Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, Vol. 14: Saint Chrysostom: Homilies on the Gospel of St. John and the Epistle to the Hebrews
Philip Schaff (ed.), various translators (1886)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

A SELECT LIBRARY


I


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


EDITED BY

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.,

PROFESSOR OF CHURCH HISTORY IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK.

\k W CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA


VOLUME XIV.

SAINT CHRYSOSTOM:

HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN

AND

THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.


NEW YORK:
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS.


THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY


Printed in tlie United States of America


DEC 18 1954


CONTENTS OF VOL. XIV.


PAGE

PREFACE V

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE ANGLO-AMERICAN AND THE GR^CO-LATIN EDITIONS

OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM vU

By the General Editor.

HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN I

The Oxford Translation.

Edited with Notes by the Rev. Philip Schaff, D.D.

HOMILIES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 335

The Oxford Translation.

Revised and Edited with Notes and Introduction by the Rev. Frederic Gardi-
ner, D.D.

TNDEXES to the Homilies on the Gospel of St. John 525

to the Homilies on the Epistle to the Hebrews 544


\


PREFACE.


This volume closes the American edition of the Works of St. Chrysostom, and at the same
time the First Series of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Library of the Christian Fathers.

The best works of St. Augustin and St. Chrysostom are thus brought within the reach of the
English reader in a more complete form and at a lower price than ever before.

The Epistle to the Hebrews was the last volume of the Oxford " Library of the Fathers," pub-
lished under the direction and with a Preface of the late Dr. Pusey, the chief originator of that
valuable Library. His Preface is dated, Oxford, May, 1877. He died Sept. 16, 1882.

The American editor of the Homilies on the Hebrews has thoroughly revised the Oxford
translation and enlarged it with a valuable introduction on the authorship of the Epistle (about
which St. Chrysostom was mistaken), and a considerable number of explanatory footnotes.
Unfortunately he died shortly before his MS. was sent to the printer, but his son read the proofs.

The Rev. Dr. Frederic Gardiner (born Sept. 11, 1822, died July 17, 1889) was for many
years Professor in the Berkeley Episcopal Divinity School at Middletown, Conn., and President
of the Society of Biblical Literature and Exegesis. He edited a Greek Harmony of the Four
Gospels, and several exegetical works, and was a contributor to Lange's Commentary, EUicott's
Commentary for English Readers, and various periodicals. The revision of the Homilies on the
Epistle to the Hebrews was his last work.

The Homilies on the Fourth Gospel appear as in the Oxford " Library of the Fathers,"
with a few additional notes. The Rev. Charles Marriott (1811-1858) edited them, and wrote the
preface to the first volume. For fourteen years, from 1841 to 1855, he was associated with Dr.
Pusey as working editor, and superintended the publication of at least twenty-four volumes (twelve
of St. Chrysostom, eight of St. Augustin, four of St. Gregory L), i.e. more than one-half of that
Library. It was with both a labor of love and sacrifice, without fee or reward except the approval
of their conscience and of good men. To their unselfish labors the American edition owes a
great debt of gratitude. Mr. Marriott did most of the literary drudgery, as translator, corrector,
and proof-reader, with untiring fidelity and painstaking zeal till he was struck down by paralysis in
1855, " to wait in stillness for his Lord's last call." Dean Burgon states these facts in an interest-
ing account of his intimate friend (in Lives of Twelve Good Men, London and New York,
1888, vol. I. 296-376). He calls Marriott "a character unique, beautiful, and saint-like," and
adds that he " lived quite above the world, and, like Enoch, walked habitually with God."

I feel very thankful that this Patristic Library has so far been finished, and I am happy to
announce that the "Christian Literature Company" is sufficiently encouraged to publish the
second series, which will contain the Greek Fathers from Eusebius to John of Damascus, and
the Latin Fathers from Hilary to Gregory the Great. I secured the cooperation of eminent
patristic scholars of England and America several years ago for the completion of this enterprise.
The first volume, containing a new translation and commentary of the historical works of Euse-
bius, will appear in April or May, 1890.

PHILIP SCHAFF.
Union Theological Seminary,
New York, Dec. 24, j88g.


COMPARATIVE TABLE


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM IN THE AMERICAN AND IN MIGNE'S EDITIONS.


ANGLO-AMERICAN EDITION OF ST. CHRYS-
OSTOM.

Volume IX.

PAGE

Prolegomena by the General Editor 3-23

Six Books on the Priesthood 25-83

Two Letters to Theodore after his Fall 85-1 16

Letter to a young Widow 1 1 7-1 28

Two Homilies. (l) On St. Ignatius. (2) On

.St. Babylas 1 29-143

Homily concerning " Lowliness of Mind " (Phil.

i- 18) ; J45-I55

Two Instructions to Candidates for Baptism. . . . 157-171
Three Homilies. (1) That demons do not gov-
ern the world. (2 and 3) Concerning the
power of the Tempter '73-197


Three Homilies. (l) Against the Marcionists
and the Manichceans on the passage " Father,
if it be possible," etc. (2) On the Paralytic
let down through the roof. (3) To those
who had not attended the Assembly; on the
passage, " If thine enemy hunger, feed him," 199-232

Homily against publishing the errors of the breth-
ren 233-242

Two Homilies on Eutropius 245-265

Treatise to prove that no one can harm the man

who does not injure himself 267-284

Four Letters to Olympias and one to presbyters

at Antioch 285-304

Correspondence of Innocent, bishop of Rome,
with St. Chrysostom and the church at Con-
stantinople 305-3H

Twenty-one Homilies on the Statues 3'5-5'4

Vol. X.

Introductory Essay on St. Chrysostom as an Exe-

gete xvii-xxii

St. Chrysostom's Homilies on the Gospel of St.

Matthew 1-551


GR^CO-LATIN EDITION.
In Migne's Patrologia Graca, Tom. XLVII.-LXIV.

Opera S. Chrysostomi, reprinted from Montfaucon's
Benedictine edition, 1862, Tom. I.-XIII.

De Sacerdotio Libri VI Tom. I. 623-693

Parsenesis ad Theodorum Lapsum Libri II.

Tom. I. 277-319

Ad Viduam juniorem Tom. I. 599-623

Hom. in Sanctum Martyrem Ignatium Deiferum,

Tom. 11. 587 sqq.
Hom. in Sanctum Martyrem Babylam, Tom. II. 527 sqq.

Hom. in Phil. i. 18 Tom. Ill, 311-320

Catecheses ad Illuminandos Tom. II. 223-243

(l) Adversus eos, qui dicunt Dtemones gubernare

res humanas, etc Tom. III. 241 sqq.

(2 and 3) Ad eos, qui objiciunt, cur e medio
sublatus non est Deus, etc.

Tom. III. 257 sqq.; 263 sqq.


Tom. III. 31 sqq.; 47 sqq.; 471 sqa.

III. 353 sqq.
IIL 391 sqq.

III. 263 sqq.

Epistol^e III. 545 sqq.

Epistolce III. 529 sqq.

Homilia; XXI de Statues ad Populum Antioche-

num habitae II. 15-223

Homiliae XC in Matthseum Tom. VII.


vni


COMPARATIVE TABLE OF WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


Vol. XI.

PAGB

Homilies on the Acts '-328

Homilies on Romans 33S~574


Vol. XII.

Prefaces and Contents to I and 2 Corinthians. .
Homilies on First Epistle to the Corinthians. . .


iii-xiv
1-269


Homilies on Second Epistle to the Corinthians. .271-438

Vol. Xm.

St Chrysostom as a Homilist v-vn

Commentary on Galatians, and Homilies on
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessa-
lonians. First and Second Timothy, Titus,
and Philemon '"592

Vol. XIV.

Homilies en the Gospel of St. John 1-334

Homilies on the Epistle to the Hebrews 335-522


Homilise LV in Acta Apostolorum Tom. IX.

Homiliae XXXII in Epistolam ad Romanes Tom. IX.


Homilise XLIV in Epistolam primam ad Corin-

thios Tom. X.

Homilise XXX in Epistolam secundam ad Co-

rinthios Tom. X.

Commentarius in Ep. ad Galatas Tom. X., 6ll-68a

Horn. XXIV in Ep. ad Ephesios; X in Ep. ad

Philippenses; XII in Ep. ad Colossenses;

XVI in Ep. I. et II. ad Thessalonicenses;

XXVIII in Ep. I. et II. ad Tiraotheum; VI in

Ep. adTitum; III in Ep. ad Philemonem. .Tom. XI.

Homilia LXXXVIII in loannem Tom. VIII.

Homilise XXXIV in Epistolam ad Hebraeos,

Tom. XII., 9-237


THE HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,

ON THE

GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.

The Oxford Translation Edited, tritfi Additional Notes, by
REV. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.


PREFACE TO THE HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN.


The Benedictine editor has already noticed the principal points in which these Homilies
differ from others in which St. Chrysostom comments upon Holy Scripture. They are far more
controversial than is usual with him, and the part devoted to moral exhortation is shorter. This
may be partly owing to the number of passages in St. John which bear on the doctrine of our
Lord's Person and His Divine and Human Natures. But it seems further that they were
delivered to a select audience at an early hour of the day. For toward the latter part of Horn.
XXXI. he contrasts the coolness of the morning, in which they were assembled, with the mid-day
heat, in which the woman of Samaria listened to our Lord. And the character of the instruction
given almost unquestionably marks the hearers as having been less miscellaneous, and less liable
to be supposed wanting in points of common duty, than those whom he generally addressed.

They do not give their own date, but are referred to by the Author, while still at Antioch,
as already published, in Horn. VH. on i Cor. ii. 8. " However, the manner of this way of
knowledge and of that hath already been declared in the Gospel ; and, not to be continually
handling the same topic, thither do we refer our readers." The place is St. John viii. 19 treated
in Hom. XLIX.

And since the three first years after St. Chrysostom was ordained Priest, a.d. 386-8, seem
completely filled up, and the Homilies in St. Matthew were probably prior to these, it is most
likely that they were not begun before a.d. 390, while those on some of the Epistles of St. Paul
seem to have come after them, and still before the year 398, in which he was removed to Con-
stantinople.

In either city there were numerous heretics of the sect against which he is most careful to
supply arguments, the Anomceans, who held that the Son is not even of like [much less of the
same^ substance with the Father. And even in his less generally controversial works, we often
meet with discussions of their tenets. But in these Homilies he is continually meeting with texts
which they perverted to the maintenance of their heresy, and turning them into weapons for its
confutation. And this he usually does with great success, since the Catholic doctrine of the true
and perfect Godhead, united in One Person with true and perfect Manhood, affords a key that
easily opens texts which most stubbornly resist any confused notion of an inferior Divinity, or
an unreal Humanity. The texts urged by the heretic, put to this test, are found not really
to belong to him. They are not even arguments so far for his view of the case, but perfectly
consistent with the truth always held by the Church. There may remain a few cases, after
attentive study, in which it is difficult to be sure what is the exact meaning, or even whether a
given text speaks of the Godhead or of the Manhood, but as to the general doctrine of the whole
Scripture, or the consistency of that doctrine with any and every text therein contained, there is
no reasonable doubt. There are those whose faith seems to tremble on the balance when such
a passage of Scripture is under discussion, but this must be either from an inveterate habit of
doubting, or an imperfect apprehension of the real meaning of the Catholic doctrine. The most
skillful commentator may occasionally fall into a critical error, but no one who has ever fairly
entered into the sense of Holy Scripture will dream of the alternative being between such and
such an exposition and the acceptance of heresy. Enough is clear to make us very sure what
will be the doctrine of any difficult passage, though we may be in doubt of its interpretation.
St. Chrysostom is usually right, and not only so, but most ingenious in detecting the rhetorical


xH PREFACE.


connection of sentiments and arguments. If anywhere he fails, it is from some over-refinement
in rhetorical analysis, and not from any want of apprehension of the main truths concerned.

In the first volume of the Benedictine edition there is a series of Homilies against the Ano-
mceans, in the first of which he states that he had been unwilling for some time to enter on the
controversy, for fear of driving away hearers who held those opinions, but that he had now taken
it up at their earnest request. These Homilies were delivered some time before those on St.
John, beginning in the first year after his ordination with those " On the Incomprehensible
Nature of God," in opposition to the pretensions of that sect to perfect knowledge of Divine
things. And the Benedictine Editor refers to them as containing a more complete array of the
positive evidence of St. John to the Catholic doctrines than even this commentary affords.

The history of the woman taken in adultery is omitted in this commentary, and the Benedic-
tine editor was not able to trace it in any of the works of St. Chrysostom. It is suggested that
his copies may have wanted the passage, or that he may have omitted it for fear it should be
taken as an encouragement to vice. But he was not the man to shrink from so slight a difficulty,
nor would he have failed, in commenting on it, to leave an impression on the hearer by no
means calculated to lessen his dread of sin. Such a reason may have prevailed with some copy-
ists to suppress the passage, and it is probable that it was not found in the copy which he used.
It is omitted in like manner by St. Cyril of Alexandria.*

The text of Savile has been followed, except where the Benedictine edition has supplied
improvements. The Benedictine sections are numbered throughout : where the division seemed
to be inconvenient, the number is given in the margin. In the earlier Homilies a second series
of numbers is employed to mark the sections in the translation ; this was discontinued as unnec-
essary, and the Benedictine only retained. In some of the references to the Psalms, where the
Septuagint differs much from the Hebrew, the numbers given are those of the Greek. Care will
be taken in the Index of Texts to give always the reference to the Psalm and Verse according to
the Hebrew reckoning followed in our own Version.

The editors are indebted for the present translation to the Rev. G. T. Stupart, M. A., late
Fellow of Exeter College. It has been kindly carried through the Press by the Rev. J. G.
HiCKLEV, B. D., Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. The translation of the remaining Homilies is
completed, and will shortly be in the Press.^

C. M[arriott].


Oriel College,
Feast of St. Andrew, 1848.


* [The pericope John vii. 53-vm. 11 is considered by the best modern critics as an interpolation by a transcriber, but is probably based
on a genuine apostolic tradition, perhaps taken from the lost work of Papias of Hierapolis, who collected from primitive disciples various
discourses of our Lord, among others "a narrative concerning a woman maliciously accused before the Lord touching many sins."
(Eusebius, Hist. EccU IIL 39.) The section is omitted in the oldest uncial and other Greek MSS. (K, B, etc.) ; it was unknown to
Chrysostom and other Greek and early Latin fathers; it interrupts the context; it departs from the style of John, and presents an unusual
number of various readings. We find it first in Latin Gospel MSS. of the fourth century, but in different places, sometimes at the end of
the Gospel of John as an appendix, sometimes at the end of Luke xxi. It was also in the Gospel according to the Hebrews. The
R. V. properly retains it, but in brackets and with a marginal note. The story, though no pan of the Gospel of John, is eminently
Christlike. For details see Tischendorf (ed. viii.) , Tregelles, Westcott and Hon, and the critical commentaries. — P. S.]

' [The second volume of the Oxford edition, containing Homilies 42-88 (John vi.-xxi.), was published in 1853 without a Preface.
— P. S.]


CONTENTS.


HOMILIES ON JOHN.

rAcs

Homily I i

Homily II. — John i. I. In the beginning was the Word 4

Homily III. — John i. i. In the beginning was the Word 10

Homily IV. — John i. I. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God 16

Homily V. — John i. 3. All things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was

made 21

Homily VI. — John i. 6. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John 25

Homily VII. — John i. 9. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. . . 27
Homily VIII. — John i. 9. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. . 29

Homily IX. — John i. ii . He came unto His own, and His own received Him not 32

Homily X. — John i. 11. He came unto His own, and His own received Him not 35

Homily XI. — John i. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us 38

Homily XII. — John i. 14. And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full

of grace and truth 40

Homily XIII. — John i. 15. John beareth witness of Him, and crieth, saying. This is He of whom I spake,

saying. He that cometh after me is preferred before me, for He was before me 43

Homily XIV. — John i. 16. And of His fullness have all we received, and grace for grace 47

Homily XV. — John i. 18. No man hath seen God at anytime; the Only-begotten Son, which is in the

bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him 51

Homily XVI. — John i. 19. And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from

Jerusalem to ask him. Who art thou ? 54

Homily XVII. — John i. 28, 29. These things were done in Bethany beyond Jordan, where John was bap-
tizing. The next day he seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith. Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh

away the sin of the world 58

Homily XVIII. — John i. 35-37. Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking
upon Jesus as He walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God. And the two disciples heard him speak,

and they followed Jesus 62

Homily XIX. — John i. 41, 42. He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him. We have found

the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus 67

Homily XX. — John i. 43, 44. The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and

saith unto him. Follow Me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter 69

Homily XXI. — John i. 49, 50. Nathanael answered and said unto Him, Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God,
f, Thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him. Because I said unto thee, I saw thee

under the fig-tree, believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things than these 72

Homily XXII. — John ii. 4. Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour is not yet come 76

Homily XXIII. — John ii. 11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee 79

Homily XXIV. — John ii. 23. Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the feast, many believed

on him 83

Homily XXV. — John iii. 5. Verily I say unto thee. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he

cannot enter into the Kingdom of God 87

Homily XXVI. — John iii. 6. That which is bom of the flesh is flesh : and that which is born of the Spirit is

spirit 90

Homily XXVII. — John iii. 12, 13. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye be-
lieve, if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down

from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven 93

Homily XXVIII. — John iii. 17. For God sent not His Son to condemn the world, but to save the world. . . 96
Homily XXIX. — John iii. 22. And He came and His disciples into the land of Judaea, and there He

tarried with them (and baptized) ...,,, 99


xjv CONTENTS. *

PACE

Homily XXX. — John iii. 31. He that cometh from above is above all; he that is of the earth is earthly, and

speaketh of the earth ^

Homily XXXI. — John iii. 35, 36. The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand. He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but

the wrath of God abideth on him '°°

Homily XXXH. — John iv. 13, 14. Jesus answered and said unto her. Whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the

Water that I shaU give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting Life in

Homily XXXIII. — John iv. 21, 22. Jesus saith unto her. Woman, believe Me, the hour cometh, when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. Ye worship ye know not what;

we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews "S

Homily XXXIV. — John iv. 28, 29. The woman then left her water pot, and went her way into the city, and

saith to the men, Come, see a Man which told me all things that ever I did; is not this the Christ? 118

Homily XXXV. — John iv. 40-43. So when the Samaritans were come unto Him, they besought Him that
He would tarry with them : and He abode there two days. And many more believed because of His own
word; and said unto the woman. Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard Him
ourselves, and know that This is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world. Now after two days He de-

parted thence, and went into Galilee ' ^^

Homily XXXVI. — John iv. 54, v. i . This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out

of Judiea into Galilee. After this there was a feast of the Jews ; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem 1 25

Homily XXXVII. — John v. 6, 7. Jesus saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The impotent man

answered Him, Yea, Sir, but I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool 128

Homily XXXVIII. — John v. 14. Afterward Jesus findeth him in the Temple, and said unto him. Behold,

thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee 13'

Homily XXXIX. — John v. 23, 24. For My Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to

the Son; that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father 137

Homily XL. — John v. 31, 32. If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is not true; there is another that

beareth witness of Me, and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of Me is true 143

Homily XLL — John v. 39, 40. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal Ufe; and they

are they which testify of Me. And ye will not come to Me that ye might have [eternal] life I47

Homily XLII. — John vi. 1-4. After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, into the parts of Tiberias.
And a great multitude followed Him, because they saw the miracles which He did on them that were
diseased. And Jesus departed into a mountain, and there sat with His disciples. And the Passover of

the Jews was nigh 5

Homily XLIII. — John vi. 16-18. And when even was now come. His disciples went down unto the sea,
and entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was

not come unto them. And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew I5S

Homily XLIV. — John vi. 26, 27. Jesus answered them, and said. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek Me,
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled. Labor not for the

meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life 157

Homily XLV. — John vi. 28-30. Then said they unto Him, What shall we do, that we might work the works
of God? Jesus answered and said unto them. This is the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom
He hath sent. They said therefore unto Him, What sign showest thou then, that we may see and believe

thee? what dost thou work? ' ........ 159

Homily XLVI. — John vi. 41, 42. The Jews then murmured at Him, because He said, I am the bread which
came down from heaven; and they said. Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we

know? How is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? 164

Homily XLVII. — John vi. 53, 54. Jesus therefore said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have not eternal life in yourselves. Whoso

eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath life in himself. • ■ '68

» Homily XLVIIL — John vii. I, 2. After these things Jesus walked in Galilee; for He would not walk in

Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill Him. Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand 173

Homily XLIX. — John vii. 9, 10. When He had said these words unto them. He aljode still in Galilee. But

when His brethren were gone up, then went He up also unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret, 176

Homily L. John vii. 25-27. Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?

But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the

very Christ? Howbeit we know this man whence he is • •**

Homily LI. — John vii. 37, 38. In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, 1/


CONTENTS. XV


PACK

any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink. He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath said,

out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water 183

Homily LH. — John vii. 45, 46. Then came the officers to the Chief Priests and Pharisees; and they said

unto them. Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man spake like this Man 186

Homily LIH. — John viii. 20. These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as He taught in the Temple; and no

man laid hands on Him, for His hour was not yet come 190

Homily LIV. — John viii. 31, 32. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on Him, If ye continue in

My word, then are ye My disciples indeed. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, 1 93
Homily LV. — John viii. 48, 49. Then answered the Jews, and said unto Him, Say we not well that thou art

a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honor My Father 197

Homily LVI. — John ix. i, 2. And as Jesus passed by. He saw a man which was blind from his birth. And

His disciples asked Him, saying. Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? . . 200
Homily LVH. — John ix. 6, 7. When Jesus had thus spoken. He spat on the ground, and made clay of the

spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the blind man with clay, and said. Go, wash in the pool of Siloam. . . 204
Homily LVHI. — John ix. 17, i8. They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he

hath opened thine eyes? He said, He is a Prophet. The Jews then did not believe 207

Homily LIX. — John ix. 34-36. And they cast him out. And Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and

when He had found him, He said unto him. Dost thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and said.

Who is He, Lord, that I might believe on Him? And the rest 212

Homily LX. — John x. 14, 15. I am the good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am known of Mine. As

the Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father; and I lay down My life for the sheep 216

Homily LXI. — John x. 22-24. And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of the dedication, and it was winter. And

Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. Then came the Jews round about Him, and said unto

Him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? 222

Homily LXII. — John xi. i, 2. Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, of the town of

Mary and her sister Martha. It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment 227

Homily LXIII. — John xi. 30, 31. Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where

Martha met Him. The Jews then which were with her, And what follows 232

Homily LXIV. — John xi. 41, 42. Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said, Father, I thank Thee that Thou hast

heard Me ; and I knew that Thou hearest Me always, but because of the people which stand by, I said it.

And what follows 236

Homily LXV. — John xi. 49, 50. And one of them, Caiaphas, being the High Priest that same year, said

unto them. Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient that one man should die for the

people, and that the whole nation perish not, &c 241

Homily LXVI. — John xii. 8. Much people of the Jews therefore knew that He was there, and they came,

not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom He had raised from the dead 244

Homily LXVII. — John xii. 25, 26. He that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that hateth his life in this

world shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve Me, let him follow Me 248

Homily LXVIII. — John xii. 34. The people answered Him, We have heard out of the Law that Christ

abideth for ever; and how sayest thou, The Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?. . 251
Homily LXIX. — John xii. 42, 43. Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on Him; but

because of the Pharisees they did not confess Him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue : for they

loved the praise of men more than the praise of God 254

Homily LXX. — John xiii. i. Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that His hour was

come that He should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved His own which were in the

world. He loved them unto the end 256

Homily LXXI. — John xiii. 12. And He took His garments, and having sat down again, said unto them.

Know ye what I have done to you? And what follows 260

Homily LXXII. — John xiii. 20. Verily, verily, I say unto you. He that receiveth whomsoever I send, receiveth

Me ; and He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me 263

Homily LXXIII. — John xiii. 36. Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, whither goest Thou? Jesus answered

Him, Whither I go thou canst not follow Me now, but thou shalt follow Me afterwards 267

Homily LXXIV. — John xiv. 8,9. Philip saith unto Him, Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.

Jesus saith unto him. Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known Me, Philip? He

who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father 271

Homily LXXV. — John xiv. 15-17. If ye love Me, keep My commandments. And I will pray the Father,

and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth,

whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him 273


xvi CONTENTS.


?AGB


Homily LXXVI. — John xiv. 31, xv. i. Arise, let us go hence. I am the true Vine, (ye are the branches,)

and My Father is the Husbandman 278

Homily LXXVI I. —John xv. 11, 12. These things have I spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in you,

and that your joy might be full. This is My commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, 281
Homily LXXVIII. — John xvi. 4-6. These things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with

you. But now I go My way to Him that sent Me; and none of you asketh Me, Whither goest Thou?

But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart 286

Homily LXXIX. — John xvi. 16, 17. A little while, and ye shall not see Me: and again, a little while, and

ye shall see Me, because I go to the Father. Then said some of His disciples among themselves, What is

this that He saith? And what follows 291

Homily LXXX. — John xvii. i. These words spake Jesus, and lifted up His eyes to heaven, and saith. Father,

the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee 296

Homily LXXXI. — John xvii. 6. I have manifested Thy Name unto the men which Thou gavest Me out of

the world; Thine they were, and Thou gavest them Me, and they have kept Thy word 299

Homily LXXXH. — John xvii. 14. I have given them Thy word; and the world hath hated them, because

they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world • • • 3°2

Homily LXXXHI. — John xviii. i. When Jesus had spoken these words. He went forth with His disciples

over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which He entered, and His disciples 306

Homily LXXXIV. John xviii. 37. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I

should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth My voice 313

Homily LXXXV. — John xix. 16-18. Then delivered he Him therefore unto them to be crucified. And

they took Jesus, and led Him away. And He, bearing His cross, went forth into a place called the place

of a skull, where they crucified Him 3'°

Homily LXXXVI. — John xx. 10, 1 1. Then the disciples went away again unto their own home. But Mary

stood without at the sepulcher, weeping 3^3

Homily LXXXVH. — John xx. 24, 25. But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them
when Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him. We have seen the Lord. But he said.

Except I shall see in His hands — I will not believe 3^7

Homily LXXXVHL — John xxi. 15. So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of
Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee, 331


HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

ON THE

GOSPEL ACCORDING TO
ST, JOHN,


HOMILY I.


PREFACE.


[i.] They that are spectators of the heathen
games, when they have learned that a distin-
guished athlete and winner of crowns is come
from any quarter, run all together to view his
wrestling, and all his skill and strength ; and
you may see the whole theater of many ten
thousands, all there straining their eyes both of
body and mind, that nothing of what is done
may escape them. So again these same persons,
if any admirable musician come amongst them,
leave all that they had in hand, which often is
necessary and pressing business, and mount the
steps, and sit listening very attentively to the
words and the accompaniments, and criticising
the agreement of the two. This is what the
many do.

Again ; those who are skilled in rhetoric do
just the same with respect to the sophists, for
they too have their theaters, and their audience,
and clappings of hands, and noise, and closest
criticism of what is said.

And if in the case of rhetoricians, musicians,
and athletes, people sit in the one case to look
on, in the other to see at once and to listen with
such earnest attention ; what zeal, what earnest-
ness ought ye in reason to display, when it is no
musician or debater who now comes forward to
a trial of skill, but when a man is speaking from
heaven, and utters a voice plainer than thunder ?
for he has pervaded the whole earth with the
sound ; and occupied and filled it, not by the
loudness of the cry, but by moving his tongue
with the grace of God.

And what is wonderful, this sound, great as it


is, is neither a harsh nor an unpleasant one, but
sweeter and more delightful than all harmony of
music, and with more skill to soothe ; and be-
sides all this, most holy, and most awful, and
full of mysteries so great, and bringing with it
goods so great, that if men were exactly and
with ready mind to receive and keep them, they
could no longer be mere men nor remain upon
the earth, but would take their stand above all
the things of this life, and having adapted them-
selves to the condition of angels, would dwell on
earth just as if it were heaven.

[2.] For the son of thunder, the beloved of
Christ, the pillar of the Churches throughout the
world, who holds the keys of heaven, who drank
the cup of Christ, and was baptized with His
baptism, who lay upon his Master's bosom with
much confidence,' this man comes forward to us
now ; not as an actor of a play, not hiding his
head with a mask, (for he hath another sort of
words to speak,) nor mounting a platform,' nor
striking the stage with his foot, nor dressed out
with apparel of gold, but he enters wearing a
robe of inconceivable beauty. For he will ap-
pear before us having "put on Christ " (Rom.
xiii. 14; Gal. iii. 27), having his beautiful "feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace" (Eph. vi. 15); wearing a girdle not
about his waist, but about his loins, not made of
scarlet leather nor daubed outside ' with gold,
but woven and composed of truth itself Now
will he appear before us, not acting a part, (for
with him there is nothing counterfeit, nor fic-
tion, nor fable,) but with unmasked head he


1 nap^ijffCat iroAA^t. ' oKpipavTOf, ' avu6tv ij\tiiiiiivifv*


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I.


proclaims to us the truth unmasked ; not mak-
ing the audience believe him other than he is by
carriage, by look, by voice, needing for the de-
livery of his message no instruments of music,
as harp, lyre, or any other the like, for he effects
all with his tongue, uttering a voice which is
sweeter and more profitable than that of any
harper or any music. All heaven is his stage ;
his theater, the habitable world ; his audience,
all angels ; and of men as many as are angels
already, or desire to become so, for none but
these can hear that harmony aright, and show it
forth by their works ; all the rest, like little chil-
dren who hear, but what they hear understand
not, from their anxiety about sweetmeats and
childish playthings ; so they too, being in mirth
and luxury, and living only for wealth and power
and sensuality, hear sometimes what is said, it is
true, but show forth nothing great or noble in
their actions through fastening' themselves for
good to the clay of the brickmaking. By this
Apostle stand the powers from above, marveling
at the beauty of his soul, and his understanding,
and the bloom of that virtue by which he drew
unto him Christ Himself, and obtained the grace
of the Spirit. For he hath made ready his soul,
as some well-fashioned and jeweled lyre with
strings of gold, and yielded it for the utterance
of something great and sublime to the Spirit.

[3.] Seeing then it is no longer the fisherman
the son of Zebedee, but He who knoweth " the
deep things of God" (i Cor. ii. 10), the Holy
Spirit I mean, that striketh this lyre, let us
hearken accordingly. For he will say nothing
to us as a man, but what he saith, he will say
from the depths of the Spirit, from those secret
things which before they came to pass the very
Angels knew not ; since they too have learned
by the voice of John with us, and by us, the
things which we know. And this hath another
Apostle declared, saying, "To the intent that
unto the principalities and powers might be
known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
God." (Eph. iii. 10.) If then principalities,
and powers, and Cherubim, and Seraphim,
learned these things by the Church, it is very
clear that they were exceedingly earnest in lis-
tening to this teaching; and even in this we
have been not a little honored, that the Angels
learned things which before they knew not with
us ; I do not at present speak of their learning
by us also. Let us then show much silence and
orderly behavior; not to-day only, nor during
the day on which we are hearers, but during all
our life, since it is at all times good to hear
Him. For if we long to know what is going on
in the palace, what, for instance, the king has
said, what he has done, what counsel he is taking


concerning his subjects, though in truth these
things are for the most part nothing to us ; much
more is it desirable to hear what God hath said,
especially when all concerns us. And all this
will this man tell us exactly, as being a friend of
the King Himself, or rather, as having Him
speaking within himself, and from Him hearing
all things which He heareth from the Father.
" I have called you friends," He saith, " for all
things that I have heard of My Father, I have
made known unto you." (John xv. 15.)

[4.] As then we should all run together if we
saw one from above bend down "on a sudden"^
from the height of heaven, promising to describe
exactly all things there, even so let us be dis-
posed now. It is from thence that this Man
speaketh to us; He is not of this world, as
Christ Himself declareth, "Ye are not of the
world" (John xv. 19), and He hath speaking
within him the Comforter, the Omnipresent,
who knoweth the things of God as exactly as
the soul of man knoweth what belongs to her-
self, the Spirit of holiness, the righteous Spirit,
the guiding Spirit, which leads men by the hand
to heaven, which gives them other eyes, fitting
them to see things to come as though present,
and giving them even in the flesh to look into
things heavenly. To Him then let us yield our-
selves during all our life ' in much tranquillity.
Let none dull, none sleepy, none sordid, enter
here and tarry ; but let us remove ourselves to
heaven, for there He speaketh these things to
those who are citizens there. And if we tarry
on earth, we shall gain nothing great from
thence. For the words of John are nothing to
those who do not desire to be freed from this
swinish life, just as the things of this world to
him are nothing. The thunder amazes our
souls, having sound without significance ; * but
this man's voice troubles none of the faithful,
yea, rather releases them from trouble and con-
fusion ; it amazes the devils only, and those who
are their slaves. Therefore that we may know
how it amazes them, let us preserve deep silence,
both external and mental, but especially the
latter ; for what advantage is it that the mouth
be hushed, if the soul is disturbed and full of
tossing? I look for that calm which is of the
mind, of the soul, since it is the hearing of the
soul which I require. Let then no desire of
riches trouble us, no lust of glory, no tyranny of
anger, nor the crowd of other passions besides
these ; for it is not possible for the ear, except
it be cleansed, to perceive as it ought the sub-
limity of the things spoken ; nor rightly to
understand the awful and unutterable nature of
these mysteries, and all other virtue which is m


I «^*n|Xavr,


' oSpoo^, comp. Eus. f/isi Eccl. v. i. 29.
» iroAArii' irapex""'" '''1*' i<r>'X'«'''


Homily I.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


these divine oracles. If a man cannot learn well
a melody on pipe or harp, unless he in every
way strain his attention ; how shall one, who sits
as a listener to sounds mystical, be able to hear
with a careless soul ?

[5.] Wherefore Christ Himself exhorted, say-
ing, " Give not that which is holy unto the dogs,
neither cast ye your pearls before swine." (Matt,
vii. 6.) He called these words " pearls," though
in truth they be much more precious than they,
because we have no substance more precious
than that. For this reason too He is wont often
to compare their sweetness to honey, not that so
much only is the measure of their sweetness, but
because amongst us there is nothing sweeter.
Now, to show that they very exceedingly sur-
pass the nature of precious stones, and the
sweetness of any honey, hear the prophet speak-
ing concerning them, and declaring this superi-
ority; " More to be desired are they," he saith,
" than gold and much precious stone ; sweeter
are they also than honey and the honeycomb."
(Ps. xix. 10.) But to those (only) who are in
health ; wherefore he has added, " For thy ser-
vant keepeth them." And again in another
place calling them sweet he has added, " to my
throat." For he saith, " How sweet are thy
words unto my throat." (Ps. cxix. 103.) And
again he insisteth on the superiority, saying,
" Above honey and the honeycomb to my
mouth." For he was in very sound health.
And let not us either come nigh to these while
we are sick, but when we have healed our soul,
so receive the food that is offered us.

It is for this reason that, after so long a preface,
I have not yet attempted to fathom ' these ex-
pressions (of St. John), in order that every one
having laid aside all manner of infirmity, as
though he were entering into heaven itself, so
may enter here pure, and freed from wrath and
: carefulness and anxiety of this life, of all other
passions. For it is not otherwise possible for a
man to gain from hence anything great, except
he have first so cleansed anew his soul. And
let no one say that the time to the coming com-
munion ^ is short, for it is possible, not only in
five days, but in one moment, to change the
whole course of life. Tell me what is worse
than a robber and a murderer, is not this the
extremest kind of wickedness ? Yet such an one
arrived straight at the summit of excellence, and
passed into Paradise itself, not needing days,
nor half a day, but one httle moment. So that
a man may change suddenly, and become gold
instead of clay. For since what belongs to
virtue and to vice is not by nature, the change
is easy, as being independent of any necessity.
" If ye be wiUing and obedient," He saith, " ye


^ KoBriKat


* (rVKa£«wf.


shall eat the good of the land." (Isa. i. 19.)
Seest thou that there needs the will only ? will —
not the common wishing of the multitude — but
earnest will. For I know that all are wishing to
fly up to heaven even now ; but it is necessary
to show forth the wish by works. The merchant
too wishes to get rich ; but he doth not allow
his wish to stop with the thought of it ; no, he
fits out a ship, and gets together sailors, and
engages a pilot, and furnishes the vessel with all
other stores, and borrows money, and crosses
the sea, and goes away into a strange land, and
endures many dangers, and all the rest which
they know who sail the sea. So too must we
show our will ; for we also sail a voyage, not
from land to land, but from earth to heaven.
Let us then so order our reason, that it be ser-
viceable to steer our upward course, and our
sailors that they be obedient to it, and let our
vessel be stout, that it be not swamped amidst
the reverses and despondencies of this life, nor
be lifted up by the blasts of vainglory, but be a
fast and easy vessel. If so we order our ship,
and so our pilot and our crew, we shall sail with
a fair wind, and we shall draw down to ourselves
the Son of God, the true Pilot, who will not
leave our bark to be engulfed, but, though ten
thousand winds may blow, will rebuke the winds
and the sea, and instead of raging waves, make
a great calm.

[6.] Having therefore ordered yourselves, so
come to our next assembly, if at least it be at
all an object of desire to you to hear somewhat
to your advantage, and lay up what is said in
your souls. But let not one of you be the " way-
side," none the " stony ground," none the " full
of thorns." (Matt. xiii. 4, 5, 7.) Let us make
ourselves fallow lands. For so shall we (the
preachers) put in the seed with gladness, when
we see the land clean, but if stony or rough,
pardon us if we like not to labor in vain. For
if we shall leave off sowing and begin to cut
up thorns, surely to cast seed into ground un-
wrought were extreme folly.

It is not meet that he who has the advantage
of such hearing be partaker of the table of
devils. " For what fellowship hath righteousness
with unrighteousness ? " (2 Cor. vi. 14.) Thou
standest listening to John, and learning the
things of the Spirit by him ; and dost thou
after this depart to listen to harlots speaking
vile things, and acting viler, and to effeminates
cuffing one another? How wilt thou be able to
be fairly cleansed, if thou wallowest in such
mire ? Why need I reckon in detail all the in-
decency that is there? All there is laughter, all
is shame, all disgrace, revilings and mockings, all
abandonment, all destruction. See, I forewarn
and charge you all. Let none of those who en-
joy the blessings of this table destroy his own


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


Homily II.


soul by those pernicious spectacles. All that is
said and done there is a pageant of Satan. But
ye who have been initiated know what manner
of covenants ye made with us, or rather ye
made with Christ when He guided you into His
mysteries, what ye spoke to Him, what speech
ye had with Him concerning Satan's pageant ; '
how with Satan and his angels ye renounced this
also, and promised that you would not so much
as cast a glance" that way. There is then no
slight ground for fear, lest, by becoming careless
of such promises, one should render himself un-
worthy of these mysteries.

[7.] Seest thou not how in king's palaces it
is not those who have offended, but those who
have been honorably distinguished,' that are
called to share especial favor,* and are num-
bered among the king's friends. A messenger
has come to us from heaven, sent by God Him-
self, to speak with us on certain necessary mat-
ters, and you leave hearing His will, and the


message He sends to you, and sit listening to
stage-players. What thunderings, what bolts
from heaven, does not this conduct deserve !
For as it is not meet to partake of the table of
devils, so neither is it of the listening to devils ;
nor to be present with filthy raiment at that glo-
rious Table, loaded with so many good things,
which God Himself hath provided. Such is its
power, that it can raise us at once to heaven, if
only we approach it with a sober mind. For it
is not possible that he who is continually under
the influence of ' the words of God, can remain
in this present low condition, but he needs must
presently take wing, and fly away to the land
which is above, and light on the infinite treasures
of good things ; which may it be that we all
attain to, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and
with whom be glory to the Father and the All-
holy Spirit, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.


HOMILY II.


John i. i.


" In the beginning was the Word."

Were John about to converse with us, and to
say to us words of his own, we needs must de-
scribe his family, his country, and his education.
But since it is not he, but God by him, that
speaks to mankind, it seems to me superfluous
and distracting to enquire into these matters.
And yet even thus it is not superfluous, but even
very necessary. For when you have learned
who he was, and from whence, who his parents,
and what his character, and then hear his voice
and all his heavenly wisdom,'* then you shall
know right well that these (doctrines) belong
not to him, but to the Divine power stirring his
soul.

From what country ° then was he ? From no
country ; but from a poor village, and from a
land little esteemed, and producing no good
thing. For the Scribes speak evil of Galilee,
saying, "Search and look, for out of Galilee
ariseth no prophet." (John vii. 52.) And "the
Israelite indeed " speaks ill of it, saying, " Can
any good thing come out of Nazareth ? " And
being of this land, he was not even of any re-
markable place in it, but of one not even dis-


■ irofinTC.


• varpiSof,


tinguished by name. Of this he was,' and his
father a poor fisherman, so poor that he took
his sons to the same employment. Now you all
know that no workman will choose to bring up
his son to succeed him in his trade, unless pov-
erty press him very hard, especially where the
trade is a mean one. But nothing can be poorer,
meaner, no, nor more ignorant, than fishermen.
Yet even among them there are some greater,
some less ; and even there our Apostle occupied
the lower rank, for he did not take his prey
from the sea, but passed his time on a certain
little lake. And as he was engaged by it with
his father and his brother James, and they
mending their broken nets, a thing which of
itself marked extreme poverty, so Christ called
him."

As for worldly instruction, we may learn from
these facts that he had none at all of it. Be-
sides, Luke testifies this when he writes not only
that he was ignorant," but that he was absolutely


' iiT^S6tievov.

' One MS. " not even distinguished by name had he not been of
it. His," &c.

' [On the other hand, the facts that John's father Zcbedee had
hired servants, that his mother Salome aided in the support of Jesus,
that John was acquainted with the hi^h-pricst, and seems to have

gossessed a home in Jerusalem into which he toolt the mother of our
aviour after the crucifixion, prove that he was not the poorest
among the fishermen, but in tolerably good circumstances. Comp.
Mark ii. 30; Luke v. 10; viii. 3: Mark xvi. i; John xviii. 15; xix.
37. — P. S.] "> Utwr^.


Homily II.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


unlettered.' (Acts iv. 13.) As was likely. For
one who was so poor, never coming into the
public assemblies, nor falling in with men of
respectability, but as it were nailed to his fishing,
or even if he ever did meet any one, conversing
with fishmongers and cooks, how, I say, was he
likely to be in a state better than that of the
irrational animals ? how could he help imitating
the very dumbness of his fishes?

[2.] This fisherman then, whose business was
about lakes, and nets, and fish ; this native of
Bethsaida of Galilee ; this son of a poor fisher-
man, yes, and poor to the last degree ; this man
ignorant, and to the last degree of ignorance
too, who never learned letters either before or
after he accompanied Christ ; let us see what
he utters, and on what matters he converses with
us. Is it of things in the field? Is it of things
in rivers? On the trade in fish? For these
things, perhaps, one expects to hear from a fish-
erman. But fear ye not ; we shall hear nought
of these ; but we shall hear of things in heaven,
and what no one ever learned before this man.
For, as might be expected of one who speaks
from the very treasures of the Spirit, he is come
bringing to us sublime doctrines, and the best
way of life and wisdom, [as though just arrived
from the very heavens ; yea, rather such as it
was not likely that all even there should know,
as I said before.''] Do these things belong to a
fisherman? Tell me. Do they belong to a
rhetorician at all? To a sophist or philosopher?
To every one trained in the wisdom of the Gen-
tiles ? By no means. The human soul is simply
unable thus to philosophize on that pure and
blessed nature ; on the powers that come next
to it ; on immortality and endless life ; on the
nature of mortal bodies which shall hereafter be
immortal ; on punishment and the judgment to
come ; on the enquiries that shall be as to deeds
and words, as to thoughts and imaginations. It
cannot tell what is man, what the world ; what
is man indeed, and what he who seems to be
man, but is not ; what is the nature of virtue,
what of vice.

[3.] Some of these things indeed the disci-
ples of Plato and Pythagoras enquired into. Of
the other philosophers we need make no men-
tion at all ; they have all on this point been so
excessively ridiculous ; and those who have been
among them in greater esteem than the rest, and
who have been considered the leading men in
this science, are so more than the others ; and
they have composed and written somewhat on
the subject of polity and doctrines, and in all
have been more shamefully ridiculous than chil-
dren. For they have spent their whole life in
making women common to all, in overthrowing


* aypanfiaroi.

' See above, p. 3 [4]. [From one MS. in the Bened. ed. — P.S.]


the very order of life,' in doing away the honor
of marriage, and in making other the like ridicu-
lous laws. As for doctrines on the soul, there is
nothing excessively shameful that they have
left unsaid ; asserting that the souls of men be-
come flies, and gnats, and bushes,* and that God
Himself is a soul ; with some other the like in-
decencies.

And not this alone in them is worthy of
blame, but so is also their ever-shifting current
of words ; for since they assert everything on
uncertain and fallacious arguments, they are like
men carried hither and thither in Euripus, and
never remain in the same place.

Not so this fisherman ; for all he saith is in-
fallible ; and standing as it were upon a rock,
he never shifts his ground. For since he has
been thought worthy to be in the most secret
places, and has the Lord of all speaking within
him, he is subject to nothing that is human.
But they, like persons who are not held worthy
even in a dream * to set foot in the king's palace,
but who pass their time in the forum with other
men, guessing from their own imagination at
what they cannot see, have erred a great error,
and, like blind or drunken men in their wander-
ing, have dashed against each other; and not
only against each other, but against themselves,
by continually changing their opinion, and that
ever on the same matters.

[4.] But this unlettered man, the ignorant,
the native of Bethsaida, the son of Zebedee,
(though the Greeks mock ten thousand times at
the rusticity of the names, I shall not the less
speak them with the greater boldness.) For the
more barbarous his nation seems to them, and
the more he seems removed from Grecian dis-
cipline, so much the brighter does what we have
with us appear. For when a barbarian and an
untaught person utters things which no man
on earth ever knew, and does not only utter,
(though if this were the only thing it were a
great marvel,) but besides this, affords another
and a stronger proof that what he says is divinely
inspired, namely, the convincing all his hearers
through all time ; who will not wonder at the
power that dwells in him? Since this is, as I
said, the strongest proof that he lays down no
laws of his own. This barbarian then, with his
writing of the Gospel, has occupied all the hab-
itable world. With his body he has taken pos-
session of the center of Asia, where of old phi-
losophized all of the Grecian party, shining forth
in the midst of his foes, dispersing ° their dark-
ness, and breaking down the stronghold of

' piov.

* Empedocles said this. Vid. Diog. Laert. viii. 2.

'H5tj yap iroT evil ytvofirjv KOvpoi r* KOpff Tf
da^xfoc T* oiwfOf Tff ical cj aAof cfAirifpof l\$vtt

* ovSe hvap,

* Lit. "quenching."


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily II.


devils : but in soul he has retired to that place
which is fit for one who has done such things.

[5.] And as for the writings of the Greeks,
they are all put out and vanished, but this man's
shine brighter day by day. For from the time
that he (was) and the other fishermen, since
then the (doctrines) of Pythagoras and of Plato,
which seemed before to prevail, have ceased to
be spoken of, and most men do not know them
even by name. Yet Plato was, they say, the in-
vited companion of kings, had many friends, and
sailed to Sicily. And Pythagoras occupied Magna
Grsecia,^ and practiced there ten thousand kinds
of sorcery. For to converse with oxen, (which
they say he did,) was nothing else but a piece
of sorcery. As is most clear from this. He that
so conversed with brutes did not in anything
benefit the race of men, but even did them the
greatest wrong. Yet surely, the nature of men
was better adapted for the reasoning of philoso-
phy ; still he did, as they say, converse with
eagles and oxen, using sorceries. For he did
not make their irrational nature rational, (this
was impossible to man,) but by his magic tricks
he deceived the foolish. And neglecting to
teach men anything useful, he taught that they
might as well eat the heads of those who begot
them, as beans. And he persuaded those who
associated with him, that the soul of their teacher
had actually been at one time a bush, at another
a girl, at another a fish.

Are not these things with good cause extinct,
and vanished utterly? With good cause, and
reasonably. But not so the words of him who
was ignorant and unlettered ; for Syrians, and
; Egyptians, and Indians, and Persians, and Ethi-
l opians, and ten thousand other nations, trans-
I lating into their own tongues the doctrines intro-
Iduced by him, barbarians though they be,
have learned to philosophize. I did not there-
fore idly say that all the world has become his
theater. For he did not leave those of his own
kind, and waste his labor on the irrational crea-
tures, (an act of excessive vainglory and extreme
folly,) but being clear of this as well as of other
passions, he was earnest on one point only, that
all the world might learn somewhat of the things
which might profit it, and be able to translate it
from earth to heaven.

For this reason too, he did not hide his teach-
ing in mist and darkness, as they did who threw
obscurity of speech, like a kind of veil, around
the mischiefs laid up within. But this man's
doctrines are clearer than the sunbeams, where-
fore they have been unfolded* to all men
throughout the world. For he did not teach as
Pythagoras did, commanding those who came
to him to be silent for five years, or to sit like


senseless stones ; neither did he invent fables
defining the universe to consist of numbers ; but
casting away all this devilish trash and mischief,
he diffused such simplicity through his words,
that all he said was plain, not only to wise men,
but also to women and youths. For he was per-
suaded that the words were true and profitable
to all that should hearken to them. And all
time after him is his witness ; since he has drawn
to him all the world, and has freed our life when
we have listened to these words from all mon-
strous display of wisdom ; wherefore we who
hear them would prefer rather to give up our
lives, than the doctrines by him delivered to
us.

[6.] From this then, and from every other
circumstance, it is plain, that nothing of this
man's is human, but divine and heavenly are the
lessons which come to us by this divine soul.
For we shall observe not sounding sentences,
nor magnificent diction, nor excessive and use-
less order and arrangement of words and sen-
tences, (these things are far from all true wis-
dom,) but strength invincible and divine, and
irresistible force of right doctrines, and a rich
supply of unnumbered good things. For their
over-care about expression was so excessive, so
worthy of mere sophists, or rather not even of
sophists, but of silly striplings, that even their
own chief philosopher introduces his own master
as greatly ashamed of this art, and as saying to
the judges, that what they hear from him shall
be spoken plainly and without premeditation,
not tricked out rhetorically nor ornamented with
(fine) sentences and words ; since, says he, it
cannot surely be becoming, O men, that one
at my age should come before you like a lad
inventing speeches.' And observe the extreme
absurdity of the thing ; what he has described
his master avoiding as disgraceful, unworthy of
philosophy and work for lads, this above all he
himself has cultivated. So entirely were they
given up to mere love of distinction.

And as, if you uncover those sepulchers which
are whitened without you will find them full of
corruption, and stench, and rotten bones ; so
too the doctrines of the philosopher, if you strip
them of their flowery diction, you will see to be
full of much abomination, especially when he
philosophizes on the soul, which he both honors
and speaks ill of without measure. And this is
the snare of the devil, never to keep due pro-
portion, but by excess on either hand to lead
aside those who are entangled by it into evil
speaking. At one time he says, that the soul is
of the substance of God ; at another, after having
exalted it thus immoderately and impiously, he
exceeds again in a different way, and treats it


' Flat. A/el. Socr. { i, iu init.


Homily II.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


with insult, making it pass into swine and asses,
and other animals of yet less esteem than these.

But enough of this ; or rather even this is out
of measure. For if it were possible to learn any-
thing profitable from these things, we must have
been longer occupied with them ; but if it be
only to observe their indecency and absurdity,
more than requisite has been said by us already.
^Ve will therefore leave their fables, and attach
ourselves to our own doctrines, which have been
brought to us from above by the tongue of this
liiherman, and which have nothing human in
them.

[7.] Let us then bring forward the words,
h.iving reminded you now, as I exhorted you at
the first, earnestly to attend to what is said.
What then does this Evangelist say immediately
on his outset?

" In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God." (Ver. i.) Seest thou
the great boldness and power of the words, how
he speaks nothing doubting nor conjecturing,
but declaring all things plainly ? For this is the
teacher's part, not to waver in anything he says,
since if he who is to be a guide to the rest re-
quire another person who shall be able to estab-
lish him with certainty, he would be rightly
r.inked not among teachers, but among disciples.

15ut if any one say, " What can be the reason
that he has neglected the first cause, and spoken
to us at once concerning the second ? " we shall
decline to speak of " first " and " second," for
the Divinity is above number, and the succession
of times. Wherefore we decline these expres-
sions; but we confess that the Father is from
none, and that the Son is begotten of the Father.
Yes, it may be said, but why then does he leave
the Father, and speak concerning the Son ?
Why? because the former was manifest to all, if
not as Father, at least as God ; but the Only-
Begotten was not known ; and therefore with
reason did he immediately from the very begin-
ning hasten to implant the knowledge of Him
in those who knew Him not.

Besides, he has not been silent as to the Father
in his writings on these points. And observe, I
beg of you, his spiritual wisdom. He knows
that men most honor the eldest of beings which
was before all, and account this to be God.
Wherefore from this point first he makes his
beginning, and as he advances, declares that
God is, and does not like Plato assert, some-
times that He is intellect, sometimes that He is
soul ; for these things are far removed from that
divine and unmixed Nature which has nothing
common with us, but is separated from any fel-
lowship with created things, I mean as to sub-
Stance, though not as to relation.

And for this reason he calls Him "The Word."
For since he is about to teach that this " Word "


is the only-begotten Son of God, in order that
no one may imagine that His generation is pas-
sible, by giving Him the appellation of "The
Word," he anticipates and removes beforehand
the evil suspicion, showing that the Son is from
the Father, and that without His suffering
(change).

[8.] Seest thou then that as I said, he has not
been silent as to the Father in his words con-
cerning the Son? And if these instances are
not sufficient fully to explain the whole matter,
marvel not, for our argument is God, whom it is
impossible to describe, or to imagine worthily ;
hence this man nowhere assigns the name of His
essence, (for it is not possible to say what God
is, as to essence,) but everywhere he declares
Him to us by His workings. For this " Word "
one may see shortly after called " Light," and
the " Light " in turn named " Life."

Although not for this reason only did he so
name Him ; this was the first reason, and the
second was because He was about to declare to
us the things of the Father. For " all things,"
He saith, " that I have heard from my Father,
I have made known unto you." (John xv. 15.)
He calls Him both "Light" and "Life," for He
hath freely given to us the light which proceeds
from knowledge, and the life which follows it.
In short, one name is not sufficient, nor two, nor
three, nor more, to teach us what belongs to
God. But we must be content to be able even
by means of many to apprehend, though but
obscurely. His attributes.

And he has not called Him simply " Word,"
but with the addition of the article, distinguish-
ing Him from the rest in this way also. Seest
thou then that I said not without cause that this
Evangelist speaks to us from heaven ? Only see
from the very beginning whither he has drawn up
the soul, having given it wings, and has carried
up with him the mind of his hearers. For hav-
ing set it higher than all the things of sense,
than earth, than sea, than heaven, he leads it by
the hand above the very angels, above cherubim
and seraphim, above thrones and principalities
and powers ; in a word, persuades it to journey
beyond all created things.

[9.] What then? when he has brought us to
such a height as this, is he in sooth able to stop
us there ? By no means ; but just as one by
transporting into the midst of the sea a person
who was standing on the beach, and looking on
cities, and beaches, and havens, removes him
indeed from the former objects, yet does not
stay his sight anywhere, but brings him to a
view without bound ; so this Evangelist, having
brought us above all creation, and escorted us
towards the eternal periods which lie beyond it,
leaves the sight suspended,' not allowing it to


^ llfTwpov,


8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily II.


arrive at any limit upwards, as indeed there is
none.

For the intellect, having ascended to " the
beginning," enquires what " beginning " ; and
then finding the " was " always outstripping its
imagination, has no point at which to stay its
thought ; but looking intently onwards, and being
unable to cease at any point, it becomes wearied
out, and turns back to things below. For this,
" was in the beginning," is nothing else than
expressive of ever being and being infinitely.

Seest thou true philosophy and divine doc-
trines ? Not like those of the Greeks, who
assign times, and say that some indeed of the
gods are younger, some elder. There is nothing
of this with us. For if God Is, as certainly He
Is, then nothing was before Him. If He is
Creator of all things. He must be first ; if Master
and Lord of all, then all, both creatures and
ages, are after Him.

[lo.] I had desired to enter the lists yet on
other difficulties, but perhaps our minds are
wearied out ; when therefore I have advised you
on those points which are useful ' to us for the
hearing, both of what has been said, and of
what is yet to be said, I again will hold my
peace. What then are these points? I know
that many have become confused * by reason of
the length of what has been spoken. Now this
takes place when the soul is heavy laden with
many burdens of this life. For as the eye when
it is clear and transparent is keen-sighted also,
and will not easily be tired in making out even
the minutest bodies ; but when from some bad
humor from the head having poured into it, or
some smoke-like fumes having ascended to it
from beneath, a kind of thick cloud is formed
before the ball, this does not allow it clearly to
perceive even any larger object ; so is naturally
the case with the soul. For when it is puri-
fied, and has no passion to disturb it, it looks
steadfastly to the fit objects of its regard ; but
when, darkened by many passions, it loses its
proper excellence, then it is not easily able to
be sufficient for any high thing, but soon is
wearied, and falls back ; and turning aside to
sleep and sloth, lets pass things that concern it
with a view to excellence and the life thence
arising, instead of receiving them with much
readiness.

And that you may not suffer this, (I shall not
cease continually thus to warn you,) strengthen
your minds, that ye may not hear what the
faithful among the Hebrews heard from Paul.
For to them he said that he had "many
things to say, and hard to be uttered " (Heb.
V. ii) ; not as though they were by nature
such, but because, says he, " ye are dull of hear-


' al. " to jrou.'


' iA*YYta9avra{.


ing." For it is the nature of the weak and
infirm man to be confused even by few words
as by many, and what is clear and easy he
thinks hard to be comprehended. Let not
any here be such an one, but having chased from
him all worldly care, so let him hear these doc-
trines.

For when the desire of money possesses the
hearer, the desire of hearing cannot possess him
as well ; since the soul, being one, cannot suffice
for many desires ; but one of the two is injured
by the other, and, from division, becomes
weaker as its rival prevails, and expends all
upon itself.

And this is wont to happen in the case of
children. When a man has only one, he loves
that one exceedingly. But when he has become
father of many, then also his dispositions of
alTection being divided become weaker.

If this happens where there is the absolute
rule and power of nature, and the objects be-
loved are akin one with another, what can we
say as to that desire and disposition which is
according to deliberate choice ; especially where
these desires lie directly opposed to each other ;
for the love of wealth is a thing opposed to the
love of this kind of hearing. We enter heaven
when we enter here ; not in place, I mean, but
in disposition ; for it is possible for one who is
on earth to stand in heaven, and to have vision
of the things that are there, and to hear the
words from thence.

[ii.] Let none then introduce the things of
earth into heaven ; let no one standing here be
careful about what is at his house. For he ought
to bear with him, and to preserve both at home
and in his business, what he gains from this
place, not to allow it to be loaded with the bur-
dens of house and market. Our reason for
entering in to the chair of instruction is, that
thence we may cleanse ourselves from ' the filth
of the outer world ; but if we are likely even in
this little space to be injured by things said or
done without, it is better for us not to enter at
all. Let no one then in the assembly be think- :
ing about domestic matters, but let him at home I
be stirring with what he heard in the assembly.
Let these things be more precious to us than
any. These concern the soul, but those the
body ; or rather what is said here concerns both
body and soul. Wherefore let these things be
our leading business, and all others but occa-
sional employments ; for these belong both to
the future and the present life, but the rest
neither to the one nor the other, unless they be
managed according to the law laid down for
these. Since from these it is impossible to learn
not only what we shall hereafter be, and how we

» al. " rub o«r."


Homily II.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


shall then live, but how we shall rightly direct
this present life also.

For this house is ' a spiritual surgery, that what-
ever wounds we may have received without, here ^
we may heal, not that we may gather fresh ones
to take with us hence. Yet if we do not give
heed to the Spirit speaking to us, we shall not
only fail to clear ourselves of our former hurts,
but shall get others in addition.

Let us then with much earnestness attend to
the book as it is being unfolded to us ; since if
we learn exactly its first principles and funda-
mental doctrines,^ we shall not afterwards recjuire
much close study, but after laboring a little at
the beginning, shall be able, as Paul says, to
instruct others also. (Rom. xv. 14.) For this
Apostle is very sublime, abounding in many
doctrines, and on these he dwells more than on
other matters.

Let us not then be careless hearers. And
this is the reason why we set them forth to you
by little and little, so that all may be easily
intelligible to you, and may not escape your
memory. Let us fear then lest we come under
the condemnation of that word which says, " If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they had
not had sin." (John xv. 22.) For what shall
we be profited more than those who have not
heard, if even after hearing we go our way home
bearing nothing with us, but only wondering at
what has been said.

Allow us then to sow in good ground ; allow
us, that you may draw us the more to you. If
any man hath thorns, let him cast the fire of the
Spirit amongst them. If any hath a hard and
stubborn heart, let him by employing the same
fire make it soft and yielding. If any by the
wayside is trodden down by all kind of thoughts,
let him enter into more sheltered places, and
not lie exposed for those that will to invade for
plunder : that so we may see your cornfields
waving with corn. Besides, if we exercise such
care as this over ourselves, and apply ourselves


' al. *' is set."
' ai. " hence.*


industriously to this spiritual hearing, if not at
once yet by degrees, we shall surely be freed
from all the cares of life.

Let us therefore take heed that it be not said of
us, that our* ears are those of a deaf adder. (Ps.
Iviii. 4.) For tell me, in what does a hearer of
this kind differ from a beast ? and how could he be
otherwise than more irrational than any irra-
tional animal, who does not attend when God is
speaking ? And if to be well-pleasing ^ to God is
really to be a man, what else but a beast can he
be who will not even hear how he may succeed
in this? Consider then what a misfortune it
would be for us to fall down " of our own accord
from (the nature of) men to (that of) beasts,
when Christ is willing of men to make us equal
to angels. For to serve the belly, to be pos-
sessed by the desire of riches, to be given to
anger, to bite, to kick, become not men, but
beasts. Nay, even the beasts have each, as one
may say, one single passion, and that by nature.
But man, when he has cast away the dominion
of reason, and torn himself from the common-
wealth of God's devising, gives himself up to all
the passions, is no longer merely a beast, but a
kind of many-formed motley monster ; nor has
he even the excuse from nature, for all his
wickedness proceeds from deliberate choice and
determination.

May we never have cause to suspect this of
the Church of Christ. Indeed, we are concern-
ing you persuaded of better things, and such as
belong to salvation ; but the more we are so
persuaded, the more careful we will be not to
desist from words of caution. In order that
having mounted to the summit of excellencies,
we may obtain the promised goods. Which
may it come to pass that we all attain to, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be glory world without
end. Amen.


' al. " their."

" al. " to be thankful.''

• al. " to chance.**


lO


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV III.


HOMILY III.

John i. i.


" In the beginning was the Word."

[i.] On the subject of attention in hearkening
it is superfluous to exhort you any more, so quickly
have you shown by your actions the effects of
my advice. For your manner of nmning together,
your attentive postures, the thrusting one another
in your eagerness to get the inner places, where
my voice may more clearly be heard by you,
your unwillingness to retire from the press until
this spiritual assembly be dissolved, the clapping
of hands, the murmurs of applause ; in a word,
all things of this kind may be considered proofs
of the fervor of your souls, and of your desire
to hear. So that on this point it is superfluous
to exhort you. One thing, however, it is neces-
sary for us to bid and entreat, that you continue
to have the same zeal, and manifest it not here
only, but that also when you are at home, you
converse man with wife, and father with son,
concerning these matters. And say somewhat
of yourselves, and require somewhat in return
from them ; and so all contribute to this excel-
lent banquet.'

For let no one tell me that our children ought
not to be occupied with these things ; they ought
not only to be occupied with them, but to be
zealous about them only. And although on
account of your infirmity I do not assert this,
nor take them away from their worldly learning,^
just as I do not draw you either from your civil
business ; yet of these seven days I claim that
you dedicate one to the common Lord of us all.

(For is it not a strange thing that we should bid
our domestics slave for us all their time, and
ourselves apportion not even a litde of our leisure
to God ; and this too when all our service adds
nothing to Him, (for the Godhead is incapable
of want,) but turns out to our own advantage?
And yet when you take your children into the
theaters, you allege neither their mathematical
lessons, nor anything of the kind ; but if it be
required to gain or collect anything spiritual, you
call the matter a waste of time. And how shall
you not anger God, if you find leisure and assign
a season for everything else, and yet think it a
troublesome and unseasonable thing for your
children to take in hand what relates to Him ?

Do not so, brethren, do not so. It is this
very age that most of all needs the hearing these
things ; for from its tenderness it readily stores


1 ipavovt a feast to which all the guests contributed.
• at " study."


up what is said ; and what children hear is
impressed as a seal on the wax of their minds.
Besides, it is then that their life begins to in-
cline to vice or virtue ; and if from the very
gates' and portals one lead them away from
iniquity, and guide them by the hand to the
best road, he will fix them for the time to come
in a sort of habit and nature, and they will not,
even if they be willing, easily change for the
worse, since this force of custom draws them
to the performance of good actions. So that we
shall see them become more worthy of respect
than those who have grown old, and they will be
more useful in civil matters, displaying in youth
the qualities of the aged.

For, as I before said, it cannot be that they
who enjoy the hearing of such things as these,
and who are in the company of such an Apostle,
should depart without receiving some great and
remarkable advantage, be it man, woman, or
youth, that partakes of this table. If we train
by words the animals which we have, and so
tame them, how much more shall we effect this
with men by this spiritual teaching, when there
is a wide difference between the remedy in each
case, and the subject healed as well. For neither
is there so much fierceness in us as in the brutes,
since theirs is from nature, ours from choice ;
nor is the power of the words the same, for the
power of the first is that of the human intellect,
the power of the second is that of the might and
grace of the Spirit.* Let then the man who
despairs of himself consider the tame animals,
and he shall no longer be thus affected ; let him
come continually to this house of healing, let
him hear at all times the laws of the Spirit, and
on retiring home let him write down in his mind
the things which he has heard ; so shall his
hopes be good and his confidence great, as he
feels his progress by experience. For when the
devil sees the law of God written in the soul,
and the heart become tablets to write it on, he
will not approach any more. Since wherever
the king's writing is, not engraved on a pillar of
brass, but stamped by the Holy Ghost on a
mind loving God, and bright with abundant grace,
that (evil one) will not be able even to look at
it, but from afar will turn his back upon us. For
nothing is so terrible to him and to the thoughts
which are suggested by him as a mind careful


' al. " beginning."

* i.e. Man is more tractable than brutes, the words of the Spirit
more powerful than words of reasoo.


Homily III.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


II


about Divine matters, and a soul which ever
hangs over this fountain. Such an one can noth-
ing present annoy, even though it be displeasing ;
nothing puff up or make proud, even though
it be favorable ; but amidst all this storm and
surge it will even enjoy a great calm.

[2.] For confusion arises within us, not from
the nature of circumstances, but from the infirm-
ity of our minds ; for if we were thus affected by
reason of what befalls us, then, (as we all sail the
same sea, and it is impossible to escape waves
and spray,) all men must needs be troubled ;
but if there are some who stand beyond the
influence of the storm and the raging sea, then
it is clear that it is not circumstances which
make the storm, but the condition of our own
mind. If therefore we so order the mind that
it may bear all things contentedly, we shall have
no storm nor even a ripple, but always a clear
calm.

After professing that I should say nothing on
these points, I know not how I have been car-
ried away into such a length of exhortation.
Pardon my proHxity ; for I fear, yes, I greatly
fear lest this zeal of ours should ever become
weaker. Did I feel confident respecting it, I
would not now have said to you anything on
these matters, since it is sufficient to make all
things easy to you. But it is time in what follows
to proceed to the matters proposed for considera-
tion to-day ; that you may not come weary to
the contest. For we have contests against the
enemies of the truth, against those who use every
artifice to destroy the honor of the Son of God,
or rather their own. This remains for ever as
it now is, nothing lessened by the blaspheming
tongue, but they, by seeking eagerly to pull down
Him whom they say they worship, fill their
faces with shame and their souls with punish-
ment.

What then do they say when we assert what
we have asserted ? " That the words, ' in the
beginning was the Word,' do not denote eter-
nity absolutely, for that this same expression
was used also concerning heaven and earth."
What enormous shamelessness and irreverence !
I speak to thee concerning God, and dost thou
bring the earth into the argument, and men who
are of the earth ? At this rate, since Christ is
called Son of God, and God, Man who is called
Son of God must be God also. For, " I have
said. Ye are Gods, and all of you are children
of the Most High." (Ps. Ixxxii. 6.) Wilt thou
contend with the Only-Begotten concerning Son-
ship, and assert that in that respect He enjoys
nothing more than thou? "By no means," is
the reply. And yet thou doest this even though
thou say not so in words. " How?" Because
thou sayest that thou by grace art partaker of
the adoption, and He in like manner. For


by saying that He is not Son by nature, thou
only makest him to be so by grace.

However, let us see the proofs which they
produce to us. " In the beginning," it is said,
" God made the Heaven and the earth, and the
earth was invisible and unformed." (Gen. i.
2.) And, "There 'was' a man of Ramathaim
Zophim." (i Sam. i. i.) These are what they
think strong arguments, and they are strong ;
but it is to prove the correctness of the doc-
trines asserted by us, while they are utterly
powerless to establish their blasphemy. For
tell me, what has the word " was " in common
with the word " made " ? What hath God in
common with man ? Why dost thou mix what
may not be mixed? Why confound things
which are distinct, why bring low what is above ?
In that place it is not the expression " was "
only which denotes eternity, but that One " was
in the beginning." And that other, " The Word
was " ; for as the word " being," when used con-
cerning man, only distinguishes present time,
but when concerning God, denotes eternity,' so
" was," when used respecting our nature, signi-
fies to us past time, and that too limited, but
when respecting God it declares eternity. It
would have been enough then when one had
heard the words "earth" and "man," to im-
agine nothing more concerning them than what
one may fitly think of a nature that came into
being,'' for that which came to be, be it what it
may, hath come to be either in time, or the age
before time was, but the Son of God is above
not only times, but all ages which were before,
for He is the Creator and Maker of them, as the
Apostle says, "by whom also He made the
ages." Now the Maker necessarily is, before
the thing made. Yet since some are so sense-
less, as even after this to have higher notions
concerning creatures than is their due, by the
expression " He made," and by that other,
" there was a man," he lays hold beforehand
of the mind of his hearer, and cuts up all
shamelessness by the roots. For all that has
been made, both heaven and earth, has been
made in time, and has its beginning in time, and
none of them is without beginning, as having
been made : so that when you hear that " he
made the earth," and that " there was a man,"
you are trifling' to no purpose, and weaving a
tissue of useless folly.

For I can mention even another thing by way
of going further. What is it ? It is, that if it
had been said of the earth, " In the beginning
was the earth," and of man, " In the beginning
was the man," we must not even then have

* al. " one ever and through all time."

* TO ofTo are opposed to to ytv6tj.eva in the Platonic philosophy.
The reading here should be yemjTJj for yfvvTjrjit as in the MS. Baroc.
no. 210, in the Bodl. Library. Our Lord is ytvvijTOi aytmjTw^.

' al, " trifle npt,"


12


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV III.


imagined any greater things concerning them
than what we have now determined.' For the
terms " earth " and " man " as they are presup-
posed, whatever may be said concerning them,
do not allow the mind to imagine to itself any-
thing greater concerning them than what we
know at present. Just as " the Word," although
but little be said of It, does not allow us to
think (respecting It) anything low or poor.
Since in proceeding he says of the earth, " The
earth was invisible and unformed." For having
said that " He made " it, and having settled its
proper limit, he afterwards declares fearlessly
what follows, as knowing that there is no one so
silly as to suppose that it is without beginning
and uncreated, since the word " earth," and
that other " made," are enough to convince
even a very simple person that it is not eternal
nor increate, but one of those things created in
time.

[3.] Besides, the expression "was," applied
to the earth and to man, is not indicative of
absolute existence. But in the case of a man
(it denotes) his being of a certain place, in that
of the earth its being in a certain way. For he
has not said absolutely " the earth was," and
then held his peace, but has taught how it was
even after its creation, as that it was " invisible
and unformed," as yet covered by the waters
and in confusion. So in the case of Elkanah
he does not merely say that " there was a man,"
but adds also whence he was, " of Armathaim
Zophim." But in the case of "the Word," it is
not so. I am ashamed to try these cases, one
against the other, for if we find fault with those
who do so in the case of men, when there is a
great difference in the virtue of those who are
so tried, though in truth their substance be one ;
where the difference both of nature and of every-
thing else is so infinite, is it not the extremest
madness to raise such questions ? But may He
who is blasphemed by them be merciful to us.
For it was not we who invented the necessity of
such discussions, but they who war against their
own salvation laid it on us.

What then do I say? That this first "was,"
applied to " the Word," is only indicative of His
eternal Being, (for " In the beginning," he saith,
"was the Word,") and that the second "was,"
(" and the Word was with God,") denotes His
relative Being. For since to be eternal and
without beginning is most peculiar to God, this
he puts first ; and then, lest any one hearing that
He was " in the beginning," should assert, that
He was " unbegotten " also, he immediately
remedies this by saying, before he declares what
He was, that He was " with God." And he has
prevented any one from supposing, that this


al. " it now contained in them."


" Word " is simply such a one as is either uttered'
or conceived,' by the addition, as I beforesaid,
of the article, as well as by this second expres-
sion. For he does not say, was " in God," but
was " with God " : declaring to us His eternity
as to person.* Then, as he advances, he has
more clearly revealed it, by adding, that this
" Word " also " was God."

" But yet created," it may be said. What then
hindered him from saying, that " In the begin-
ning God made the Word " ? at least Moses speak-
ing of the earth says, not that " in the beginning
was the earth," but that " He made it," and then
it waa What now hindered John from saying
in like manner, that " In the beginning God
made the Word " ? For if Moses feared lest
any one should assert that the earth was un-
created," much more ought John to have feared
this respecting the Son, if He was indeed created.
The world being visible, by this very circum-
stance proclaims its Maker, (" the heavens,"
says the Psalmist, " declare the glory of God "
— Ps. xix. i), but the Son is invisible, and is
greatly, infinitely, higher than all creation. If
now, in the one instance, where we needed
neither argument nor teaching to know that the
world is created," yet the prophet sets down this
fact clearly and before all others ; much more
should John have declared the same concerning
the Son, if He had really been created.'

" Yes," it may be said, " but Peter has asserted
this clearly and openly." Where and when?
" When speaking to the Jews he said, that ' God
hath made Him both Lord and Christ.' " (Acts
ii. 36.) Why dost thou not add what follows,
" That same Jesus whom ye have crucified "? or
dost thou not know that of the words, part re-
late to His unmixed Nature, part to His Incar-
nation?' But if this be not the case, and thou
wilt absolutely understand all as referring to the
Godhead, then thou wilt make the Godhead
capable of suffering ; but if not capable of
suffering, then not created. For if blood
had flowed from that divine and ineffable
Nature, and if that Nature, and not the flesh,
had been torn and cut by the nails upon the
cross, on this supposition your quibbling would
have had reason ; but if not even the devil him-
self could utter such a blasphemy, why dost thou
feign to be ignorant with ignorance so unpar-
donable, and such as not the evil spirits them-
selves could pretend? Besides the expres-
sions " Lord " and " Christ " belong not to His
Essence, but to His dignity ; for the one refers
to His Power," the other to his having been
anointed. What then wouldest thou say con-


• npo^opiKOV, * ay«vr)Tov.

• ivSiiOtrov, • yevriToi.

• ifnotrraatv. ' »cTtff0«(«.

■ otKoi'o^ia signifies all that Christ did and suffered on earth for
the salvation of mankind. Vide Euseb. Hist. Ecc, i. 1, Not. 11,
ed. Heinichen. * cjovria.


Homily III.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


13


cerning the Son of God ? for if he were even, as
you assert, created, this argument could not
have place. For He was not first created and
afterwards God chose Him, nor does He hold a
kingdom which could be thrown aside, but one
which belongs by nature to His Essence ; since,
when asked if He were a King, He answers,
"To this end was I born." (c. xviii. 37.) But
Peter speaks as concerning one chosen, because
his argument wholly refers to the Dispensation.

[4.] And why dost thou wonder if Peter says
this? for Paul, reasoning with the Athenians,
calls Him " Man" only, saying, "By that Man
whom He hath ordained, whereof He hath given
assurance to all men, in that He hath raised
Him from the dead." (Acts xvii. 31.) He
speaks nothing concerning " the form of God "
(Phil. ii. 6), nor that He was "equal to Him,"
nor that He was the " brightness of His glory."
(Heb. i. 3.) And with reason. The time for
words like these was not yet come ; but it would
have contented him that they should in the
meanwhile admit that He was Man, and that He
rose again from the dead. Christ Himself acted
in the same manner, from whom Paul having
learned, used this reserve.' For He did not at
ance reveal to us His Divinity, but was at first
held to be a Prophet and a good man ; ^ but
afterwards His real nature was shown by His
works and words. On this account Peter too at
first used this method, (for this was the first
sermon that he made to the Jews ;) and be-
cause they were not yet able clearly to under-
stand anything respecting His Godhead, he
dwelt on the arguments relating to His Incarna-
tion ; that their ears being exercised in these,
might open a way to the rest of his teaching.
And if any one will go through all the sermon
from the beginning, he will find what I say very
observable, for he (Peter) calls Him " Man,"
and dwells on the accounts of His Passion, His
Resurrection, and His generation according to
the flesh. Paul too when he says, " Who was
born of the seed of David according to the
flesh" (Rom. i. 3), only teaches us that the
word " made " ' is taken with a view* to His In-
carnation, as we allow. But the son of thunder
is now speaking to us concerning His Ineffable
and Eternal ' Existence, and therefore he leaves
the word " made " and puts " was " ; yet if He
were created, this point he needs must most
especially have determined. For if Paul feared
that some foolish persons might suppose that
He shall be greater than the Father, and have
Him who begat Him made subject to Him,
(for this is the reason why the Apostle in send-

^ OUTCO Ta irpdytiara. tiiKOfofici,

' a!. " and Christ, simply a Man."

" " made," E. V.

' iraptiXTjirraK iwi T^f oifcofOMiaf* "adopted in reference to."

B wpoatvviot.


ing to the Corinthians writes, " But when He
saith. All things are put under Him, it is mani-
fest that He is excepted which did put all things
under Him," yet who could possibly imagine
that the Father, even in common with all things,
will be subject to the Son?) if, I say, he never-
theless feared these foolish imaginations, and
says, " He is excepted that did put all things
under Him ; " much more if the Son of God were
indeed created, ought John to have feared lest
any one should suppose Him uncreated, and to
have taught on this point before any other.

But now, since He was Begotten, with good
reason neither John nor any other, whether
apostle or prophet, hath asserted that He was
created. Neither had it been so would the
Only-Begotten Himself have let it pass unmen-
tioned. For He who spoke of Himself so hum-
bly from condescension' would certainly not
have been silent on this matter. And I think it
not unreasonable to suppose, that He would be
more likely to have the higher Nature, and say
nothing of it, than not having it to pass by this
omission, and fail to make known that He had
it not. For in the first case there was a good
excuse for silence, namely, His desire to teach
mankind humility by being silent as to the great-
ness of His attributes ; but in the second case
you can find no just excuse for silence. For
why should He who declined many of His real
attributes have been, if He were created, silent
as to His having been made? He who, in
order to teach humility, often uttered expres-
sions of lowliness, such as did not properly be-
long to Him, much more if He had been indeed
created, would not have failed to speak of this.
Do you not see Him, in order that none may
imagine Him not to have been begotten,'
doing and saying everything to show that He
was so, uttering words unworthy both of His
dignity and His essence, and descending to the
humble character of a Prophet? For the ex-
pression, "As I hear, I judge" (v. 30) ; and
that other, " He hath told Me what I should say,
and what I should speak" (xii. 49), and the
like, belong merely to a prophet. If now, from
His desire to remove this suspicion. He did not
disdain to utter words thus lowly, much more if
He were created would He have said many like
words, that none might suppose Him to be un-
created ; as, " Think not that I am begotten of
the Father ; I am created, not begotten, nor do
I share His essence." But as it is. He does the
very contrary, and utters words which compel
men, even against their will and desire, to admit
the opposite opinion. As, " I am in the Father,
and the Father in Me " (xiv. 11); and, " Have
I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou


14


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily III.


not known Me, Philip? he that hath seen Me,
hath seen the Father." (xiv. 9.) And, "That
all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father." (v. 23.) " As the Father
raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even
so the Son quickeneth whom He will." (v. 21.)
" My Father worketh hitherto, and I work."
(v. 17.) "As the Father knoweth Me, even so
know I the Father." (x. 15.) "I and My
Father are One." (x. 30.) And everywhere
by putting the " as," and the " so," and the
"being with the Father," He declares His unde-
viating likeness to Him.* His power in Himself
He manifests by these, as well as by many other
words ; as when He says, " Peace, be still."
(Mark iv. 39.) " I will, be thou clean." (Matt,
viii. 3.) "Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee, come out of him." (Mark ix. 25.) And
again, "Ye have heard that it was said by them
of old time. Thou shall not kill ; but I say unto
you. That whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger." (Matt. v.
21, 22.) And all the other laws which He gave,
and wonders which He worked, are sufficient to
show His power, or rather, I should say, a very
small part of them is enough to bring over and
convince any, except the utterly insensate.

[5.] But vainglory^ is a thing powerful to
blind even to very evident truths the minds of
those ensnared by it, and to persuade them to
dispute against what is allowed by others ; nay,
it instigates ' some who know and are persuaded
of the truth to pretended ignorance and oppo-
sition. As took place in the case of the Jews,
for they did not through ignorance deny the Son
of God, but that they might obtain honor from
the multitude ; " they believed," says the Evan-
gelist, but were afraid, " lest they should be put
out of the synagogue." (xii. 40.) And so they
gave up ■* their salvation to others.' For it can-
not be that he who is so zealous a slave to the
glory of this present world can obtain the glory
which is from God. Wherefore He rebuked
them, saying, " How can ye believe, which re-
ceive honor of men, and seek not the honor
which Cometh from God?" (v. 44.) This
passion is a sort of deep intoxication, and makes
him who is subdued by it hard to recover. And
having detached the souls of its captives from
heavenly things, it nails them to earth, and lets
them not look up to the true light, but persuades
them ever to wallow in the mire, giving them
masters so powerful, that they have the rule over
them without needing to use commands. For
the man who is sick of this disease, does of his
own accord, and without bidding, all that he


* TTtv wpo? ainov aitapaWaiiav,

* al. " love of rule."

* nftoertivav.

* i.e. (ave up their salvation rather than ofiend others.


thinks will be agreeable to his masters. On
their account he clothes himself in rich apparel,
and beautifies his face, taking these pains not
for himself but for others ; and he leads about
a train of followers through the market-place,
that others may admire him, and all that he
does he goes through, merely out of obsequious-
ness to the rest of the world. Can any state of
mind be more wretched than this ? That others
may admire him, he is ever being precipitated '
to ruin.

Would you learn what a tyrannous sway it
exercises? Why surely, the words of Christ are
sufficient to show it all. But yet listen to these
further remarks.' If you will ask any of those
men who mingle in state affairs and incur great
expenses, why they lavish so much gold, and
what their so vast expenditure means ; you will
hear from them, that it is for nothing else but
to gratify the people. If again you ask what
the people may be ; they will say, that it is a
thing full of confusion and turbulent, made up
for the most part of folly, tossed blindly to and
fro like the waves of the sea, and often com-
posed of varying and adverse opinions. Must
not the man who has such a master be more
pitiable than any one ? And yet strange though
it be, it is not so strange that worldly men should
be eager about these things ; but that those who
say that they have started away from the world
should be sick of this same disease, or rather of
one more grievous still, this is the strangest thing
of all. For with the first the loss extends only
to money, but in the last case the danger reaches
to the soul. For when men alter a right faith
for reputation's sake, and dishonor God that they
may be in high repute themselves, tell me, what
excess of stupidity and madness must there not
be in what they do? Other passions, even if
they are very hurtful, at least bring some pleas-
ure with them, though it be but for a time and
fleeting ; those who love money, or wine, or
women, have, with their hurt, a pleasure, though
a brief one. But those who are taken captives
by this passion, live a life continually embittered
and stripped of enjoyment, for they do not ob-
tain what they earnestly desire, glory, I mean,
from the many. They think they enjoy it, but
do not really, because the thing they aim at is
not glory at all. And therefore their state of
mind is not called glory,' but a something void
of glory, vaingloriousness,' so have all the an-
cients named it, and with good reason ; inas-
much as it is quite empty, and contains nothing
bright or glorious within it, but as players' masks
seem to be bright and lovely, but are hollow
within, (for which cause, though they be more


• KtLTOLKpjJtJ^l'i^eral.

' al. " but it may be seen from this."
« Sofa.

* KtvoSo^ia^ lit. ** empty glory,"


Homily HI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


15


beautiful than natural faces, yet they never draw
any to love them,) even so, or rather yet more
wretchedly, has the applause of the multitude
tricked out for us this passion, dangerous as an
antagonist, and cruel as a master. Its counte-
nance alone is bright, but within it is no more
like the mask's mere emptiness, but crammed
with dishonor, and full of savage tyranny.
Whence then, it may be asked, has this passion,
so unreasonable, so devoid of pleasure, its birth ?
Whence else but from a low, mean soul? It
cannot be that one who is captivated by love of
applause should imagine readily anything great
or noble ; he needs must be base, mean, dishon-
orable, little. He who does nothing for virtue's
sake, but to please men worthy of no considera-
tion, and who ever makes account of their mis-
taken and erring opinions, how can he be worth
anything? Consider; if any one should ask
him, What do you think of the many ? he clearly
would say, " that they are thoughtless, and not
to be regarded." Then if any one again should
ask him, " Would you choose to be like them ? "
I do not suppose he could possibly desire to be
Uke them. Must it not then be excessively ridic-
ulous to seek the good opinion of those whom
you never would choose to resemble ?

[6.] Do you say that they are many and a
sort of collective body ? this is the very reason
why you ought most to despise them. If when
taken singly they are contemptible, still more
will this be the case when they are many ; for
when they are assembled together, their individ-
ual folly is increased by numbers, and becomes
greater. So that a man might possibly take a
single one of them and set him right, but could
not do so with them when together, because then
their folly becomes intense, and they are led like
sheep, and follow in every direction the opinions
of one another. Tell me, will you seek to obtain
this vulgar glory? Do not, I beg and entreat
you. It turns everything upside down ; it is the
mother of avarice, of slander, of false witness, of
treacheries ; it arms and exasperates those who
have received no injury against those who have
inflicted none. He who has fallen into this dis-
ease neither knows friendship nor remembers
old companionship, and knows not how to re-
spect any one at all ; he has cast away from his
soul all goodness, and is at war with every one,
unstable, without natural affection.

Again, the passion of anger, tyrannical though
it be and hard to bear, still is not wont always
to disturb, but only when it has persons that ex-
cite it ; but that of vainglory is ever active, and
there is no time, as one may say, when it can
cease, since reason neither hinders nor restrains
it, but it is always with us not only persuading
us to sin, but snatching from our hands anything
which we may chance to do aright, or sometimes


not allowing us to do right at all. If Paul calls
covetousness idolatry, what ought we to name
that which is mother, and root, and source of it,
I mean, vainglory? We cannot possibly find
any term such as its wickedness deserves. Be-
loved, let us now return to our senses ; let us
put off this filthy garment, let us rend and cut it
off from us, let us at some time or other become
free with true freedom, and be sensible of the
nobility ' which has been given to us by God ;
let us despise vulgar applause. For nothing is
so ridiculous and disgraceful as this passion,
nothing so full of shame and dishonor. One
may in many ways see, that to love honor, is dis-
honor ; and that true honor consists in neglect-
ing honor, in making no account of it, but in
saying and doing everything according to what
seems good to God. In this way we shall be
able to receive a reward from Him who sees
exactly all our doings, if we are content to have
Him only for a spectator. What need we other
eyes, when He who shall confer the prize is ever
beholding our actions ? Is it not a strange thing
that, whatever a servant does, he should do to
please his master, should seek nothing more
than his master's observation, desire not to at-
tract other eyes (though they be great men
who are looking on) to his conduct, but aim at
one thing only, that his master may observe him ;
while we who have a Lord so great, seek other
spectators who can nothing profit, but rather
hurt us by their observation, and make all our
labor vain? Not so, I beseech you. Let us
call Him to applaud and view our actions from
whom we shall receive our rewards. Let us
have nothing to do with human eyes. For if
we should even desire to attain this honor, we
shall then attain to it, when we seek that which
cometh from God alone. For, He saith, " Them
that honor Me, I will honor." (i Sam. ii. 30.)
And even as we are best supplied with riches
when we despise them, and seek only the wealth
which cometh from God (" Seek," he saith,
"the kingdom of God, and all these things shall
be added to you" — Matt. vi. 33) ; so it is in
the case of honor. When the granting either ot^
riches or honor is no longer attended with dan-
ger to us, then God gives them freely ; and it is
then unattended with danger, when they have
not the rule or power over us, do not command
us as slaves, but belong to us as masters and free
men. For the reason that He wishes us not to
love them is, that we may not be ruled by them ;
and if we succeed in this respect. He gives us
them with great liberality. Tell me, what is
brighter than Paul, when he says, " We seek not
honor of men, neither of you, nor yet of others."
(i Thess. ii. 6.) What then is richer than him

> tirytveia, " high birth."


i6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


who hath nothing, and yet possesseth all things?
for as I said, when we are not mastered by them,
then we shall master them, then we shall receive
them. If then we desire to obtain honor, let us
shun honor, so shall we be enabled after accom-


plishing the laws of God to obtain both the good
things which are here, and those which are
promised, by the grace of Christ, with whom,
to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY IV.

John i. i.


" In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God."

[i.] When children are just brought to their
learning, their teachers do not give them many
tasks in succession, nor do they set them once for
all, but they often repeat to them the same short
ones, so that what is said may be easily implanted
in their minds, and they may not be vexed at the
first onset with the quantity, and with finding it
hard to remember, and become less active in
picking up what is given them, a kind of sluggish-
ness arising from the difficulty. And I, who
wish to effect the same with you, and to render
your labor easy, take by little and little the food
which lies on this Divine table, and instill it into
your souls. On this account I shall handle again
the same words, not so as to say again the same
things, but to set before you only what yet
remains. Come, then, let us again apply our
discourse to the introduction.

" In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God." Why, when all the other
Evangelists had begun with the Dispensation ' ;
(for Matthew says, " The Book of the generation
of Jesus Christ, the Son of David " ; and Luke
too relates to us in the beginning of his Gospel
the events relating to Mary ; and in like manner
Mark dwells on the same narratives, from that
point detailing to us the history of the Baptist ;)
why, when they began with these matters, did
John briefly and in a later place hint at them,
saying, "the Word was made flesh "(ver. 14.);
and, passing by everything else. His conception.
His birth. His bringing up. His growth, at once
discourse to us concerning His Eternal Genera-
tion?

I will now tell you what the reason of this is.
Because the other Evangelists had dwelt most on
the accounts of His coming in the flesh, there
was fear lest some, being of grovelling minds,
might for this reason rest in these doctrines
alone, as indeed was the case with Paul of
Samosata. In order, therefore, to lead away


from this fondness for earth those who were
like to fall into it, and to draw them up towards
heaven, with good reason he commences his
narrative from above, and from the eternal
subsistence. For while Matthew enters upon
his relation from Herod the king, Luke from
Tiberius Caesar, Mark from the Baptism of John,
this Apostle, leaving alone all these things,
ascends beyond all time or age.^ Thither
darting forward the imagination of his hearers
to the "was in the beginning," not allowing it
to stay at any point, nor setting any limit, as
they did in Herod, and Tiberius, and John.

And what we may mention besides as espe-
cially deserving our admiration is, that John,
though he gave himself up to the higher doc-
trine,^ yet did not neglect the Dispensation ;
nor were the others, though intent upon the
relation of this, silent as to the subsistence
before the ages. With good cause ; for One
Spirit It was that moved the souls of all ; and
therefore they have shown great unanimity in
their narrative. But thou, beloved, when thou
hast heard of "The Word," do not endure those
who say, that He is a work ; nor those even who
think, that He is simply a word. For many are
the words of God which angels execute, but of
those words none is God ; they all are prophe-
cies or commands, (for in Scripture it is usual
to call the laws of God His commands, and
prophecies, words ; wherefore in speaking of the
angels, he says, •' Mighty in strength, fulfilling His
word ") (Ps. ciii. 20), but this Word is a Being
with subsistence,^ proceeding* without affection'^
from the Father Himself. For this, as I before
said, he has shown by the term "Word." As
therefore the expression, " In the beginning was
the Word," shows His Eternity, so "was in the
beginning with God," has declared to us His
Co-eternity. For that you may not, when you
hear " In the beginning was the Word," suppose
Him to be Eternal, and yet imagine the life of


^ \6yov.

* Qvaia ecuwoffTaTO?.


B irpocAdoOaa.


Homily IV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


17


the Father to differ from His by some interval
and longer duration, and so assign a beginning
to the Only-Begotten, he adds, " was in the be-
ginning with God" ; so eternally even as the Father
Himself, for the Father was never without the
Word, but He was always God with God, yet
Each in His proper Person.'

How then, one says, does John assert, that He
was in the world, if He was with God? Because
He was both ' with God and in the world also.
For neither Father nor Son are limited in any
way. Since, if " there is no end of His great-
ness " (Ps. cxlv. 3), and if" of His wisdom there
is no number" (Ps. cxlvii. 5), it is clear that
there cannot be any beginning in time'' to His
Essence. Thou hast heard, that " In the begin-
ning God made the heaven and the earth "
(Gen. i. i) ; what dost thou understand from
this " beginning " ? clearly, that they were created
before all visible things. So, respecting the
Only-Begotten, when you hear that He was " in
the beginning," conceive of him as before all
intelligible things,* and before the ages.

But if any one say, " How can it be that He
is a Son, and yet not younger than the Father ?
since that which proceeds from something else
needs must be later than that from which it pro-
ceeds " ; we will say that, properly speaking,
these are human reasonings ; that he who ques-
tions on this matter will question on others yet
more improper ; ^ and that to such we ought not
even to give ear. For our speech is now con-
cerning God, not concerning the nature of men,
which is subject to the sequence and necessary
conclusions of these reasonings. Still, for the
assurance of the weaker sort, we will speak even
to these points.

[2.] Tell me, then, does the radiance of the
sun proceed from the substance " itself of the
sun, or from some other source ? Any one not
deprived of his very senses needs must confess,
that it proceeds from the substance itself. Yet,
although the radiance proceeds from the sun
itself, we cannot say that it is later in point of
time than the substance of that body, since the
sun has never appeared without its rays. Now if
in the case of these visible and sensible bodies
there has been shown to be something which
proceeds from something else, and yet is not
after that from whence it proceeds ; why are
you incredulous in the case of the invisible and
ineffable Nature? This same thing there takes
place, but in a manner suitable to That Sub-
stance.' For it is for this reason that Paul too
calls Him "Brightness" (Heb. i. 3); setting
forth thereby His being from Him and His Co-
eternity. Again, tell me, were not all the ages.


' vnotTTatTfi, • vOTjroiv.

' al. " God with God." '' aronuiTtpa.

' Ti> auTo i'ri toOto €<ttiv ovtws «? tKiiyrf Trj ovata np€irov ^v.


and every interval ' created by Him ? Any man
not deprived of his senses must necessarily con-
fess this. There is no interval' therefore be-
tween the Son and the Father ; and if there be
none, then He is not after, but Co-eternal with
Him. For " before " and " after" are notions
implying time, since, without age or time, no
man could possibly imagine these words ; but
God is above times and ages.

But if in any case you say that you have found
a beginning to the Son, see whether by the same
reason and argument you are not compelled to
reduce the Father also to a beginning, earlier
indeed, but still a beginning. For when you
have assigned to the Son a limit and beginning
of existence, do you not proceed upwards from
that point, and say, that the Father was before
it? Clearly you do. Tell me then, what is the
extent of the Father's prior subsistence? For
whether you say that the interval is little, or
whether you say it is great, you equally have
brought the Father to a beginning. For it is
clear, that it is by measuring the space that you
say whether it is little or great ; yet it would not
be possible to measure it, unless there were a
beginning on either side ; so that as far as you
are concerned you have given the Father a be-
ginning, and henceforth, according to your ar-
gument, not even the Father will be without
beginning. See you that the word spoken by
the Saviour is true, and the saying everywhere
discovers its force ? And what is that word ? It
is, " He that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not
the Father." (John v. 23.)

And I know indeed that what now has been
said cannot by many be comprehended, and
therefore it is that in many places we avoid '°
agitating questions of human reasonings, because
the rest of the people cannot follow such argu-
ments, and if they could, still they have nothing
firm or sure in them. " For the thoughts of
mortal men are miserable, and our devices are
but uncertain." (Wisd. ix. 14.) Still I should
like to ask our objectors, what means that which
is said by the Prophet, " Before Me there was
no God formed, nor is there any after Me " ?
(Isa. xliii. 10.) For if the Son is younger than
the Father, how, says He, " Nor is there " any
after me " ? Will you take away the being of
the Only-Begotten Himself? You either must
dare this, or admit one Godhead with distinct
Persons of the Father and Son.

Finally, how could the expression, " All things
were made by Him," be true? For if there is
an age older than He, how can that '^ which was
before Him have been made by Him? See ye
to what daring the argument has carried them,


• fiiaov.
10 aco^oAAo/ic^a, '


put off."


" LXX. .Vt.f.
** TO, al. u.


i8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


when once the truth has been unsettled ? Why
did not the EvangeHst say, that He was made
from things that were not, as Paul declares of
all things, when he says, "Who calleth those
things which be not as though they were " ; but
says, "Was in the beginning"? (Rom. iv. 17.)
This is contrary to that ; and with good reason.
For God neither is made,' nor has anything
older ; these are words of the Greeks.^ Tell me
this too : Would you not say, that the Creator
beyond all comparison excels His works? Yet
since that which is from things that were not is
similar to them, where is the superiority not
admitting of comparison? And what mean the
expressions, " I am the first and I am the last "
(Isa. xliv. 6) ; and, "before Me was no other
God formed "? (Isa. xliii. 10.) For if the Son
be not of the same Essence, there is another
God ; and if He be not Co-eternal, He is after
Him; and if He did not proceed from His
Essence, clear it is that He was made. But if
they assert, that these things were said to dis-
tinguish Him from idols, why do they not allow
that it is to distinguish Him from idols that he
says, "the Only True God"? (John xvii. 3.)
Besides, if this was said to distinguish Him from
idols, how would you interpret the whole sen-
tence? "After Me," He says, "is no other
God." In saying this, He does not exclude the
Son, but that " After Me there is no idol God,"
not that " there is no Son." Allowed, says he ;
what then ? and the expression, " Before Me
was no other God formed," will you so under-
stand, as that no idol God indeed was formed
before Him, but yet a Son was formed before
Him ? What evil spirit would assert this ? I do
not suppose that even Satan himself would
do so.

Moreover, if He be not Co-eternal with the
Father, how can you say that His Life is infinite ?
For if it have a beginning from before," although
it be endless, yet it is not infinite ; for the in-
finite must be infinite in both directions. As
Paul also declared, when he said, " Having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life " (Heb.
vii. 3) ; by this expression showing that He is
both without beginning and without end. For
as the one has no limit, so neither has the other.
In one direction there is no end, in the other
no beginning.

[3.] And how again, since He is " Life," was
there ever when He was not? For all must
allow, that Life both is always, and is without
beginning and without end, if It be indeed Life,
as indeed It is. For if there be when It is not,
how can It be the life of others, when It even
Itself is not?


e


livtreu.
ieathens.
* iim0tvt " a parte ante.'


" How then," says one, " does John lay down
a beginning by saying, ' In the beginning was'?"
Tell me, have you attended to the " In the
beginning," and to the " was," and do you not
understand the expression, "the Word was"?
What ! when the Prophet says, " From everlast-
ing* and to everlasting Thou art" (Ps. xc. 2),
does he say this to assign Him limits? No, but
to declare His Eternity. Consider now that the
case is the same in this place. He did not use
the expression as assigning limits, since he did
not say, " had a beginning," but " was in the
beginning"; by the word "was" carrying thee
forward to the idea that the Son is without
beginning. "Yet observe," says he, "the Father
is named with the addition of the article, but
the Son without it." What then, when the
Apostle says, " The Great God, and our Saviour
Jesus Christ" (Tit. ii. 13) ; and again, "Who is
above all, God "? (Rom. ix. 5.) It is true that
here he has mentioned the Son, without the
article ; but he does the same with the Father
also, at least in his Epistle to the Philippians
(c. ii. 6), he says, "Who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with
God " ; and again to the Romans, " Grace to
you, and peace, from God our Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ." (Rom. i. 7.) Besides, it
was superfluous for it to be attached in that
place, when close" above it was continually
attached to " the Word." For as in speaking
concerning the Father, he says, " God is a
Spirit" (John iv. 24), and we do not, because
the article is not joined to " Spirit," yet deny the
Spiritual Nature of God ; so here, although the
article is not annexed to the Son, the Son is not
on that account a less God. Why so ? Because
in saying " God," and again " God," he does
not reveal to us any difference in this Godhead,
but the contrary ; for having before said, " and
the Word was God " ; that no one might suppose
the Godhead of the Son to be inferior, he im-
mediately adds the characteristics of genuine
Godhead, including Eternity, (for " He was,"
says he, " in the beginning with God,") and
attributing to Him the office of Creator. For
" by Him were all things made, and without Him
was not anything made that was made " ; which
His Father also everywhere by the Prophets
declares to be especially characteristic of His
own Essence. And the Prophets are continually
busy on this kind of demonstration, not only of
itself, but when they contend against the honor
shown to idols ; " Let the gods perish," says one
" who have not made heaven and earth " (Jer.
x. 11) : and again, "I have stretched out the
heaven with My hand " (Isa. xliv. 24) ; and it is
as declaring it to be indicative of Divinity, that


aTTO TOV a.Lu>voi.


Homily IV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


19


He everywhere puts it. And the Evangehst
himself was not satisfied with these words, but
calls Him " Life " too and " Light." If now He
was ever with the Father, if He Himself created
all things, if He brought all things into existence,
and keeps together' all things, (for, this he meant
by " Life,") if He enlightens all things, who so
senseless as to say, that the Evangelist desired
to teach an inferiority of Divinity by those very
expressions, by which, rather than by any others,
it is possible to express its equality and not differ-
ing? Let us not then confound the creation
with the Creator, lest we too hear it said of us,
that " they served the creature rather than the
Creator" (Rom. i. 25); for although it be
asserted that this is said of the heavens, still in
speaking of the heavens he positively says, that
we must not serve ^ the creature, for it is a
heathenish' thing.

[4.] Let us therefore not lay ourselves under
this curse. For this the Son of God came, that
He might rid us from this service ; for this He
took the form of a slave, that He might free us
from this slavery ; for this He was spit upon, for
this He was buffeted, for this He endured the
shameful death. Let us not, I entreat you, make
all these things of none effect, let us not go back
to our former unrighteousness, or rather to un-
righteousness much more grievous ; for to serve
the creature is not the same thing as to bring
down the Creator, as far at least as in us lies, to
the meanness of the creature. For He con-
tinues being such as He is ; as says the Psalmist,
"Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not
fail." (Ps. cii. 27.) Let us then glorify Him
as we have received from our fathers, let us
glorify Him both by our faith and by our works ;
for sound doctrines avail us nothing to salvation,
if our life is corrupt. Let us then order it accord-
ing to what is well-pleasing to God, setting our-
selves far from all filthiness, unrighteousness,
and covetousness, as strangers and foreigners
and aliens to the things here on earth. If any
have much wealth and possessions, let him so
use them as one who is a sojourner, and who,
whether he will or not, shall shortly pass from
them. If one be injured by another, let him
not be angry forever, nay rather not even for a
time. For the Apostle has not allowed us more
than a single day for the venting of anger.

" Let not," says he, " the sun go down upon
your wrath" (Eph. iv. 26) ; and with reason;
for it is matter for contentment that even in so
short a time nothing unpleasant take place ; but
if night also overtake us, what has happened
becomes more grievous, because the fire of our
wrath is increased ten thousand times by memory.


* <rvyKpo7€i , al. iTvy<paTtl,
' Xarpevciv.


and we at our leisure enquire into it more bitterly.
Before therefore we obtain this pernicious leisure
and kindle a hotter fire, he bids us arrest before-
hand and quench the mischief. For the passion
of wrath is fierce, fiercer than any flame ; and
so we need much haste to prevent the flame,
and not allow it to blaze up high, for so this
disease becomes a cause of many evils. It has
overturned whole houses, it has dissolved old
companionships, and has worked tragedies not
to be remedied in a short moment of time.
" For," saith one, " the sway of his fury shall be
his destruction." (Ecclus. i. 22.) Let us not
then leave such a wild beast unbridled, but put
upon him a muzzle in all ways strong, the fear
of the judgment to come. Whenever a friend
grieves thee, or one of thine own family exas-
perates thee, think of the sins thou hast com-
mitted against God, and that by kindness towards
him thou makest that judgment more lenient to
thyself, (" Forgive," saith He, " and ye shall be
forgiven") (Luke vi. 37), and thy passion shall
quickly skulk away.^

And besides, consider this, whether there has
been a time when thou wert being carried away
into ferocity, and didst control thyself, and
another time when thou hast been dragged along
by the passion. Compare the two seasons, and
thou shalt gain thence great improvement. For
tell me, when didst thou praise thyself? Was it
when thou wast worsted, or when thou hadst the
mastery? Do we not in the first case vehe-
mently blame ourselves, and feel ashamed even
when none reproves us, and do not many feelings
of repentance come over us, both for what we
have said and done ; but when we gain the mas-
tery, then are we not proud, and exult as con-
querors? For victory in the case of anger is, not
the requiting evil with the like, (that is utter de-
feat,) but the bearing meekly to be ill treated
and ill spoken of. To get the better is not to
inflict but to suffer evil. Therefore when angry
do not say, " certainly I will retaliate," " cer-
tainly I will be revenged " ; do not persist in
saying to those who exhort you to gain a victory,
" I will not endure that the man mock me, and
escape clear." He will never mock thee, except
when thou avengest thyself; or if he even should
mock thee he will do so as a fool. Seek not
when thou conquerest honor from fools, but con-
sider that sufficient which comes from men of
understanding. Nay, why do I set before thee
a small and mean body of spectators, when 1
make it up of men ? Look up straight to God :
He will praise thee, and the man who is ap-
proved by Him must not seek honor from mor-
tals. Mortal honor often arises from flattery or
hatred of others, and brings no profit ; but the


* 5pa;reTcv<7'<i.


20


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


decision of God is free from this inequality, and
brings great advantage to the man whom He ap-
proves. This praise then let us follow after.

Will you learn what an evil is anger? Stand
by while others are quarreling in the forum. In
yourself you cannot easily see the disgrace of
the thing, because your reason is darkened and
drunken ; but when you are clear from the pas-
sion, and while your judgment is sound, view
your own case in others. Observe, I pray you,
the crowds collecting round, and the angry men
like maniacs acting shamefully in the midst.
For when the passion boils up within the breast,
and becomes excited and savage, the mouth
breathes fire, the eyes emit fire, all the face be-
comes swollen, the hands are extended disorderly,
the feet dance ridiculously, and they spring at
those who restrain them, and differ nothing from
madmen in their insensibility to all these things ;
nay, differ not from wild asses, kicking and biting.
Truly a passionate man is not a graceful one.

And then, when after this exceedingly ridicu-
lous conduct, they return home and come to
themselves, they have the greater pain, and much
fear, thinking who were present when they were
angry. For like raving men, they did not then
know the standers by, but when they have re-
turned to their right mind, then they consider,
were they friends ? were they foes and enemies
that looked on ? And they fear alike about both ;
the first because they will condemn them and
give them more shame ; the others because they
will rejoice at it. And if they have even ex-
changed blows, then their fear is the more
pressing ; for instance, lest anything very griev-
ous happen to the sufferer ; a fever follow and
bring on death, or a troublesome swelling rise
and place him in danger of the worst. And,
" what need " (say they) "had I of fighting, and
violence, and quarreling ? Perish such things."
And then they curse the ill-fated business which
caused them to begin, and the more foolish lay
on " wicked spirits," and " an evil hour," the
blame of what has been done ; but these things
are not from an evil hour, (for there is no such
thing as an evil hour,) nor from a wicked spirit,
but from the wickedness of those captured by
the passion ; they draw the spirits to them, and
bring upon themselves all things terrible. " But
the heart swells," says one, " and is stung by in-
sults." I know it ; and that is the reason why I
admire those who master this dreadful wild beast ;
yet it is possible if we will, to beat off the passion.


For why when our nilers insult us do we not feel
it ? It is because fear counterbalances the pas-
sion, and frightens us from it, and does not allow
it to spring up at all. And why too do our ser-
vants, though insulted by us in ten thousand
ways, bear all in silence? Because they too have
the same restraint laid upon them. And think
thou not merely of the fear of God, but that it is
even God Himself who then insults thee, who
bids thee be silent, and then thou wilt bear all
things meekly, and say to the aggressor. How
can I be angry with thee? there is another that
restrains both my hand and my tongue ; and the
saying will be a suggestion of sound wisdom,
both to thyself and to him. Even now we bear
unbearable things on account of men, and often
say to those who have insulted us, " Such an one
insulted me, not you." Shall we not use the
same caution in the case of God ? How else
can we hope for pardon? Let us say to our
soul, " It is God who holds our hands, who
now insults us ; let us not be restive, let not
God be less honored by us than men." Did ye
shudder at the word ? I wish you would shudder
not at the word only, but at the deed. For
God hath commanded us when buffeted not
only to endure it, but even to offer ourselves to
suffer something worse ; and we withstand Him
with such vehemence, that we not only refuse to
offer ourselves to suffer evil, but even avenge
ourselves, nay often are the first to act on the
offensive,' and think we are disgraced if we do
not the same in return. Yes, and the mischief
is, that when utterly worsted we think ourselves
conquerors, and when lying undermost and re-
ceiving ten thousand blows from the devil, then we
imagine that we are mastering him. Let us then,
I exhort you, understand what is the nature ^ of
this victory, and this kind of nature' let us fol-
low after. To suffer evil is to get the crown. If
then we wish to be proclaimed victors by God,
let us not in these contests observe the laws of
heathen games, but those of God, and learn to
bear all things with longsuffering ; for so we
may get the better of our antagonists, and obtain
both present and promised goods, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom and with whom to the
Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, and
honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


* ipxftv x^tpCiv aSiKOiv,


Tponov TO ei


;{.(.


Homily V.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


21


HOMILY V.


John i. 3.


"All things were made by Him; and without Him was
not anything made that was made."

[ I .] Moses in the beginning of the history and
writings of the Old Testament speaks to us of
the objects of sense, and enumerates them to us
at length. For, " In the beginning," he says,
"God made the heaven and the earth," and
then he adds, that light was created, and a
second heaven and the stars, the various kinds
of living creatures, and, that we may not delay
by going through particulars, everything else.
But this Evangelist, cutting all short, includes
both these things and the things which are
above these in a single sentence ; with reason,
because they were known to his hearers, and
because he is hastening to a greater subject, and
has instituted all his treatise, that he might
speak not of the works but of the Creator, and
Him who produced them all. And therefore
Moses, though he has selected the smaller por-
tion of the creation, (for he has spoken nothing
to us concerning the invisible powers,) dwells
on these things;' while John, as hastening to
ascend to the Creator Himself, runs by both
these things, and those on which Moses was
silent, having comprised them in one little say-
ing, " All things were made by Him." And
that you may not think that he merely speaks
of all the things mentioned by Moses, he
adds, that " without Him was not anything made
that was made." That is to say, that of created
things, not one, whether it be visible^ or in-
telligible^ was brought into being without the
power of the Son.

For we will not put the full stop after " not
anything," as the heretics do. They, because
they wish to make the Spirit created, say,
" What was made, in Him was Life " ; yet so
what is said becomes unintelligible. First, it
was not the time here to make mention of the
Spirit, and if he desired to do so, why did he
state it so indistinctly? For how is it clear that
this saying relates to the Spirit? Besides, we
shall find by this argument, not that the Spirit,
but that the Son Himself, is created by Himself.
But rouse yourselves, that what is said may not
escape you ; and come, let us read for a while
after their fashion, for so its absurdity will be
clearer to us. " What was made, in Him was
Life." They say that the Spirit is called " Life."


* i.e. the visible creation.
' ofialhvt


* VOTJTOi'.


But this " Life " is found to be also " Light," for
he adds, " And the Life was the Light of men."
(Ver. 4.) Therefore, according to them the
" Light of men " here means the Spirit. Well,
but when he goes on to say, that " There was a
man sent from God, to bear witness of that
Light " (vers. 6, 7), they needs must assert, that
this too is spoken of the Spirit ; for whom he
above called " Word," Him as he proceeds he
calls " God," and " Life," and " Light." This
" Word " he says was " Life," and this " Life "
was " Light." If now this Word was Life, and if
this Word and this Life became flesh, then the
Life, that is to say, the Word, " was made flesh,
and we beheld" Its "glory, the glory as of the
Only- Begotten of the Father." If then they say
that the Spirit is here called " Life," consider
what strange consequences will follow. It will
be the Spirit, not the Son, that was made flesh ;
the Spirit will be the Only-Begotten Son.

And those who read the passage so will fall, if
not into this, yet in avoiding this into another
most strange conclusion. If they allow that the
words are spoken of the Son, and yet do not
stop or read as we do, then they will assert that
the Son is created by Himself. Since, if " the
Word was Life," and " what was made in Him
was Life" ; according to this reading He is cre-
ated in Himself and through Himself. Then
after some words between, he has added, " And
we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-
Begotten of the Father." (Ver. 14.) See, the
Holy Spirit is found, according to the reading of
those who assert these things, to be also an only-
begotten Son, for it is concerning Him that all
this declaration is uttered by him. See when
the word has swerved * from the truth, whither
it is perverted, and what strange consequences
it produces !

What then, says one, is not the Spirit " Light " ?
It is Light : but in this place there is no men-
tion of the Spirit. Since even God (the Father)
is called " Spirit," that is to say, incorporeal, yet
God (the Father) is not absolutely meant wher-
ever " Spirit " is mentioned. And why do you
wonder if we say this of the Father? We could
not even say of the Comforter, that wherever
" Spirit " (is mentioned), the Comforter is abso-
lutely meant, and yet this is His most distinctive
name ; still not always where Spirit (is men-
tioned is) the Comforter (meant). Thus Christ
is called "the power of God" (i Cor. i. 24),


* cxKvAta-tfiT, lit. " been rolled away."


22


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily V.


and " the wisdom of God " ; yet not always
where " the power " and " the wisdom of God "
are mentioned is Christ meant ; so in this pas-
sage, although the Spirit does give " Light," yet
the Evangelist is not now speaking of the Spirit.

When we have shut them out from these
strange opinions, they who take all manner of
pains to withstand the truth, say, (still clinging
to the same reading,) " Whatever came into ex-
istence' by him was life, because," says one,
" whatever came into existence was life." What
then do you say of the punishment of the men
of Sodom, and the flood, and hell fire, and ten
thousand like things? "But," says one, "we
are speaking of the material creation." ^ Well,
these too belong entirely to the material creation.
But that we may out of our abundance ' refute
their argument, we will ask them, " Is wood,
life," tell me? "Is stone, life?" these things
that are lifeless and motionless? Nay, is man
absolutely life? Who would say so? he is not
pure life,* but is capable of receiving life.

[2.] See here again, an absurdity; by the
same succession of consequences we will bring
the argument to such a point, that even hence
you may learn their folly. In this way they as-
sert things by no means befitting of the Spirit.
Being driven from their other ground, they apply
those things to men, which they before thought
to be spoken worthily of the Spirit. However,
let us examine the reading itself this way also.
The creature is now called " life," therefore, the
same is " light," and John came to witness con-
cerning it. Why then is not he also " light " ?
He says that "he was not that light" (ver. 8),
and yet he belonged to created things? How
then is he not "light"? How was he " in the
world, and the world was made by him " ?
(Ver. 10.) Was the creature in the creature,
arid was the creature made by the creature?
But how did "the world know him not "? How
did the creature not know the creature? "But
as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the sons of God." (Ver. 12.) But
enough of laughter. For the rest I leave it to
you to attack these monstrous reasonings, that
we may not seem to have chosen" to raise a
laugh for its own sake, and waste the time with-
out cause. For if these things are neither said
of the Spirit, (and it has been shown that they
are not,) nor of anything created, and yet they
still hold to the same reading, that stranger con-
clusion than any which we before mentioned,
will follow, that the Son was made by Himself.
For if the Son is the true Light, and this Light
was Life, and this Life was made in Him, this
must needs be the result according to their own


* y4yovt. ' €K ircpiouffiaf.

* Sav. aod Mt. Bodl. npojipriafiat.


reading. Let us then relinquish this reading,
and come to the recognized reading and ex-
planation.'

And what is that ? It is to make the sentence
end at " was made," and to begin the next sen-
tence with, " In Him was Life." What (the
Evangelist) says is this, " Without Him was
not anything made that was made " ; whatever
created thing was made, says he, was not made
without Him. See you how by this short addi-
tion he has rectified all the besetting ' difficulties ;
for the saying, that " without Him was not any-
thing made," and then the adding, " which was
made," includes things cognizable by the intel-
lect,* but excludes the Spirit. For after he had
said that " all things were made by Him," and
" without Him was not anything made," he
needed this addition, lest some one should say,
" If all things were made by Him, then the
Spirit also was made." " I," he replies, " as-
serted that whatever was made was made by
Him, even though it be invisible, or incorporeal,
or in the heavens. For this reason, I did not
say absolutely, ' all things,' but ' whatever was
made,' that is, ' created things,' but the Spirit is
uncreated."

Do you see the precision of his teaching ? He
has alluded to the creation of material things,
(for concerning these Moses had taught before
him,) and after bringing us to advance from
thence to higher things, I mean the immaterial
and the invisible, he excepts the Holy Spirit
from all creation. And so Paul, inspired by the
same grace, said, " For by Him were all things
created." (Col. i. 16.) Observe too here again
the same exactness. For the same Spirit moved
this soul also. That no one should except any
created things from the works of God because
of their being invisible, nor yet should confound
the Comforter with them, after running through
the objects of sense which are known to all, he
enumerates also things in the heavens, saying,
" Whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers " ; for the expression
" whether " subjoined to each, shows to us noth-
ing else but this, that " by Him all things were
made, and without Him was not anything made
that was made."

But if you think that the expression " by " ' is
a mark of inferiority, (as making Christ an in-
strument,) hear him say, "Thou, Lord, in the
beginning, hast laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of Thy hands."
(Ps. cii. 25.) He says of the Son what is said
of the Father in His character of Creator ; which
he would not have said, unless he had deemed
of Him as of a Creator, and yet not subservient


« ('fijyijcrir.

7 iiipoptiovvTa, lit. "blockading."

* i.e. the things of the invisible world, opposed to opara.

* Or, through 6ca.


Homily V.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


23


to any. And if the expression " by Him " is
here used, it is put for no other reason but to
prevent any one from supposing the Son to be
Unbegotten. For that in respect of the title
of Creator He is nothing inferior to the Father ;
hear from Himself, where He saith, " As the
Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them,
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will."
(c. V. 21.) If now in the Old Testament it is
said of the Son, " Thou, Lord, in the beginning
hast laid the foundation of the earth," His title
of Creator is plain. But if you say that the
Prophet spoke this of the Father, and that Paul
attributed to the Son what was said of the
Father, even so the conclusion is the same. For
Paul would not have decided that the same
expression suited the Son, unless he had been
very confident that between Father and Son
there was an equality of honor ; since it would
have been an act of extremest rashness to refer
what suited an incomparable Nature to a nature
inferior to, and falling short of it. But the Son
is not inferior to, nor falls short of, the Essence
of the Father ; and therefore Paul has not only
dared to use these expressions concerning Him,
but also others like them. For the expression
" from Whom," which you decide to belong
properly to the Father alone, he uses also con-
cerning the Son, when he says, " from which all
the body by joints and bands having nourish-
ment ministered, and knit together, increaseth
with the increase of God." (Col. ii. 19.)

[3.] And he is not content with this only, he
stops your mouths in another way also, by apply ing
to the Father the expression "by whom," which
you say is a mark of inferiority. For he says,
" God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto
the fellowship of His Son " (i Cor. i. 9) : and
again, "By His will" (i Cor. i. i, &c.) ; and in
another place, " For of Him, and through Him,
and to Him, are all things." (Rom. xi. 26.)
Neither is the expression "from' whom," as-
signed to the Son only, but also to the Spirit ;
for the angel said to Joseph, " Fear not to take
unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is con-
ceived in her is of the Holy Ghost." (Matt. i.
20.) As also the Prophet does not deem it im-
proper to apply to the Father the expression " in
whom,"^ which belongs to the Spirit, when he
says, " In' God we shall do valiantly." (Ps. Ix.
12.) And Paul, "Making request, if by any
means now at length I might have a prosperous
journey, in the will of God, to come unto you."
(Rom. i. 10.) And again he uses it of Christ,
saying, "In Christ Jesus." (Rom. vi. 11, 23,
&c.) In short, we may often and continually
find these expressions interchanged;'' now this
would not have taken place, had not the same


* i.e. applied alike to the diifereat Persons in the Holy Trinity.


Essence been in every instance their subject.
And that you may not imagine that the words,
"All things were made by Him," are in this case
used concerning His miracles, (for the other
Evangelists have discoursed concerning these ;)
he farther goes on to say, " He was in the world,
and the world was made by Him " ; (but not
the Spirit, for This is not of the number of
created things, but of those above all creation.)

Let us now attend to what follows. John
having spoken of the work of creation, that " All
things were made by Him, and without Him was
not anything made that was made," goes on to
speak concerning His Providence, where he
saith, " In Him was Life." That no one may
doubt how so many and so great things were
"made by Him," he adds, that "In Him was
Life." For as with the fountain which is the/
mother of the great deeps, however much you/
take away you nothing lessen the fountain ; so
with the energy of the Only-Begotten, howeverl
much you believe has been produced and made\
by it, it has become no whit the less. Or, to"
use a more familiar example, I will instance that
of light, which the Apostle himself added im-
mediately, saying, "And the Life was the Light."
As then light, however many myriads it may en-
lighten, suffers no diminution of its own bright-
ness ; so also God, before commencing His work
and after completing it, remains alike indefecti-
ble, nothing diminished, nor wearied by the
greatness of the creation. Nay, if need were
that ten thousand, or even an infinite number of
such worlds be created. He remains the same,
sufficient for them all not merely to produce, but
also to control them after their creation. For
the word " Life " here refers not merely to the
act of creation, but also to the providence (en-
gaged) about the permanence of the things cre-
ated ; it also lays down beforehand the doctrine
of the resurrection, and is the beginning* of
these marvelous good tidings." Since when
" life " has come to be with us, the power of
death is dissolved ; and when "light" has shone
upon us, there is no longer darkness, but life
ever abides within us, and death cannot over-
come it. So that what is asserted of the Father
might be asserted absolutely of Him (Christ)
also, that " In Him we live and move and have
our being." (Col. i. 16, 17.) As Paul has shown
when he says, " By Him were all things cre-
ated," and " by Him all things consist " ; for
which reason He has been called also " Root"'
and "Foundation."*

But when you hear that " In Him was Life,"
do not imagine Him a compound Being, since


* Or, " Gospels," Acts xvii. 28.

' Isa. xi. 10, as quoted Rom, xv. 12: Rev. xxii. 16.

* I Cor. iii. 11.


H


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily V.


farther on he says of the Father also, " As the
Father hath Life in Himself, so hath He given to
the Son also to have Life " (John v. 26) ; now
as you would not on account of this expression
say that the Father is compounded, so neither
can you say so of the Son. Thus in another
place he says, that "God is Light" (i John i.
S), and elsewhere (it is said), that He "dwell-
eth in light unapproachable" (i Tim. vi. 16) ;
yet these expressions are used not that we may
suppose a compounded nature,^ but that by little
and little we may be led up to the highest doc-
trines. For since one of the multitude could
not easily have understood how His life was Life
Impersonate,' he first used that humbler expres-
sion, and afterwards leads them (thus) trained
to the higher doctrine. For He who had said
that " He hath given Him (the Son) to have
life " (c. v. 26) ; the Same saith in another
place, " I am the Life " (c. xiv. 6) ; and in an-
other, "I am the Light." (c. viii. 12.) And
what, tell me, is the nature of this "light"?
This kind (of light) is the object not of the
senses, but of the intellect, enlightening the soul
herself. And since Christ should hereafter say,
that " None can come unto Me except the Father
draw him " (c. vi. 44) ; the Apostle has in this
place anticipated an objection, and declared that
it is He (the Son) who "giveth light " (ver. 9) ;
that although you hear a saying like this con-
cerning the Father, you may not say that it be-
longs to the Father only, but also to the Son.
For, " All things," He saith, " which the Father
hath are Mine." (c. xvi. 15.)

First then, the Evangelist hath instructed us
respecting the creation, after that he tells us of
the goods relating to the soul which He supplied
to us by His coming ; and these he has darkly
described in one sentence, when he says, " And
the Life was the Light of men." (Ver. 4.) He
does not say, " was the light of the Jews," but uni-
versally " of men " : nor did the Jews only, but
the Greeks also, come to this knowledge, and this
light was a common proffer made' to all. "Why
did he not add ' Angels,' but said, 'of men '?"
Because at present his discourse is of the nature
of men, and to them he came bearing glad
tidings of good things.

"And the light shineth in darkness." (Ver. 5.)
He calls death and error, " darkness." For the
light which is the object of our senses does not
shine in darkness, but apart from it; but the
preaching of Christ hath shone forth in the midst
of prevailing error, and made it to disappear.
And He by enduring death * hath so overcome
death, that He hath recovered those already held
by it. Since then neither death overcame it, nor


ft^irwrTarot.


* KOiVOI' npoVKtlTO,

* Lit. ** haivmg been in death."


error, since it is bright everywhere, and shines
by its proper strength, therefore he says,

"And the darkness comprehended it not."
For it cannot be overcome, and will not dwell
in souls which wish not to be enlightened.

[4.] But let it not trouble thee that It took
not all, for not by necessity and force, but by
will and consent " does God bring us to Himself.
Therefore do not thou shut thy doors against
this light, and thou shall enjoy great happiness.'
But this light cometh by faith, and when it is
come, it lighteth abundantly him that hath re-
ceived it ; and if thou displayest a pure hfe
(meet) for it, remains indwelling within contin-
ually. " For," He saith, " He that loveth Me,
will keep My commandments ; and I and My
Father will come unto him, and make Our abode
with him." (John xiv. 23 ; slightly varied.) As
then one cannot rightly enjoy the sunlight,
unless he opens his eyes ; so neither can one
largely share this splendor, unless he have ex-
panded the eye of the soul, and rendered it in
every way keen of sight.

But how is this effected? Then when we
have cleansed the soul from all the passions.
For sin is darkness, and a deep darkness ; as is
clear, because men do it unconsciously and
secretly. For, " every one that doeth evil hateth
the light, neither cometh to the light." (c. iii.
20.) And, " It is a shame even to speak of
those things which are done of them in secret."
(Eph. V. 12.) For, as in darkness a man knows
neither friend nor foe, but cannot perceive any
of the properties of objects ; so too is it in sin.
For he who desires to get more gain, makes no
difference between friend and enemy ; and the
envious regards with hostile eyes the man with
whom he is very intimate ; and the plotter is at
mortal quarrel with all alike. In short, as to
distinguishing the nature of objects, he who
commits sin is no better than men who are
drunk or mad. And as in the night, wood, lead,
iron, silver, gold, precious stones, seem to us all
alike on account of the absence of the light
which shows their distinctions ; so he who leads
an impure life knows neither the excellence of
temperance nor the beauty of philosophy. For
in darkness, as I said before, even precious
stones if they be displayed do not show their
luster, not by reason of their own nature, but
because of the want of discernment in the be-
holders. Nor is this the only evil which happens
to us who are in sin, but this also, that we live
in constant fear : and as men walking in a
moonless night tremble, though none be by to
frighten them ; so those who work iniquity can-
not have confidence, though there be none to
accuse them ; but they are afraid of everything.


* Tpv^^f, " spiritual enjoyment.'


Homily VI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


25


and are suspicious, being pricked by their con-
science : all to them is full of fear and distress,'
they look about them at everything, are terrified
at everything. Let us then tlee a life so pain-
ful, especially since after this painfulness shall
follow death ; a deathless death, for of the pun-
ishment in that place there will be no end ; and
in this life they (who sin) are no better than
madmen, in that they are dreaming of things
that have no existence. They think they are
rich when they are not rich, that they enjoy
when they are not enjoying, nor do they prop-
erly perceive the cheat until they are freed from
the madness and have shaken off the sleep.
Wherefore Paul exhorts all to be sober, and to
watch ; and Christ also commands the same.
For he who is sober and awake, although he be
captured by sin, quickly beats it off; while he
who sleeps and is beside himself, perceives not
how he is held prisoner of it.

Let us then not sleep. This is not the season
of night, but of day. Let us therefore " walk
honestly^ as in the day" (Rom. xiii. 13) ; and
nothing is more indecent than sin. In point of
indecency it is not so bad to go about naked as
in sin and wrong doing. That is not so great
matter of blame, since it might even be caused
by poverty ; but nothing has more shame and
less honor than the sinner. Let us think of
those who come to the justice-hall on some
account of extortion, or overreaching ; ^ how
base and ridiculous they appear to all by their
utter shamelessness, their lies, and audacity.*
But we are such pitiable and wretched beings,
that we cannot bear ourselves to put on a gar-
ment awkwardly or awry ; nay, if we see another


person in this state, we set him right ; and yet
though we and all our neighbors are walking on
our heads, we do not even perceive it. For
what, say, can be more shameful than a man
who goes in to a harlot? what more contemp-
tible than an insolent, a foul-tongued or an envi-
ous man ? Whence then is it that these things
do not seem so disgraceful as to walk naked ?
Merely from hahif. To go naked no one has
ever willingly endured ; but all men are contin-
ually venturing on the others without any fear.
Yet if one came into an assembly of angels,
among whom nothing of the sort has ever taken
place, there he would clearly see the great ridi-
cule (of such conduct). And why do I say an
assembly of angels ? Even in the very palaces
among us, should one introduce a harlot and
enjoy her, or be oppressed by excess of wine, or
commit any other like indecency, he would suf-
fer extreme punishment. But if it be intolerable
that men should dare such things in palaces,
much more when the King is everywhere
present, and observes what is done, shall we if
we dare them undergo severest chastisement.
Wherefore let us, I exhort you, show forth in
our life much gentleness, much purity, for we
have a King who beholds all our actions contin-
ually. In order then that this light may ever
richly enlighten us, let us gladly accept* these
bright beams,' for so shall we enjoy both the
good things present and those to come, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom, and with whom, to the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY VI.

John i. 6.


"There was a man sent from God, whose name was
John."

[i.] Having in the introduction spoken to us
things of urgent importance' concerning God
the Word, (the Evangelist) proceeding on his
road, and in order, afterwards comes to the her-
ald of the Word, his namesake John. And now
that thou hearest that he was " sent from God,"
do not for the future imagine that any of the
words spoken by him are mere man's words ;


1 ayiavtai.

' ev(r;^i7/xofws, "decently.**


' nanevoixevoi,
' Ta KaTtirtiyovra,


for all that he utters is not his own, but is of
Him who sent him. Wherefore he is called'
"messenger" (Mai. iii. i), for the excellence of
a messenger is, that he say nothing of his own.
But the expression " was," in this place is not
significative of his coming into existence, but
refers to his office of messenger ; for " ' there
was ' a man sent from God," is used instead of
" a man ' was sent ' from God."

How then do some say,' that the expression,
" being in the form of God " (Phil. ii. 6) is not


• iniiTiTOiiTuifjLeBa.

"^ OLKTlVa,

• al. irporfyoptvTai, " is foretold."


' Vid. supra, Horn. iv. 3.


26


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VI.


used of His invariable likeness ' to the Father,
because no article is added ? ' For observe, that
the article is nowhere added here. Are these
words then not spoken of the Father? What
then shall we say to the prophet who says, that,
" Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face,
who shall prepare Thy way" (Mai. iii. i, as
found in Mark i. 2) ? for the expressions " My"
and " Thy " declare two Persons.

Ver. 7. "The same came for a witness, to
bear witness of that Light."

What is this, perhaps one may say, the servant
bear witness to his Master ? When then you see
Him not only witnessed to by His servant, but
even coming to him, and with Jews baptized by
him, will you not be still more astonished and
perplexed ? Yet you ought not to be troubled
nor confused, but amazed at such unspeakable
goodness. Though if any still continue bewil-
dered ' and confused, He will say to such an one
what He said to John, " Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteous-
ness " (Matt. iii. 15) ; and, if any be still further
troubled, again He will say to him too * what he
said to the Jews, " But I receive not testimony
from man." (c. v. 34.) If now he needs not
this witness, why was John sent from God ? Not
as though He required his testimony — this were
extremest blasphemy. Why then? John him-
self informs us, when he says,

" That all men through him might believe."

And Christ also, after having said that " I re-
ceive not testimony from man" (c. v. 34), in
order that He may not seem to the foolish to
clash with* Himself, by declaring at one time,
" There is another that beareth witness of Me,
and I know that his^ witness is true" (c. v. 32),
(for He pointed to John ;) and at another, " I
receive not testimony from man " (c. v. 34) ;
He immediately adds the solution of the doubt,
" But these things I say " for your own sake,'
" that ye might be saved." As though He had
said, that " I am God, and the really-Begotten *
Son of God, and am of that Simple and Blessed
Essence, I need none to witness to Me ; and
even though none would do so, yet am not I by
this anything diminished in My Essence ; but
because I care for the salvation of the many,' I
have descended to such humility as to commit
the witness of Me to a man." For by reason of
the groveling nature and infirmity of the Jews,
the faith in Him would in this way be more
easily received, and more palatable.'" As then


1 ajrapoAXajta, vtd. supra, Horn. iii. 4 ad fin.

* i.e. to ©foO.

* tAiYYiwv, '* dizzy."

* Jxoi irpb« aitrby], perhaps "and with reference to him (the
Baptist), Sav. al, koX irpof trt.

* w*pininrttv.

* aiiTov. ffv ixafmwt ntpl ifiov. G. T.

* ii iifiai (not in G. T.). * Twif iroAAwi'.

* yvi^toi, " genuine." ^ cvKoAwrfpa.


He clothed Himself with flesh, that he might
not, by encountering men with the unveiled God-
head, destroy them all ; so He sent forth a man
for His herald, that those who heard might at
the hearing of a kindred voice approach more
readily. For (to prove) that He had no need
of that (herald's) testimony, it would have suf-
ficed that He should only have shown Himself
who He was in His unveiled Essence, and have
confounded them all. But this He did not for
the reason I have before mentioned. He would
have annihilated " all, since none could have en-
dured the encounter of that unapproachable
light.'^ Wherefore, as I said. He put on flesh,
and entrusted the witness (of Himself) to one of
our fellow-servants, since He arranged '^ all for
the salvation of men, looking not only to His
own honor, but also to what might be readily
received by, and be profitable to. His hearers.
Which He glanced at when He said, "These
things I say " for your sake, " that ye might be
saved." (c. v. 34.) And the Evangelist using
the same language as his Master, after saying,
" to bear witness of that Light," adds,

" That all men through Him might believe."
All but saying, Think not that the reason why
John the Baptist came to bear witness, was that
he might add aught to the trustworthiness of his
Master. No; (He came,) that by his means
beings of his own class " might believe. For it
is clear from what follows, that he used this ex-
pression in his anxiety to remove this suspicion
beforehand, since he adds,

Ver. 8. " He was not that Light."
Now if he did not introduce this as setting
himself against this suspicion, then the expres-
sion is absolutely superfluous, and tautology
rather than elucidation of his teaching. For
why, after having said that he " was sent to bear
witness of that Light," does he again say, " He
was not that Light "? (He says it,) not loosely
or without reason ; but, because, for the most
part, among ourselves, the person witnessing is
held to be greater, and generally more trust-
worthy than the person witnessed of; therefore,
that none might suspect this in the case of John,
at once from the very beginning he removes this
evil suspicion, and having torn it up by the roots,
shows who this is that bears witness, and who is
He who is witnessed of, and what an interval
there is between the witnessed of, and the bearer
of witness. And after having done this, and
shown His incomparable superiority, he after-
wards proceeds fearlessly to the narrative which
remains ; and after carefully removing whatever
strange (ideas) might secretly harbor" in the

" Lit. " unapproachable encounter of that light."
^ inpayiJ.ar4vaaT0,

u i/^opiiQVv,


Homily VII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


27


minds of the simpler sort, so instills into all'
easily and without impediment the word of doc-
trine in its proper order.

Let us pray then, that henceforth with the
revelation of these thoughts and rightness of
doctrine, we may have also a pure life and bright
conversation,'' since these things profit nothing
unless good works be present with us. For
though we have all faith and all knowledge of
the Scriptures, yet if we be naked and destitute
of the protection derived from (holy) living,
there is nothing to hinder us from being hurried
into the fire of hell, and burning for ever in the
unquenchable flame. For as they who have


done good shall rise to life everlasting, so they
who have dared the contrary shall rise to ever-
lasting punishment, which never has an end
Let us then manifest all eagerness not to mar
the gain which accrues to us from a right faith
by the vileness of our actions, but becoming well-
pleasing to Him by these also, boldly to look on
Christ. No happiness can be equal to this. And
may it come to pass, that we all having obtained'
what has been mentioned, may do all to the
glory of God ; to whom, with the Only-Begot-
ten Son and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY VII.

John i. 9.


" That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world."

[i.] The reason, O children greatly beloved,
why we entertain you portion by portion with the
thoughts taken from the Scriptures, and do not
at once pour all forth to you, is, that the retaining
what is successively set before you may be easy.
For even in building, one who before the first
stones are settled lays on others, constructs' a
rotten wall altogether, and easily thrown down :
while one who waits that the mortar may first
get hard, and so adds what remains little by
little, finishes the whole house firmly, and makes
it strong, not one to last for a short time, or
easily to fall to pieces. These builders we imi-
tate,* and in like manner build up your souls.
For we fear lest, while the first foundation is but
newly laid, the addition of the succeeding specu-
lations'' may do harm to the former, through the
insufficiency of the intellect to contain them all
at once.

What now is it that has been read to us to-
day?

" That was the true Light, which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world." For since
above in speaking of John he said, that he came
" to bear witness of that Light " ; and that he was
sent in these our days ; ^ lest any one at hearing
this should, on account of the recent coming of
the witness, conceive some like suspicion con-
cerning Him, who is witnessed of, he has carried
up tlie imagination, and transported it to that


' nl. " goes on and instills."

* TToAtTeta.


* al. '* let us imitate.*
^ 6etiiprnidTtDV,


existence which is before all beginning, which
has neither end nor commencement.

" And how is it possible," says one, " that
being a Son, He should possess this (nature) ? "
We are speaking of God, and do you ask how ?
And do you not fear nor shudder ? Yet should
any one ask you, " How should our souls and
bodies have endless life in the world to come ?' "
you will laugh at the question, on the ground
that it does not belong to the intellect of man to
search into such questions, but that he ought
only to believe, and not to be over-curious on the
subject mentioned, since he has a sufficient proof
of the saying, in the power of Him who spake
it. And if we say, that He, who created our
souls and bodies, and who incomparably excels
all created things, is without beginning, will you
require us to say " How ? " Who could assert this
to be the act of a well-ordered soul, or of sound
reason? you have heard that "That was the
true Light " : why are you vainly and rashly striv-
ing to overshoot^ by force of reasoning this Life
which is unlimited? You cannot do it. Why
seek what may not be sought? Why be curious
about what is incomprehensible? Why search
what is unsearchable? Gaze upon the very
source of the sunbeams. You cannot ; yet you
are neither vexed nor impatient at your weak-
ness ; how then have you become so daring and
headlong in greater matters? The son of thun-
der, John who sounds'" the spiritual trumpet,
when he had heard from the Spirit the was, en-
quired no farther. And are you, who share not
in his grace, but speak from your own wretched


' al. " living worthily of."
' fura TaiiTa,


• virtpaKovrltrai.
"> al. " holds."


28


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VII.


reasonings, ambitious to exceed the measure of
his knowledge ? Then for this very reason you
will never be able even to reach to the measure
of his knowledge. For this is the craft of the
devil : he leads away those who obey him from
the limits assigned by God, as though to things
much greater : but when, having enticed us by
these hopes, he has cast us out of the grace of
God, he not only gives nothing more, (how can
he, devil as he is ?) but does not even allow us
to return again to our former situation, where we
dwelt safely and surely, but leads us about in all
directions wandering and not having any standing
ground. So he caused the first created man
to be banished from the abode of Paradise.
Having puffed him up with the expectation of
greater knowledge and honor, he expelled him
from what he already possessed in security.
For he not only did not become like a god as
(the devil) promised him, but even fell beneath
the dominion of death ; having not only gained
no further advantage by eating of the tree, but
having lost no small portion of the knowledge
which he possessed, through hope of greater
knowledge. For the sense of shame, and the
desire to hide himself because of his nakedness,
then came upon him, who before the cheat was
superior to all such shame ; and this very seeing
himself to be naked, and the need for the future
of the covering of garments, and many other
infirmities,' became thenceforth natural to him.
That this be not our case, let us obey God, con-
tinue in His commandments, and not be busy
about anything beyond them, that we may not
be cast out from the good things already given
us. Thus they have fared (of whom we speak).
For seeking to find a beginning of the Life
which has no beginning, they lost what they
might have retained. They found not what
they sought, (this is impossible,) and they fell
away from the true faith concerning the Only-
Begotten.

Let us not then remove the eternal bounds
which our fathers set, but let us ever yield to the
laws of the Spirit ; and when we hear that " That
was the true Light," let us seek to discover
nothing more. For it is not possible to pass
beyond this saying. Had His generation been
like that of a man, needs must there have been
an interval between the begetter and the begot-
ten ; but since it is in a manner ineffable and
becoming God, give up the " before " and the
" after," for these are the names of points in time,
but the Son is the Creator even of all ages.^

[2.] "Then," says one, "He is not Father,
but brother." What need, pray? If we had
asserted that the Father and the Son were from
a different root, you might have then spoken


><r««i).


t altiimv.


this well. But, if we flee this impiety, and say
the Father, besides being without beginning, is
Unbegotten also, while the Son, though with'.iut
beginning, is Begotten of the Father, what kind
of need that as a consequence of this idea, that
unholy assertion should be introduced ? None at
all. For He is an Effulgence : but an effulgence
is included in the idea of the nature whose efful-
gence it is. For this reason Paul has called
Him so, that you may imagine no interval be-
tween the Father and the Son. (Heb. i. 3.) This
expression ' therefore is declaratory of the point ;
but the following part of the proof quoted, cor-
rects an erroneous opinion which might beset
simple men. For, says the Aposde, do not, be-
cause you have heard that he is an Effulgence,
suppose that He is deprived of His proper per-
son ; this is impious, and belongs to the madness
•of the Sabellians, and of Marcellus' followers.
We say not so, but that He is also in His proper
Person. And for this reason, after having called
Him " Effulgence," Paul has added that He is
"the express image of His Person " (Heb. i. 3),
in order to make evident His proper Personahty,
and that He belongs to the same Essence of
which He is also the express image. For, as I
before * said, it is not sufficient by a single ex-
pression to set before men the doctrines con-
cerning God, but it is desirable that we bring
many together, and choose from each what is
suitable. So shall we be able to attain to a worthy
telling of His glory, worthy, I mean, as regards
our power ; for if any should deem himself able
to speak words suitable to His essential worthi-
ness, and be ambitious to do so, saying, that he
knows God as God knows Himself, he it is who
is most ignorant of God.

Knowing therefore this, let us continue stead-
fastly to hold what " they have delivered unto
us, which from the beginning were eye-witnesses,
and ministers of the word." (Luke i. 2.) And
let us not be curious beyond : for two evils will
attend those who are sick of this disease, (curi-
osity,) the wearying themselves in vain by seek-
ing what it is impossible to find, and the pro-
voking God by their endeavors to overturn the
bounds set by Him. Now what anger this ex-
cites, it needs not that you who know should
learn from us. Abstaining therefore from their
madness, let us tremble at His words, that He
may continually build us up. For, " upon whom
shall I look " (Isa. Ixvi. 2, LXX.), saith He, " but
upon the lowly, and quiet, and who feareth my
words?" Let us then leave this pernicious
curiosity, and bruise our hearts, let us mourn
for our sins as Christ commanded, let us be
pricked at heart' for our transgressions, let us
reckon up exactly all the wicked deeds, which


' diravy<uriia.


* Horn, ii, 4>


' KarayvySifj^tv,


Homily VIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


29


in time past we have dared, and let us earnestly
strive to wipe them off in all kinds of ways.

Now to this end (}od hath opened to us many
ways. For, "Tell thou first," saith He, "thy
sins, that thou mayest be justified " (Isa. xliii.
26') ; and again, " I said, I have declared mine
iniquity unto Thee, and Thou hast taken ' away
the unrighteousness of my heart" (Ps. xxxii. 5,
LXX.) ; since a continual accusation and re-
membrance of sins contributes not a little to
lessen their magnitude. But there is another
more prevailing way than this ; to bear malice
against none of those who have offended against
us, to forgive their trespasses to all those who
have trespassed against us. Will you learn a
third ? Hear Daniel, saying, " Redeem thy sins
by almsdeeds, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor." (Dan. iv. 27, LXX.) And
there is another besides this ; constancy in
prayer, and persevering attendance on the inter-
cessions'' made with God. In like manner fast-
ing brings to us some, and that not small com-
fort and release from sins committed,* provided
it be attended with kindness to others, and


quenches the vehemence of the wrath of God.
(i Tim. ii. i.) For "water will quench a blaz-
ing fire, and by almsdeeds sins are purged away."
(Ecclus. iii. 30, LXX.)

Let us then travel along all these ways ; for if
we give ourselves wholly to these employments,
if on them we spend our time, not only shall
we wash off our bygone transgressions, but shall
gain very great profit for the future. For we
shall not allow the devil to assault us with leisure
either for slothful living, or for pernicious curi-
osity, since by these among other means, and in
consequence of these, he leads us to foolish ques-
tions and hurtful disputations, from seeing us at
leisure, and idle, and taking no forethought for
excellency of living. But let us block up this
approach against him, let us watch, let us be
sober, that having in this short time toiled a little,
we may obtain eternal goods in endless ages, by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ ; by whom and with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY VIII.


John i. 9.


"That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that
Cometh into the world."

[ I .] Nothing hinders us from handling to-day
also the same words, since before we were pre-
vented by the setting forth of doctrines, from con-
sidering all that was read. Where now are those
who deny that He is true God? for here He is
called " the true Light " (c. xiv. 6) , and elsewhere
, very " Truth " and very " Life." That saying we
will discuss more clearly when we come to the
place ; but at present we must for a while be
[speaking to your Charity of that other matter.

If He " lighteth every man that cometh into
I the world," how is it that so many continue un-
enlightened? for not all have known the majesty
[of Christ. How then doth He "light every
tman"? He lighteth all as far as in Him lies.
iBut if some, wilfully closing the eyes of their
fmind, would not receive the rays of that Light,
(their darkness arises not from the nature of the
{Light, but from their own wickedness, who will-
[fuUy deprive themselves of the gift. For the
jrace is shed forth upon all, turning itself back


* Slightly varied from LXX* ' itntvitiriv.

'' ^1, " fyrsivcn." * Xviw ii>v i


Av7(V Tuy iiiia.pfrniLiviiiv,


neither from Jew, nor Greek, nor Barbarian, nor
Scythian, nor free, nor bond, nor male, nor
female, nor old, nor young, but admitting all
alike, and inviting with an equal regard. And
those who are not willing to enjoy this gift,
ought in justice to impute their blindness to
themselves ; for if when the gate is opened to
all, and there is none to hinder, any being will-
fully evil* remain without, they perish through
none other, but only through their own wicked-
ness.

Ver. 10. " He was in the world."
But not as of equal duration with the world.
Away with the thought. Wherefore he adds,
" And the world was made by Him " ; thus lead-
ing thee up again to the eternal" existence of the
Only-Begotten. For he who has heard that this
universe is His work, though he be very dull,
though he be a hater, though he be an enemy of
the glory of God, will certainly, willing or unwill-
ing, be forced to confess that the maker is before
his works. Whence wonder always comes over
me at the madness of Paul of Samosata, who
dared to look in the face so manifest a truth,
and voluntarily threw himself down the preci-


^ «dcAoicaKou»'Tcs.


^ irpoawuftov.


30


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VIII.


pice.' For he erred not ignorantly but with full
knowledge, being in the same case as the Jews.
For as they, looking to men, gave up sound
faith, knowing that he was the only-begotten
Son of God, but not confessing Him, because of
their rulers, lest they should be cast out of the
synagogue ; so it is said that he, to gratify a
certain woman,^ sold his own salvation. A pow-
erful thing, powerful indeed, is the tyranny of
vainglory ; it is able to make blind the eyes
even of the wise, except they be sober ; for if
the taking of gifts can effect this, much more
will the yet more violent feeling of this passion.
Wherefore Jesus said to the Jews, " How can
ye believe, which receive honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that cometh from God
only?" (c. v. 44.)

"And the world knew Him not." By "the
world " he here means the multitude, which is
corrupt, and closely attached^ to earthly things,
the common* turbulent, silly people. For the
friends and favorites'* of God all knew Him,
even before His coming in the flesh. Concern-
ing the Patriarch Christ Himself speaks by name,
" that your father Abraham rejoiced to see My
day, and he saw it, and was glad." (c. viii. 56.)
And concerning David, confuting the Jews He
said, " How then doth David in spirit call Him
Lord, saying, the Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
Thou on My right hand." (Matt. xxii. 43 ;
Mark xii. 36 ; Luke xx. 42.) And in many
places, disputing with them. He mentions
Moses ; and the Apostle (mentions) the rest
of the prophets ; for Peter declares, that all the
prophets from Samuel knew Him, and pro-
claimed beforehand His coming afar off, when
he says, " All the prophets from Samuel and
those that follow after, as many as have spoken,
have likewise foretold of these days." (Acts iii.
24.) But Jacob and his father, as well as his
grandfather, He both appeared to and talked
with, and promised that He would give them
many and great blessings, which also He brought
to pass.

" How then," says one, " did He say Himself,
' Many prophets have desired to see those things
which ye see, and have not seen them ; and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them'? (Luke x. 24.) Did they then not
share in the knowledge of Him? " Surely they
did ; and I will endeavor to make this plain from
this very saying, by which some think that they
are deprived of it. " For many," He saith,
" have desired to see the things which ye see."
So that they knew that He would come [to men]


* Paul of Samosata, Bishop of Antioch, denied the Personality of
our IjOrd before His Birth of the Virgin Mary. His opinions were
condemned, and himself deposed, at the second Council of Antioch,
A.D. 270.

' Zenobia, Queen of Palmyra who supported Paul against the
Catholics after his deposition.

• irpcffTtTrjKOtf " melted to.*' * x*'***'*'' ' ^avfiaffrol.


from heaven, and would live and teach ' as He
lived and taught ; for had they not known, they
could have not desired, since no one can con-
ceive desire for things of which he has no idea ;
therefore they knew the Son of Man, and that
He would come among men. What then are
the things which they did not hear? What
those which they did not know? The things
which ye now see and hear. For if they did
hear His voice and did see Him, it was not in
the Flesh, not among men ; nor when He was
living so familiarly, and conversing so frankly
with them.' And indeed He to show this said
not simply, "to see" "Me" : but what? "the
things which ye see " ; nor " to hear " " Me " :
but what ? " the things which ye hear." * So
that if they did not behold His coming in the
Flesh, still they knew that it would be, and they
desired it, and believed on Him without having
seen Him in the Flesh.

When therefore the Greeks bring charges such
as these against us, and say ; " What then did
Christ in former time, that He did not look
upon the race of men ? And for what possible
reason did He come at last to assist in our
salvation, after neglecting us so long ? " we
will reply, that before this He was in the world,
and took thought for His works, and was known
to all who were worthy. But if ye should say,
that, because all did not then know Him, be-
cause He was only known by those noble and
excellent persons, therefore He was not ac-
knowledged ; at this rate you will not allow
that He is worshiped even now, since even now
all men do not know Him. But as at present
no one, because of those who do not know
Him, would refuse credit to those who do, so
as regards former times, we must not doubt
that He was known to many, or rather to all
of those noble and admirable persons.

[2.] And if any one say, "Why did not all
men give heed to Him? nor all worship Him,
but the just only?" I also will ask, why even
now do not all men know him? But why do
I speak of Christ, when not all men knew His
Father then, or know Him now ? For some say,
that all things are borne along by chance, while
others commit the providence of the universe
to devils. Others invent another God besides
Him, and some blasphemously assert, that His
is an opposing power,' and think that His laws
are the laws of a wicked dsemon. What then?
Shall we say that He is not God because their


• oUovoiJ.TiiToi'Tay lit. " would dispense as He did dispense."
' ^<t' aSeiaf.

* al. " for they had both heard His voice, and seen Him, but not
in the flesh "

" i.e. that the power which maintains the universe is a power
opposed to the True God. The Gnostics accounted for the exist*
ence of evil, by supposing an evil Principle, to which they attributed
the creation and support of the material world. The opinions here
spoken of were maintained by Basilides, Valctv^iaus, Marcipn^
Manea, and other supporters of that heresy.


Homily VIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


31


are some who say so? And shall we confess
Him to be evil ? for there are some who even so
blaspheme Him. Away with such mental wan-
dering, such utter insanity. If we should de-
lineate ' doctrines according to the judgment of
madmen, there is nothing to hinder us from
being mad ourselves with most grievous mad-
ness. No one will assert, looking to those who
have weak vision, that the sun is injurious to the
eyes, but he will say that it is fitted to give light,
drawing his judgments from persons in health.
And no one will call honey bitter, because it
seems so to the sense of the sick. And will
any, from the imaginations of men diseased (in
mind) decide that God either is not, or is evil ;
or that He sometimes indeed exerts His Provi-
dence, sometimes doth not so at all? Who
can say that such men are of sound mind, or
deny that they are beside themselves, delirious,
utterly mad ?

"The world," he says, "knew Him not";
but they of whom the world was not worthy
knew Him. And having spoken of those who
knew Him not, he in a short time puts the
cause of their ignorance ; for he does not abso-
lutely say, that no one knew Him, but that " the
world knew him not " ; that is, those persons
who are as it were nailed to the world alone,
and who mind the things of the world. For so
Christ was wont to call them ; as when He says,
" O Holy ^ Father, the world hath not known
Thee." (c.xvii. 25.) The world then was igno-
rant, not only of Him, but also of His Father,
as we have said ; for nothing so darkens ^ the
mind as to be closely attached * to present things.

Knowing therefore this, remove yourselves
from the world, and tear yourselves as much
as possible from carnal things, for the loss which
comes to you from these lies not in common
matters, but in what is the chief of goods. For
it is not possible for the man who clings strongly
to the things of the present life really" to lay
hold on those in heaven, but he who is earnest
about the one must needs lose the other. " Ye
cannot," He says, " serve God and Mammon "
(Matt. vi. 24), for you must hold to the one and
hate the other. And this too the very experi-
ence of the things proclaims aloud. Those, for
instance, who deride the lust of money, are
especially the persons who love God as they
ought, just as those who respect that sovereignty
(of Mammon) , are the men who above all others
have the slackest' love for Him. For the soul
when made captive once for all ' by covetous-
ness, will not easily or readily refuse doing or
saying any of the things which anger God, as
being the slave of another master, and one who


■ mAoi from ^oAb<, '* the ink of theciittic fish." * npoaTtrrjKivai.,

■ yKrjfftwT ;, perhaps " as befits a rightful heir."


gives all his commands in direct opposition to
God. Return then at length to your sober
senses, and rouse yourselves, and calling to
mind whose servants we are, let us love His
kingdom only ; let us weep, let us wail for the
times past in which we were servants of Mam-
mon ; let us cast off once for all his yoke so
intolerable, so heavy, and continue to bear the
light and easy yoke of Christ. For He lays no ,
such commands upon us as Mammon does.
Mammon bids us be enemies to all men, but \
Christ, on the contrary, to embrace and to love 1
all. The one having nailed us ' to the clay and
the brickmaking, (for gold is this,) allows us not
even at night to take breath a little ; the other
releases us from this excessive and insensate
care, and bids us gather treasures in heaven, not
by injustice towards others, but by our own
righteousness. The one after our many toils
and sufferings is not able to assist us when we
are punished in that place,' and suffer because
of his laws, nay, he increases the flame ; the
other, though He command us to give but a cup
of cold water, never allows us to lose our reward
and recompense even for this, but repays us
with great abundance. How then is it not ex-
tremest folly to slight a rule so mild, so full of
all good things, and to serve a thankless, un-
grateful tyrant, and one who neither in this world
nor in the world to come is able to help those
who obey and give heed to him. Nor is this
the only dreadful thing, nor is this only the pen-
alty, that he does not defend them when they
are being punished ; but that besides this, he, as
I before said, surrounds those who obey him
with ten thousand evils. For of those who are
punished in that place, one may see that the
greater part are punished for this cause, that
they were slaves to money, that they loved gold,
and would not assist those who needed. That
we be not in this case, let us scatter, let us give
to the poor, let us deliver our souls from hurtful
cares in this world, and from the vengeance,
which because of these things is appointed for
us in that place. Let us store up righteousness
in the heavens. Instead of riches upon earth,
let us collect treasures impregnable, treasures
which can accompany us on our journey to
heaven, which can assist us in our peril, and
make the Judge propitious at that hour. Whom
may we all have gracious unto us, both now and
at that day, and enjoy with much confidence '"
the good things prepared in the heavens for
those who love Him as they ought, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and world with-
out end. Amen.


duller."


^ KASdna^.


' irpofrrf^tacaf. - c

10 Or << with much openness," i.e. before angels and men.


* eject.


32


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IX.


HOMILY IX.

John i. ii.


" He came unto His own, and His own received Him
not."

[i.] If ye remember our former reflections,
we shall the more zealously proceed with the
building up ' of what remains, as doing so for great
gain. For so will our discourse be more intel-
ligible to you who remember what has been
already said, and we shall not need much labor,
because you are able through your great love of
learning to see more clearly into what remains.
The man who is always losing what is given to
him will always need a teacher, and will never
know anything ; but he who retains what he has
received, and so receives in addition what re-
mains, will quickly be a teacher instead of a
learner, and useful not only to himself, but to all
others also ; as, conjecturing from their great
readiness to hear, I anticipate that this assembly
will specially be. Come then, let us lay up in
your souls, as in a safe treasury, the Lord's
money, and unfold, as far as the grace of the
Spirit may afford us power, the words this day
set before us.

He (St. John) had said, speaking of the old
times, that " the world knew him not " (ver. lo) ;
afterwards he comes down in his narrative to the
times of the proclamation (of the Gospel), and
says, " He came to His own, and His own re-
ceived Him not," now calling the Jews " His
own," as His peculiar people, or perhaps even
all mankind, as created by Him. And as above,
when perplexed at the folly of the many, and
ashamed of our common nature, he said that
" the world by Him was made," and having
been made, did not recognize its Maker ; so
here again, being troubled beyond bearing^ at
the stupidity of the Jews and the many, he sets
forth the charge in a yet more striking manner,
saying, that " His own received Him not," and
that too when " He came to them." And not
only he, but the prophets also, wondering, said
the very sarr.e, as did afterwards Paul, amazed at
the very same things. Thus did the prophets
cry aloud in the person of Christ, saying, " A
people whom I have not known, have served
Me ; as soon as they heard Me, they obeyed
Me ; the strange children have dealt falsely with
Me.' The strange children have waxed aged,
and have halted from their paths." (Ps. xviii.
43-45, LXX.) And again, " They to whom it


' al. " the dispensing."


' " lied unto me." LXX.


had not been told concerning Him, shall see,
and they which had not heard, shall understand."
And, " I was found of them that sought Me not "
(Isa. Hi. 15) ; "I was made manifest unto them
that asked not after me." (Isa. xlv. i, as quoted
Rom. X. 20.) And Paul, in his Epistles to the
Romans, has said, " What then ? Israel hath not
obtained that which he seeketh for: but the
election hath obtained it." (Rom. xi. 7.) And
again ; " What shall we say then ? That the
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness,
have attained unto righteousness : but Israel
which followed after the law of righteousness,
hath not attained to the law of righteousness."
(Rom. ix. 30.)

For it is a thing indeed worthy of our amaze-
ment, how they who were nurtured in (knowledge
oO the prophetical books, who heard Moses every
day telling them ten thousand things concerning
the coming of the Christ, and the other Prophets
afterwards, who moreover themselves beheld
Christ Himself daily working miracles among
them, giving up His time ■* to them alone, neither
as yet allowing His disciples to depart into the
way of the Gentiles, or to enter into a city of
Samaritans, nor doing so Himself, but every-
where ' declaring that He was sent to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel (Matt. x. 5) : how,
(I say), while they saw the signs, and heard the
Prophets, and had Christ Himself continually
putting them in remembrance, they yet made
themselves once for all so blind and dull, as by
none of these things to be brought to faith in
Christ. (Matt. xv. 24.) While they of the Gen-
tiles, who had enjoyed none of these things, who
had never heard the oracles of God, not, as one
may say, so much as in a dream, but ever rang-
ing among the fables of madmen, (for heathen
philosophy is this,) having ever in their hands"
the sillinesses of their poets, nailed to stocks and
stones, and neither in doctrines nor in conversa-
tion ' possessing anything good or sound. (For
their way of life was more impure and more
accursed than their doctrine. As was likely ; for
when they saw their gods delighting in all wick-
edness, worshiped by shameful words, and
more shameful deeds, reckoning this festivit)
and praise, and moreover honored by foul mur
ders, and child-slaughters, how should not the;!
emulate these things ?) Still, fallen as they wen
as low as the very depth of wickedness, on


* al. " conversing with.'
B aw Mai Kafw.


' avtKiTTOvTtf,
7 iroAirc(a<.


' unrolling."


Homily IX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


33


sudden, as by the agency of some machine, they
have appeared to us shining from on high, and
from the very summit of heaven.

How then and whence came it to pass ? Hear
Paul telling you. For that blessed person search-
ing exactly into these things, ceased not until
he had found the cause, and had declared it to
all others. What then is it? and whence came
such blindness upon the Jews? Hear him who
was entrusted with this stewardship declare.
What then does he say in resolving this doubt
of the many? (i Cor. ix. 17.) "For they,"
says he, " being ignorant of God's righteousness,
and going about to establish their own righteous-
ness, have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God." (Rom. x. 3.) Where-
fore they have suffered this. And again, explain-
ing the same matter in other terms, he says,
"What shall we say then? That the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have at-
tained unto righteousness, even the righteousness
which is of faith ; but Israel, which followed after
the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the
law of righteousness. Wherefore ? Because they
sought it not by faith. For they stumbled at
that stumbling stone." (Rom. ix. 30, 32.) His
meaning is this : " These men's unbelief has
been the cause of their misfortunes, and their
haughtiness was parent of their unbelief" For
when having before enjoyed greater privileges
than the heathen,' through having received the
law, through knowing God, and the rest which
Paul enumerates, they after the coming of Christ
saw the heathen and themselves called on equal
terms through faith, and after faith received one
of the circumcision in nothing preferred to the
Gentile, they came to envy and were stung by
their haughtiness, and could not endure the un-
speakable and exceeding lovingkindness of the
Lord. So this has happened to them from noth-
ing else but pride, and wickedness, and unkind-
ness.

[2.] For in what, O most foolish of men, are
ye injured by the care^ bestowed on others?
How are your blessings made less through hav-
ing others to share the same? But of a truth
wickedness is blind, and cannot readily perceive
anything that it ought. Being therefore stung
by the prospect of having others to share the
same confidence," they thrust a sword against
themselves, and cast themselves out from the
lovingkindness of God. And with good reason.
For He saith, " Friend, I do thee no wrong, I
will give to ' these also ' even as unto thee."
^Matt. XX. 14.) Or rather, these Jews are not
deserving even of these words. For the man in
the parable if he was discontented, could yet
speak of the labors and weariness, the heat and
sweat, of a whole day. But what could these


* 'EAX^»'(u^,


' KrjSttioviai,


* irap^T)o-taf.


men have to tell? nothing like this, but slothful-
ness and profligacy and ten thousand evil things
of which all the prophets continued ever to
accuse them, and by which they like the Gen-
tiles had offended against God. And Paul
declaring this says, " For there is no difference
between the Jew and the Greek : For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God :
being justified freely by His grace." (Rom. x.
12; Rom. iii, 22-24.) And on this head he
treats profitably and very wisely throughout that
Epistle. But in a former part of it he proves
that they are worthy of still greater punishment.
" For as many as have sinned in the law shall be
judged by the law" (Rom. ii. 12); that is to
say, more severely, as having for their accuser
the law as well as nature. And not for this only,
but for that they have been the cause that God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles : " My* Name,"
He saith, " is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you." (Rom. ii. 24; Isa. Iii. 5.)

Since now this it was that stung them most,
(for the thing appeared incredible even to those
of the circumcision who beheved, and therefore
they brought it as a charge against Peter, when
he was come up to them from Cesarea, that he
" went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat
with them " (Acts xi. 3) ; and after that they
had learned the dispensation of God, even so
still " they wondered how " on the Gentiles also
was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost "
(Acts x. 45) : showing by their astonishment
that they could never have expected so incred-
ible a thing,) since then he knew that this
touched them nearest, see how he has emptied *
their pride and relaxed' their highly swelling
insolence. For after having discoursed on the
case of the heathen,' and shown that they had
not from any quarter any excuse, or hope of sal-
vation, and after having definitely charged them
both with the perversion* of their doctrines and
the uncleanness of their lives, he shifts his argu-
ment to the Jews ; and"* after recounting all the
expressions of the Prophet, in which he had said
that they were polluted, treacherous, hypocritical
persons, and had "altogether become unprofit-
able," that there was " none " among them
" that seeketh after God," that they had " all
gone out of the way" (Rom. iii. 12), and the
like, he adds, " Now we know that what things
soever the law saith, it saith to them who are
under the law : that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God." (Rom. iii. 19.) "For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God."
(Rom. iii. 23.)


* Tou @eov G. T.
^ al. " again."

* al. " he docs all things that he may empty."

^ al. " may relax." " rCtv 'EAAiji/tKwi',

» 5ia7Tpo<^)}. "* al. " then."


34


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IX.


Why then exaltest thou thyself, O Jew? why
art thou high minded? for thy mouth also is
stopped, thy boldness also is taken away, thou
I also with all the world art become guilty, and,
i like others, art placed in need of being justified
" freely. Thou oughtest surely even if thou hadst
stood upright and hadst had great boldness with
God, not even so to have envied those who
should be pitied and saved through His loving-
kindness. This is the extreme of wickedness, to
pine at the blessings of others ; especially when
this was to be effected without any loss of thine.
If indeed the salvation of others had been preju-
dicial to thy advantages, thy grieving might have
been reasonable ; though not even then would
it have been so to one who had learned true
wisdom.' But if thy reward is not increased by
the punishment of another, nor diminished by
his welfare, why dost thou bewail thyself because
that other is freely saved? As I said, thou
oughtest not, even wert thou (one) of the ap-
proved, to be pained at the salvation which
Cometh to the Gentiles through grace. But
when thou, who art guilty before thy Lord of
the same things as they, and hast thyself of-
fended, art displeased at the good of others, and
thinkest great things, as if thou alone oughtest to
be partaker of the grace, thou art guilty not only
of envy and insolence, but of extreme folly, and
mayest be liable to all the severest torments ;
for thou hast planted within thyself the root of
all evils, pride.

Wherefore a wise man has said, " Pride is the
beginning of sin" (Ecclus. x. 13) : that is, its
root, its source, its mother. By this the first
created was banished from that happy abode :
by this the devil who deceived him had fallen
from that height of dignity ; from which that
accursed one, knowing that the nature of the
sin was sufficient to cast down even from heaven
itself, came this way when he labored to bring
down Adam from such high honor. For having
puffed him up with the promise that he should
be as a God, so he broke him down, and cast


^ ^lAoao^cty.


him down into the very gulfs of hell.' Because
nothing so alienates men from the lovingkind-
ness of God, and gives them over to the fire of
the pit," as the tyranny of pride. For when
this is present with us, our whole life becomes
impure, even though we fulfill temperance, chas-
tity, fasting, prayer, almsgiving, anything. For,
" Everyone," saith the wise man, "that is proud
in heart is an abomination* to the Lord." (Prov.
xvi. 5.) Let us then restrain this swelling of
the soul, let us cut up by the roots this lump of
pride, if at least we would wish to be clean, and
to escape the punishment appointed for the
devil. For that the proud must fall under the
same punishment as that (wicked) one, hear
Paul declare ; " Not a novice, lest being lifted
up with pride, he fall into the judgment, and
the snare of the devil."* What is "the judg-
ment"?" He means, into the same "condem-
nation," the same punishment. How then does
he say, that a nian may avoid this dreadful
thing? By reflecting upon' his own nature,
upon the number of his sins, upon the greatness
of the torments in that place, upon the transitory
nature of the things which seem bright in this
world, differing in nothing from grass, and more
fading than the flowers of spring. If we con-
tinually stir within ourselves these considerations,
and keep in mind those who have walked most
upright, the devil, though he strive ten thousand
ways, will not be able to lift ' us up, nor even to
trip ' us at all. May the God who is the God
of the humble, the good and merciful God, grant
both to you and me a broken and humbled
heart, so shall we be enabled easily to order the
rest aright, to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom and with whom, to the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be glory forever and ever.
Amen.


* ^' Unclean,'* LXX. ^

■ I Tim. iii. 6, 7 (partially quoted).

* itpifio, " condemnation, ' E. V.
al. " calculating "


inapai.

vTTovKtkicai. (a gymnastic term like the preceding)*


Homily X.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


35


HOMILY X.

John i. ii.


" He came unto His own, and His own received Him
not."

[i.] Beloved, God being loving towards man
and beneficent, does and contrives all things in
order that we may shine in virtue, and as desiring
that we be well approved by Him. And to this
end He draws no one by force or compulsion : but
by persuasion and benefits He draws all that
will, and wins them to Himself. Wherefore
when He came, some received Him, and others
received Him not. For He will have no un-
willing, no forced domestic, but all of their own
will and choice, and grateful to Him for their
service. Men, as needing the ministry of ser-
vants, keep many in that state even against their
will, by the law of ownership ; ' but God, being
without wants, and not standing in need of any-
thing of ours, but doing all only for our salvation,
makes us absolute ^ in this matter, and therefore
lays neither force nor compulsion on any of
those who are unwilling. For He looks only to
i; our advantage : and to be drawn unwilling to a
'{ service like this is the same as not serving at all.
" Why then," says one, " does He punish
those who will not listen' to Him, and why hath
He threatened hell to those who endure'' not
His commands ? " Because, being Good ex-
ceedingly. He cares even for those who obey
Him not, and withdraws not from them who
start back and flee from Him. But when we ^
had rejected the first way of His beneficence,
and had refused to come by the path of persua-
sion and kind treatment, then He brought in
upon us the other way, that of correction and
punishments ; most bitter indeed, but still neces-
sary, when the former is disregarded.' Now
lawgivers also appoint many and grievous penal-
I ties against offenders, and yet we feel no aver-
j sion to them for this ; we even honor them the
' more on account of the punishments they have
enacted, and because though not needing a single
thing that we have, and often not knowing who
they should be that should enjoy the help afforded
by their written laws,' they still took care for the
good ordering of our lives, rewarding those who
live virtuously, and checking by punishments
the intemperate, and those * who would mar the


* jeairoret'af, i.e. " the law of master and slave.'*

* Kvpiovf. ' al. " -■submit."

* al. " hear." 6 al. " they."

* al. *' For, when the former way is disregarded, the introduction
of the second is necessary." Ben.

' " Writings," al. " trouble." ■ al. " as those."


repose ' of others. And if we admire and love
these men, ought we not much more to marvel
at and love God on account of His so great
care? For the difference between their and
His forethought regarding us is infinite. Un-
speakable of a truth are the riches of the good-
ness of God, and passing all excess.'" Consider ;
" He came to His own," not for His personal
need, (for, as I said, the Divinity is without
wants,) but to do good unto His own people.
Yet not even so did His own receive Him, when
He came to His own for their advantage, but
repelled Him, and not this only, but they even
cast Him out of the vineyard, and slew Him.
Yet not for this even did He shut them out from
repentance, but granted them, if they had been
willing, after such wickedness as this, to wash
off all their transgressions by faith in Him, and
to be made equal to those who had done no
such thing, but are His especial friends. And
that I say not this at random, or for persuasion's
sake, all the history of the blessed Paul loudly
declares. For when he, who after the Cross
persecuted Christ, and had stoned His martyr
Stephen by those many hands, repented, and
condemned his former sins, and ran to Him
whom he had persecuted. He immediately en-
rolled him among His friends, and the chiefest
of them, having appointed him a herald and
teacher of all the world, who had been " a blas-
phemer, and persecutor, and injurious." (i Tim.
i. 13.) Even as he rejoicing at the lovingkind-
ness of God, has proclaimed aloud, and has not
been ashamed, but having recorded in his writ-
ings, as on a pillar, the deeds formerly dared by
him, has exhibited them to all ; thinking it bet-
ter that his former life should be placarded " in
sight of all, so that the greatness of the free gift
of God might appear, than that he should obscure
His ineffable and indescribable lovingkindness
by hesitating to parade '" before all men his own
error. Wherefore continually " he treats of his
persecution, his plottings, his wars against the
Church, at one time saying, " I am not meet to
be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God " ( i Cor. xv. 9) ; at another,
" Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief." (i Tim. i. 15.) And again,
" Ye have heard of my conversation in time


• al. " settled state."
*' (mjAtT«u€ffSai. lit.
branded."

" cKirofiircvffat.


^° al. " beyond all thought."
* set on a pillar." al. crTi^effOat, " b€


avut Kai KaTit}.


36


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X.


past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond
measure I persecuted the church of God, and
wasted it." (Gal. i. 13.)

[2.] For making as it were a kind of return
to Christ for His longsuffering towards him, by
showing who it was, what a hater and enemy
that He saved, he declared with much openness
the warfare which at the first with all zeal he
warred against Christ ; and with this he holds
forth good hopes to those who despaired of their
condition. For he says, that Christ accepted
him, in order that in him first He " might show
forth all longsuffering" (Tim. i. 16), and the
abundant riches of His goodness, " for a pattern
to them that should hereafter believe in Him
to life everlasting." Because the things which
they had dared were too great for any pardon ;
which the Evangelist declaring, said,

" He came to His own, and His own received
Him not." Whence came He, who fiUeth all
things, and who is everywhere present? What
place did He empty of His presence, who hold-
eth and graspeth all things in His hand? He
exchanged not one place for another; how
should He? But by His coming down to us,
He effected this. For since, though being in
the world. He did not seem to be there, because
He was not yet known, but afterwards manifested
Himself by deigning to take upon Him our flesh,
he (St. John) calls this manifestation and descent,
"a coming."^ One might wonder at'' the dis-
ciple who is not ashamed of the dishonor of his
Teacher, but even records the insolence which
was used towards Him : yet this is no small proof
of his truth-loving disposition. And besides, he
who feels shame should feel it for those who have
offered an insult, not for the person outraged.''
Indeed He by this very thing shone the brighter,
as taking, even after the insult, so much care for
those who had offered it ; while they appeared
ungrateful and accursed in the eyes of all men,
for having rejected Him who came to bring
them so great goods, as hateful to them, and an
enemy. And not only in this were they hurt,
but also in not obtaining what they obtained who
received Him. What did these obtain ?

Ver. 12. " As many as received Him, to them
gave He power to become the sons of God," says
the Evangelist. "Why then, O blessed one,
dost thou not also tell us the punishment of them
who received Him not? Thou hast said that
they were ' His own,' and that when ' He came
to His own, they received Him not ' ; but what
they shall suffer for this, what punishment they
shall undergo, thou hast not gone on to add.
Yet so thou wouldest the more have terrified
them, and have softened the hardness of their


* wafiovtriat commonly so used in N. T.

* al. " there is reason to wonder that."

* vapoLyrjdtyTott " insulted by men heated with wine."


insanity by threatening. Wherefore then hast
thou been silent?" "And what other punish-
ment," he would say, " can be greater than this,
that when power is offered them to become sons
of God, they do not become so, but willingly
deprive themselves of such nobility and honor
as this?" Although their punishment shall not
even stop at this point, that they gain no good,
but moreover the unquenchable fire shall receive
them, as in going on he has more plainly revealed.
But for the present he speaks of the unutter-
able goods of those who received Him, and sets
these words in brief before us,* saying, " As many
as received Him, to them gave He power to
become sons of God." Whether bond or free,
whether Greeks or barbarians or Scythians, un-
learned or learned, female or male, children or
old men, in honor or dishonor, rich or poor,
rulers or private persons, all, He saith, are
deemed worthy the same privilege ; for faith
and the grace of the Spirit, removing the inequal-
ity caused by worldly things, hath moulded all
to one fashion, and stamped them with one
impress, the King's. What can equal this lov-
ingkindness ? A king, who is framed of the same
clay with us, does not deign to enrol among the
royal host his fellow-servants, who share the
same nature with himself, and in character often
are better than he, if they chance to be slaves ;
but the Only-Begotten Son of God did not dis-
dain to reckon among the company of His chil-
dren both publicans, sorcerers, and slaves, nay,
men of less repute and greater poverty than
these, maimed in body, and suffering from ten
thousand ills. Such is the power of faith in
Him, such the excess of His grace. And as the
element of fire, when it meets with ore from the
mine, straightway of earth makes it gold, even
so and much more Baptism makes those who
are washed to be of gold instead of clay, the
Spirit at that time falling like fire into our souls,
burning up the "image of the earthy" (i Cor.
XV. 49), and producing "the image of the
heavenly," fresh coined, bright and glittering, >
as from the furnace-mould.

Why then did he say not that " He made them
sons of God," but that " He gave them power to
become sons of God "? To show that we need
much zeal to keep the image of sonship im-
pressed on us at Baptism, all through without
spot or soiP ; and at the same time to show
that no one shall be able to take this power from
us, unless we are the first to deprive ourselves
of it. For if among men, those who have re-
ceived the absolute control of any matters have
well-nigh as much power as those who gave them
the charge ; much more shall we, who have ob-
tained such honor from God, be, if we do noth-


* al. " sets them in brief before us in these words.'

B avilTOiftov,


Homily X.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


37


ing unworthy of this power, stronger than all ;
because He who put this honor in our hands
is greater and better than all. At the same time
too he wishes to show, that not even does grace
come upon man irrespectively,' but upon those
who desire and take pains for it. For it lies in
the power of these to become (His) children ;
since if they do not themselves first make the
choice, the gift does not come upon them, nor
have any effect.

[3.] Having therefore everywhere excluded
compulsion, and pointing to (man's) voluntary
choice and free power, he has said the same
now. For even in these mystical blessings,'' it
is, on the one hand, God's part, to give the
grace, on the other, man's, to supply faith ; and
in after time there needs for what remains much
earnestness. In order to preserve our purity, it
is not sufficient for us merely to have been bap-
tized and to have believed, but we must, if we
will continually enjoy this brightness, display a
life worthy of it. This then is God's work in
us. To have been bom the mystical Birth, and
to have been cleansed from all our former sins,
comes from Baptism ; but to remain for the
future pure, never again after this to admit any
stain, belongs to our own power and diligence.
And this is the reason why he reminds us of the
manner of the birth, and by comparison with
fleshly pangs shows its excellence, when he says,

Ver. 13. "Who were born, not of blood,' nor
of the will of the flesh, but of God." This he
has done, in order that, considering the vileness
and lowness of the first birth, which is " of blood,"
and " the will of the flesh," and perceiving the
highness and nobleness of the second, which is
by grace, we may form from thence some great
opinion of it, and one worthy of the gift of Him
who hath begotten us, and for the future exhibit
much earnestness.

For there is no small fear, lest, having some-
time defiled that beautiful robe by our after sloth
and transgressions, we be cast out from the inner
room^ and bridal chamber, like the five foolish
virgins, or him who had not on a wedding gar-
ment. (Matt. XXV. ; xxii.) He too was one of
the guests, for he had been invited ; but be-
cause, after the invitation and so great an honor,
he behaved with insolence towards Him who
had invited him, hear what punishment he suf-
fers, how pitiable, fit subject for many tears.
For when he comes to partake of that splendid


* airXuti, 3 Lit. " bloods.**

' i.e. of Baptism. * n-oaraSof .


table, not only is he forbidden the feast, but
bound hand and foot alike, is carried into outer
darkness, to undergo eternal and endless wailing
and gnashing of teeth. Therefore, beloved, let
not us either expect' that faith is sufficient to us
for salvation ; for if we do not show forth a pure
life, but come clothed with garments unworthy
of this blessed calling, nothing hinders us from
suffering the same as that wretched one. It is
strange that He,, who is God and King, is not
ashamed of men who are vile, beggars, and of no
repute, but brings even them of the cross ways
to that table ; while we manifest so much insen-
sibility, as not even to be made better by so
great an honor, but even after the call remain in
our old wickedness, insolently abusing" the un-
speakable lovingkindness of Him who hath
called us. For it was not for this that He called
us to the spiritual and awful communion of His
mysteries, that we should enter with our former
wickedness ; but that, putting off' our filthiness,
we should change our raiment to such as becomes
those who are entertained in palaces. But if we
will not act worthily of that calling, this no
longer rests with Him who hath honored us,
but with ourselves ; it is not He that casts us
out from that admirable company of guests, but
we cast out ourselves.

He has done all His part. He has made the^
marriage. He has provided the table, He has
sent men to call us, has received us when we
came, and honored us with all other honor ; but
we, when we have offered insult to Him, to the/
company, and to the wedding, by our filthy gar-
ments, that is, our impure actions, are then with
good cause cast out. It is to honor the marriage
and the guests, that He drives off those bold '
and shameless persons ; for were He to suffer
those clothed in such a garment, He would seem
to be offering insult to the rest. But may it
never be that one, either of us or of others, find
this of Him who has called us ! For to this
end have all these things been written before
they come to pass, that we, being sobered by
the threats of the Scriptures, may not suffer this
disgrace and punishment to go on to the deed,
but stop it at the word only, and each with bright
apparel come to that call ; which may it come
to pass that we all enjoy, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


' al, " think."


* ira/iouf.


58


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


HOMILY XL

John i. 14.


"And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us."

[ I .] I DESIRE to ask one favor of you all, before
I touch on the words of the Gospel ; do not
you refuse my request, for I ask nothing heavy
or burdensome, nor, if granted, will it be useful
only to me who receive, but also to you who
grant it, and perhaps far more so to you. What
then is it that I require of you ? That each of
you take in hand that section of the Gospels
which is to be read among you on the first day
of the week, or even on the Sabbath, and before
the day arrive, that he sit down at home and
read it through, and often carefully consider its
contents, and examine all its parts well, what ' is
clear, what obscure,^ what seems to make for
the adversaries,^ but does not really so ; and
when you have tried,'' in a word,' every point, so
go to hear it read. For from zeal like this will
be no small gain both to you and to us. We
shall not need much labor to render clear the
meaning of what is said, because your minds
will be already made familiar with the sense of
the words, and you will become keener and
more clear-sighted not for hearing only, nor for
learning, but also for the teaching of others.
Since, in the way that now most of those who
come hither hear, compelled to take in the
meaning of all at once, both the words, and the
remarks we make upon them, they will not,
though we should go on doing this for a whole
year, reap any great gain. How can they, when
they have leisure for what is said as a bywork,^
and only in this place, and for this short time ?
If any lay the fault on business, and cares, and
constant occupation in public and private mat-
ters, in the first place, this is no slight charge in
itself, that they are surrounded with such a mul-
titude of business, are so continually nailed to
the things of this life, that they cannot find even
a little leisure for what is more needful than all.
Besides, that this is a mere pretext and excuse,
their meetings with friends would prove against
them, their loitering in the theaters, and the
parties ' they make to see horse races, at which
they often spend whole days, yet never in that
case does one of them complain of the pressure
of busmess. For trifles then you can without
making any excuses, always find abundant leis-
ure ; but when you ought to attend to the things

' al. '* let him mark what is clear, &c."

* al. " very plain." ^ * al. "to be contradictory."

* 6iaKu6vifiirayTtif " having tried by ringing."

' airAws. * in vaptpyov, ^ avviipio.


of God, do these seem to you so utterly super-
fluous and mean, that you think you need not
assign even a little leisure to them ? How do
men of such disposition deserve to breathe or
to look upon this sun?

There is another most foolish excuse of these
sluggards ; that they have not the books in their
possession. Now as to the rich, it is ludicrous
that we should take our aim at ' this excuse ;
but because I imagine that many of the poorer
sort continually use it, I would gladly ask, if
every one of them does not have all the instru-
ments of the trade which he works at, full and
complete, though infinite ° poverty stand in his
way? Is it not then a strange thing, in that
case to throw no blame on poverty, but to use
every means that there be no obstacle from any
quarter, but, when we might gain such great ad-
vantage, to lament our want of leisure and our
poverty ?

Besides, even if any should be so poor, it is in
their power, by means of the continual reading
of the holy Scriptures which takes place here, to
be ignorant of nothing contained in them. Or
if this seems to you impossible, it seems so with
reason ; for many do not come with fervent zeal
to hearken to what is said, but having done this
one thing '" for form's sake " on our account,'- im-
mediately return home. Or if any should stay,
they are no better disposed than those who have
retired, since they are only present here with us
in body. But that we may not overload you
with accusations, and spend all the time in find-
ing fault, let us proceed to the words of the
Gospel, for it is time to direct the remainder of
our discourse to what is set before us. Rouse
yourselves therefore, that nothing of what is said
escape you.

" And the Word was made Flesh," he saith,
" and dwelt among us."

Having declared that they who received Him
were " born of God," and had become " sons of
God," he adds the cause and reason of this un-
speakable honor. It is that " the Word became
Flesh," that the Master took on Him the form
of a servant. For He became Son of man, who
was God's own " Son, in order that He might
make the sons of men to be children of God.
For the high when it associates with the low
touches not at all its own honor, while it raises


" anoTtiveffBai.

<o i.e. having come to the assembly.


11 a^o<Tibi<Ta.^tvot..
i» al. " for the day."


HOMILV XI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


39


up the other from its excessive lowness ; and
even thus it was with the Lord. He in nothing
diminished His own Nature by this condescen-
sion,' but raised us, who had always sat in dis-
grace and darkness, to glory unspeakable. Thus
it may be, a king, conversing with interest and
kindness with a poor mean man, does not at all
shame himself, yet makes the other observed
by all and illustrious. Now if in the case of the
adventitious dignity of men, intercourse with the
humbler person in nothing injures the more
honorable, much less can it do so in the case
of that simple and blessed Essence, which has
nothing adventitious, or subject to growth or de-
cay, but has^ all good things immovable, and
fixed for ever. So that when you hear that " the
Word became Flesh," be not disturbed nor cast
down. For that Essence did not change' to
flesh, (it is impiety* to imagine this,) but con-
tinuing what it is, It so took upon It the form of
a servant.

[2.] Wherefore then does he use the expres-
sion, " was made " ? To stop the mouths of the
heretics. For since there are some " who say that
all the circumstances of the Dispensation were
an appearance, a piece of acting, an allegory,
at once to remove beforehand their blasphemy,
he has put " was made " ; desiring to show there-
by not a change of substance, (away with the
thought,) but the assumption of very flesh. For
as when (Paul) says, " Christ hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us," he does not mean that His essence re-
moving from Its proper glory took upon It the
being" of an accursed thing, (this not even
devils could imagine, nor even the very foolish,
nor those deprived of their natural understand-
ing, such impiety as well as madness does it con-
tain,) as (St. Paul) does not say this, but that He,
taking upon Himself the curse pronounced
against us, leaves us no more under the curse ;
so also here he (St. John) says that He " was
made Flesh," not by changing His Essence to
flesh, but by taking flesh to Himself, His Es-
sence remained untouched.

If they say that being God, He is Omnipotent,
so that He could lower Himself to the sub-
stance of flesh, we will reply to them, that He
is Omnipotent as long as He continues to be
God. But if He admit of change, change for
the worse, how could He be God? for change is
far from that simple Nature. Wherefore the
Prophet saith, " They all shall wax old as doth a
garment, and as a vesture shalt Thou roll them


* al. ** descent." * al. " possesses."
' fieT€nf(Tfy, " fall from what It was into."

* al. *' truly impious."

^ The Docetse, who maintained that our Lord appeared OTAy to
act and suffer in the Flesh, and that His Body was a phantom.
Perhaps they are the heretics specially alluded to by St. John,
1 £p. IV. 2, and 3 £p. 7.


up, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the
same, and Thy years shall not fail." (Ps. oil.
27, LXX.) For that Essence is superior to all
change. There is nothing better than He, to
which He might advance and reach. Better do
I say? No, nor equal to, nor the least ap-
proaching Him. It remains, therefore, that if
He change, He must admit a change for the
worse ; and this would not be God. But let the
blasphemy return upon the heads of those who
utter it. Nay, to show that he uses the expres-
sion, " was made," only that you should not sup-
pose a mere appearance, hear from what follows
how he clears the argument, and overthrows that
wicked suggestion. For what does he add?
" And dwelt among us." All but saying, " Im-
agine nothing improper from the word ' was
made ' ; I spoke not of any change of that un-
changeable Nature, but of Its dwelling* and in-
habiting. But that which dwells' cannot be the
same with that in which it dwells, but different ;
one thing dwells in a different thing, otherwise
it would not be dwelling ; for nothing can inhabit
itself. I mean, different as to essence ; for by
an Union '" and Conjoining " God the Word and
the Flesh are One, not by any confusion or ob-
literation of substances, but by a certain union
ineffable, and past'^ understanding. Ask not
how'' ; for It was made, so as He knoweth."

What then was the tabernacle in which He
dwelt? Hear the Prophet say ; " I will raise up
the tabernacle of David that is fallen." (Amos
ix. II.) It was fallen indeed, our nature had
fallen an incurable fall, and needed only that
mighty Hand. There was no possibility of rais-
ing it again, had not He who fashioned it at first
stretched forth to it His Hand, and stamped it
anew with His Image, by the regeneration of water
and the Spirit. And observe, I pray you, the
awful and ineffable nature " of the mystery. He
inhabits this tabernacle for ever, for He clothed
Himself with our flesh, not as again to leave it,
but always to have it with Him. Had not this
been the case, He would not have deemed it
worthy of the royal throne, nor would He while
wearing it have been worshiped by all the host
of heaven, angels, archangels, thrones, princi-
palities, dominions, powers. What word, what
thought can represent such great honor done to
our race, so truly marvelous and awful? What
angel, what archangel ? Not one in any place,
whether in heaven, or upon earth. For such are
the mighty works " of God, so great and marvel-
ous are His benefits, that a right description of
them exceeds not only the tongue of men, but
even the power of angels.


* Lit. " tabernacling." ^^ a(^paaTov.

» Lit. " which tabernacles.*' " al. " seek not accurately."
10 ;...•.—. 14 ai_ ♦« ineffable mystery. '


11 QVVOJ^ti<i.


^ KaTopBtittiaTa.


46


Works of st. chrysOstom.


tMoMILY Xll.


Wherefore we will ' for a while close our dis-
course, and be silent ; only delivering to you
this charge,' that you repay this our so great
Benefactor by a return which again shall bring
round to us all profit. The return is, that we
look with all carefulness to the state of our souls.
For this too is the work of His lovingkindness,
that He who stands in no need of anything of
ours, says that He is repaid when we take care
of our own souls. It is therefore an act of ex-
tremest folly, and one deserving ten thousand
chastisements, if we, when such honor has been


lavished upon us, will not even contribute what
we can, and that too when profit comes round
to us again by these means, and ten thousand
blessings are laid before us on these conditions.
For all these things let us return " glory to our
merciful God, not bywords only, but much more
by works, that we may obtain the good things
hereafter, which may it be that we all attain to,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XII.

John i. 14.


"And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-
Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth."

[ I .] Perhaps we seemed to you the other day '
needlessly hard upon you and burdensome, using
too sharp language, and extending too far our
reproaches against the sluggishness of the many.
Now if we had done this merely from a desire
to vex you, each of you would with cause have
been angry ; but if, looking to your advantage,
we neglected in our speech what might gratify
you, if ye will not give us credit for our fore-
thought, you should at least pardon us on
account of such tender love.^ For in truth we
greatly fear, lest, if we are taking pains," and
you are not willing to manifest the same dili-
gence in listening, your future reckoning may
be the more severe. Wherefore we are com-
pelled continually to arouse and waken you, that
nothing of what is said may escape ° you. For
so you will be enabled to live for the present
with much confidence, and to exhibit it at that
Day before the judgment-seat of Christ. Since
then we have lately sufficiently touched you, let
us to-day at the outset enter on the expressions
themselves.

" We beheld," he says, " His glory, the glory
as of the Only- Begotten of the Father."

Having declared that we were made "sons
of God," and having shown in what manner,'
namely, by the " Word " having been " made
Flesh," he again mentions another advantage
which we gain from this same circumstance.
What is it ? " We beheld His glory, the glory
as of the Only- Begotten of the Father " ; which


■ al. " let us."

* naprfyvaffavTii,


* ^tAo<rrof>vi'af.

* al. '* speaKing.'


irpwifv. " naftapovjjvat.

at. " that it was not otherwise than by.'


we could not have beheld, had it not been shown
to us, by means of a body like to our own.' For
if the men of old time could not even bear to
look upon the glorified countenance of Moses,
who partook of the same nature with us, if that
just man needed a veil which might shade over
the purity '" of his glory, and show to them the
face of their prophet mild and gentle ; " how
could we creatures of clay and earth have
endured the unveiled Godhead, which is unap-
proachable even by the powers above ? Where-
fore He tabernacled '^ among us, that we might
be able with much fearlessness to approach
Him, speak to, and converse with Him.

But what means " the glory as of the Only-
Begotten of the Father"? Since many of the
Prophets too were glorified, as this Moses him-
self, Elijah, and Elisha, the one encircled by the
fiery chariot (2 Kings vi. 17), the other taken
up by it ; and after them, Daniel and the Three
Children, and the many others who showed
forth wonders " ; and angels who have appeared
among men, and partly disclosed '^ to beholders
the flashing light of their proper nature ; and
since not angels only, but even the Cherubim
were seen by the Prophet in great glory, and
the Seraphim also : the Evangelist leading us
away from all these, and removing our thoughts
from created things, and from the brightness of
our fellow-servants, sets us at the very summit
of good. For, " not of prophet," says '" he, " nor
angel, nor archangel, nor of the higher powers,
nor of any other created nature," if other there


^ avairefjL^puiltv,

* avvrpotpov. '* aicpaTov

^^ Morel. " make the intolerable (brightness) of his countenance
bearable to them."

— ^^ itrKTivtaiTtv, '* itapavoitavre^,

£« i?%were glorified.] " al. " all but saying."


ttoMILY XII.]


Homilies oN st. johN.


4*


be, but of the Master Himself, the King Him-
self, the trae Only-Begotten Son Himself, of the
Very Lord' of all, did we " behold the glory."

For the expression " as," does not in this
place belong to similarity or comparison, but to
confirmation and unquestionable definition ; as

I though he said, " We beheld glory, such as it
was becoming, and likely that He should pos-

i sess, who is the Only- Begotten and true Son of
God, the King of all." The habit (of so speaking)
is general, for I shall not refuse to strengthen my
argument even from common custom, since it is
not now my object to speak with any reference
to beauty of words, or elegance of composition,
but only for your advantage ; and therefore
there is nothing to prevent my establishing my
argument by the instance of a common practice.
What then is the habit of most persons ? Often
when any have seen a king richly decked, and
glittering on all sides with precious stones, and
are afterwards describing to others the beauty,
the ornaments, the splendor, they enumerate as
much as they can, the glowing tint of the purple
robe, the size of the jewels, the whiteness of the
mules, the gold about the yoke, the soft and
shining couch. But when after enumerating
these things, and other things besides these, they
cannot, say what they will, give a full idea of ^
the splendor, they immediately bring in : " But
why say much about it ; once for all, he was like
a king ; " not desiring by the expression " like,"
to show that he, of whom they say this, resembles
a king, but that he is a real king. Just so now
the Evangelist has put the word as, desiring to
represent the transcendent nature and incom-
parable excellence of His glory.

For indeed all others, both angels and arch-
angels and prophets, did everything as under
command ; but He with the authority which
becomes a King and Master ; at which even the
multitudes wondered, that He taught as " one
having authority." (Matt. vii. 29.) Even angels,
as I said, have appeared with great glory upon
the earth ; as in the case of Daniel, of David,
of Moses, but they did all as servants who have
a Master. But He as Lord and Ruler of all,
and this when He appeared in poor and humble
form ; but even so creation recognized her Lord.
Now the star from heaven which called the wise
men to worship Him, the vast throng pouring
everywhere of angels attending the Lord,^ and
hymning His praise, and besides them, many
other heralds sprang up on a sudden, and all, as
they met,* declared to one another the glad
tidings of this ineffable mystery ; the angels to
the shepherds ; the shepherds to those of the


^ al. " and Master."

* irapdffTTjtrat.

* Morel. " and heavenly multitudes appearing on earth of Angels
ministering."

* al. " coming together."


city ; Gabriel to Mary and Elisabeth ; Anna
and Simeon to those who came to the Temple.
Nor were men and women only lifted up ' with
pleasure, but the very infant who had not yet
come forth to light, I mean the citizen of the
wilderness, the namesake of this Evangelist,
leaped while yet in his mother's womb, and all
were soaring " with hopes for the future. This
too immediately after the Birth. But when He
had manifested Himself still farther, other won-
ders, yet greater than the first, were seen. For
it was no more star, or sky, no more angels, or
archangels, not Gabriel, or Michael, but the
Father Himself from heaven above, who pro-
claimed Him, and with the Father the Com-
forter, flying down at the uttering of the Voice
and resting on Him. Truly therefore did he
say, " We beheld His glory, the glory as of the
Only-Begotten of the Father."

[2.] Yet he says it not only on account of
these things, but also on account of what fol-
lowed them ; for no longer do shepherds only,
and widow women, and aged men, declare to us
the good tidings, but the very voice' of the
things themselves, sounding clearer than any
trumpet, and so loudly, that the sound was
straightway heard even in this land. " For,"
says one, "his fame went into' all Syria"
(Matt. iv. 24) ; and He revealed Himself to
all, and all things everywhere exclaimed, that
the King of Heaven was come. Evil spirits
everywhere fled and started away from Him,
Satan covered his face ^ and retired, death '" at
that time retreated before Him, and afterwards
disappeared altogether ; every kind of infirmity
was loosed, the graves let free the dead, the
devils those whom they had maddened," and
diseases the sick. And one might see things
strange and wonderful, such as with good cause
the prophets desired to see, and saw not. One
might see eyes fashioned (John ix. 6, 7),
(might see) Him showing to all in short space
and on the more noble portion of the body, that
admirable thing which all would have desired to
see, how God formed Adam from the earth ;
palsied and distorted limbs fastened and adapted
to each other, dead hands moving, palsied feet
leaping amain, ears that were stopped re-opened,
and the tongue sounding aloud which before was
tied by speechlessness. For having taken in"^
hand the common nature of men, as some ex- /
cellent workman might take a house decayed by
time. He filled up what was broken off", banded
together its crevices and shaken portions, and )
raised up again what was entirely fallen down.

And what should one say of the fashioning of


* «rtTtim9riaav, " made winged."

•^ ^CTCCUPOl.

' al, *' nature."

• " Throughout," E. V.


'« al " and death itself."


42


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XII.


the soul, so much more admirable than that of
the body ? The health of our bodies is a great
thing, but that of our souls is as much greater as
the soul is better than the body. And not on
this account only, but because our bodily nature
follows whithersoever the Creator will lead it,
and there is nothing to resist, but the soul being
its own mistress, and possessing power over its
acts, does not in all things obey God, unless it
will to do so. For God will not make it beauti-
ful and excellent, if it be reluctant and in a man-
ner constrained by force, for this is not virtue at
all ; but He must persuade it to become so of its
own will and choice. And so this cure is more
difficult than the other ; yet even this succeeded,
and every kind of wickedness was banished.
And as He re-ordered the bodies which He
cured, not to health only, but to the highest
vigor, so did He not merely deliver the souls
from extremest wickedness, but brought them to
the very summit of excellence. A publican be-
came an Apostle, and a persecutor, blasphemer,
and injurious, appeared as herald to the world,
and the Magi became teachers of the Jews, and
a thief was declared a citizen of Paradise, and a
harlot shone forth by the greatness of her faith,
and of the two women, of Canaan and Samaria,
the latter who was another harlot, undertook to
preach the Gospel to her countrymen, and hav-
ing enclosed a whole city in her net,' so brought
them ' to Christ ; while the former by faith and
perseverance, procured the expulsion of an evil
spirit from her daughter's soul ; and many others
much worse than these were straightway num-
bered in the rank of disciples, and at once all
the infirmities ' of their bodies and diseases of
their souls were transformed, and they were fash-
ioned anew to health and exactest virtue. And
of these, not two or three men, not five, or ten,
or twenty, or an hundred only, but entire cities
and nations, were very easily remodeled. Why
should one speak of the wisdom of the com-
mands, the excellency of the heavenly laws, the
good ordering of the angelic polity? For such
a life hath He proposed to us, such laws ap-
pointed for us, such a polity established, that
those who put these things into practice, imme-
diately become angels and like to God, as far as
is in our power, even though they* may have
been worse than all men.

[3.] The Evangelist therefore having brought
together all these things, the marvels in our
bodies, in our souls, in the elements' (of our
faith), the commandments, those gifts ineffable
and higher than the heavens, the laws, the polity,
the persuasion, the future promises. His suffer-
ings, uttered that voice so wonderful and full of


* vaYijvtvaava from irayt}trrj, *' a seine net.'

* al. " brought them out."

* wi*^. • al. " we."


' ffT«ix<*ot<*


exalted docrine, saying, " We beheld His glory,
the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth." For we admire Him
not only on account of the miracles, but also by
reason of the sufferings ; as that He was nailed
upon the Cross, that He was scourged, that He
was buffeted, that He was spit upon, that He
received blows on the cheek from those to whom
He had done good. For even of those very
things which seem to be shameful, it is proper to
repeat the same expression, since He Himself
called that action ° " glory." For what then took
place was (proof) not only of kindness and love,
but also of unspeakable power. At that time
death was abolished, the curse was loosed, devils
were shamed and led in triumph and made a
show of, and the handwriting of our sins was
nailed to the Cross. And then, since these
wonders were doing invisibly, others took place
visibly, showing that He was of a truth the Only-
Begotten Son of God, the Lord of all creation.
For while yet that blessed Body hung upon the
tree, the sun turned away his rays, the whole
earth was troubled and became dark, the graves
were opened, the ground quaked, and an innum-
erable multitude of dead leaped forth, and went
into the city. And while the stones of His tomb
were fastened upon the vault, and the seals yet
upon them, the Dead arose, the Crucified, the
nail-pierced One, and' having filled His eleven
disciples with His mighty ' power. He sent them
to men throughout all the world, to be the com-
mon healers of all their kind," to correct their
way of living, to spread through every part of
the earth the knowledge of their heavenly doc-
trines, to break down the tyranny of devils, to
teach those great and ineffable blessings, to
bring to us the glad tidings of the soul's immor-
tality, and the eternal life of the body, and
rewards which are beyond conception, and shall
never have an end. These things then, and yet
more than these, the blessed Evangelist having
in mind, things which though he knew, he was
not able to write, because the world could not
have contained them (for if all things " should
be written every one, I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that
should be written" — c. xxi. 25), reflecting
therefore on all these, he cries out, " We beheld
His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of
the Father, full of grace and tnith."

It behooves therefore those who have been
deemed worthy to see and to hear such things,
and who have enjoyed so great a gift, to display
also a life worthy of the doctrines, that they may
enjoy also the good things which are (laid up)
there. For our Lord Jesus Christ came, not

• i.e. His Crucifixion. • Or "of their whole n.iture."
' al. " then again."

* al. " a certain irresistible and divine."


Homily XIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


43


only that we might behold His glory here, but
also that which shall be. For therefore He saith,
" I will that these ' also be with Me where I am,
that they may behold My glory." (c. xvii. 24.)
Now if the glory here was so bright and splendid,
what can one say of that (which shall be) ? for
it shall appear not on this corruptible earth, nor
while we are in perishable bodies, but in a crea-
tion which is imperishable, and waxes not old,
and with such brightness as it is not possible
even to represent in words. O ^ blessed, thrice
blessed, yea many times so, they who are
deemed worthy to be beholders of that glory !
It is concerning this that the prophet says, " Let
the unrighteous be taken away, that he behold
not the glory of the Lord." (Isa. xxvi. 10, LXX.)
God grant that not one of us be taken away nor
excluded ever from beholding it. For if we
shall not hereafter enjoy it, then it is time to say
of ourselves, " Good were it for" us, "if" we "had
never been born." For why do we live and
breathe ? What are we, if we fail of that specta-
cle, if no one grant us then to behold our Lord ?
If those who see not the light of the sun endure
a life more bitter than any death, what is it
likely that they who are deprived of that light
must suffer? For in the one case the loss is
confined to this one privation ; but in the other
it does not rest here, (though if this were the
only thing to be dreaded, even then the degrees
of punishment would not be equal, but one
would be as much severer than the other, as that
sun is incomparably superior to this,) but now


we must look also for other vengeance ; for he
who beholds not that light must not only be led
into darkness, but must be burned continually,
and waste away, and gnash his teeth, and suffer
ten thousand other dreadful things. Let us then
not permit ourselves by making this brief time a
time of carelessness and remissness, to fall into
everlasting punishment, but let us watch and be
sober, let us do all things, and make it all our
business to attain to that felicity, and to keep
far from that river of fire, which rushes with a
loud roaring before the terrible judgment seat.
For he who has once been cast in there, must
remain for ever ; there is no one to deliver him
from his punishment, not father, not mother, not
brother. And this the prophets themselves de-
clared aloud ; one saying, " Brother delivers not
brother. Shall man deliver?" ( Ps. xlix. 7,
LXX.) And Ezekiel has declared somewhat
more than this, saying, " Though Noah, Daniel,
and Job were in it, they shall deliver neither
sons nor daughters." (Ezek. xiv. 16.) For one
defense " only, that through works," is there, and
he who is deprived of that cannot be saved by
any other means. Revolving these things, then,
and reflecting upon them continually, let us
cleanse our life and make it lustrous, that we
may see the Lord with boldness, and obtain the
promised good things ; through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Spirit, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XIII.

John i. 15.


"John beareth witness of Him, and crieth, saying, This
is He of whom I spake, saying, He that cometh after
me is preferred before me, for He was before me."

[i.] Do we then run and labor in vain? Are
Iv/e sowing upon the rocks ? Does the seed fall
[upon the rocks ? Does the seed fall without our
[knowing it by the wayside, and among thorns ?
1 1 am greatly troubled and fear, lest our hus-
[bandry be unprofitable ; not ^ as though I shall
Ibe a loser as well as you, touching the reward
[of this labor. For it is not with those who teach
[as it is with husbandmen. Oftentimes the hus-
[bandman after his year's toil, his hard work and
[sweat, if the earth produce no suitable return
[for his pains, will be * able to find comfort for


* oCtoi KaKttvoi (G. T.).
' al. " how."


* al. '* nothing.'

• al. " i«."


his labors from none else, but returns ashamed
and downcast from his barn to his dwelling, his
wife and children, unable to require of any man
a reward for his lengthened toil. But in our
case there is ' nothing like this. For even though
the soil which we cultivate bring forth no fruit,
if we have shown all industry, the Lord of it
and of us will not suffer us to depart with disap-
pointed hopes, but will give us a recompense ;
for, says St. Paul, " Every man shall receive his
own reward according to his own labor " ( i Cor.
iii. 8), not according to the event of things.
And that it is so, hearken: "And Thou," he
saith, " Son of man, testify unto this people, if


■' vpofTTafTLa,

• There arc places where he allows that the prayers of others
may avail a man in the Judgment, when the^ are the consequence
of his good deeds. See on Statues, Hom. ii. § 17.

' al. " shall be."


44


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[II0MII.V XIII.


they will hear, and if they will understand."
( Ezek. ii. 5, not from LXX.) And Ezekiel says,'
" If the watchman give warning what it behooves
to flee from, and what to choose, he hath de-
livered his own soul, although there be none that
will take heed." (Ezek. iii. 18, and xxxiii. 9;
not quoted from LXX.) Yet although we have
this strong consolation, and are confident of the
recompense that shall be made us, still when we
see that the work in you does not go forward,
our state is not better than the state of those
husbandmen who lament and mourn, who hide
their faces and are ashamed. This is the sym-
pathy of a teacher, this is the natural care of a
father. For Moses too, when it was in his
power to have been delivered from the ingrati-
tude of the Jews, and to have laid the more
glorious foundation of another and far greater ^
people, ("Let Me alone," said God, "that I
may consume them,' and make of thee a nation
mightier than this" — Ex. xxxii. 10,) because he
was a holy man, the servant of God, and a friend''
very true and generous, he did not endure even
to hearken to this word, but chose rather to
perish with those who had been once allotted to
him, than without them to be saved and be in
greater honor. Such ought he to be who has
the charge of souls. For it is a strange thing
that any one who has weak children, will not be
called the father of any others than those who
are sprung from him, but that he who has had
disciples placed in his hands should be con-
tinually changing one flock for another, that we
should be catching at the charge now of these,
then of those, then again of others," having no
real affection for any one. May we never have
cause to suspect this of you. We trust that ye
abound more in faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and in love to one another and towards all men.
And this we say as desiring that your zeal may
be increased, and the excellence of your con-
versation ' farther advanced. For it is thus that
you will be able to bring your understandings
down to the very depth of the words set before
us, if no film ' of wickedness darkfen the eyes of
your intellect, and disturb its clearsightedness
and acuteness.

What then is it which is set before ' us to-day ?
"John bare witness of Him, and cried, saying.
This was He of whom I spake, He that cometh
after me is preferred before me, for He was be-
fore me." The Evangelist is very full in making
frequent mention of John, and often bearing
about his testimony. And this he does not with-
out a reason, but very wisely ; for all the Jews


• al. " this may be learnt from Ezekiel."
' al. '* in a far greater way."

• Lit. " wipe out." * al. " very much a servant."

• al. " and others again with these."

• iroAiTctaf . ' ^^Mt **' ^viirj, " defilement."

• al. " said to."


held the man in great admiration, (even Josephus
imputes the war to his death ; ' and shows, that,
on his account, what once was the mother city,
is now no city at all,'" and continues " the words
of his encomium to great length,) and therefore
desiring by his means to make the Jews ashamed,
he continually reminds them of the testimony
of the forerunner. The other Evangelists make
mention of the older prophets, and at each suc-
cessive thing that took place respecting Him
refer the hearer to them. Thus when the Child
is born, they say, " Now all this was done, that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias
the prophet, saying. Behold, a virgin shall be
with Child, and shall bring forth a Son " (Matt,
i. 22 ; Isa. vii. 14) ; and when He is plotted
against and sought for everywhere so diligently,
that even tender infancy is slaughtered by "
Herod, they bring in Jeremy, saying, " In Ramah
was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weep-
ing, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her
children" (Matt. ii. 18; Jer. xxxi. 15); and
again, when He comes up out of Egypt, they
mention '" Hosea, saying, " Out of Egypt have I
called My Son " (Matt. ii. 15 ; Hosea xi. i) ; and
this they do everywhere. But John providing
testimony more clear and fresh, and uttering a
voice more glorious than the others, brings con-
tinually forward not those only who had departed
and were dead, but one also who was alive and
present, who pointed Him out and baptized
Him, him he continually introduces, not desiring
to gain credit for the master " through the ser-
vant, but condescending to the infirmity of his
hearers.'* For as unless He had taken the form
of a servant. He would not have been easily
received, so had He not by the voice of a
servant prepared the ears of his fellow-servants,
the many (at any rate) of the Jews would not"
have received the Word.

[2.] But besides this, there was another great
and wonderful provision. For because to speak
any great words concerning himself, makes a
man's witness to be suspected, and is often an
obstacle to many hearers, another comes to testify
of Him. And besides this, the many'^ are in a
manner wont to run more readily to a voice
which is more familiar and natural to them, as
recognizing it more than other voices ; and
therefore the Voice from heaven was uttered "
once or twice, but that of John oftentimes and


* No such passage is extant in Josephus. Probably the place
alluded to is Anti'g. b. xviii. c. 5, § 2, where the destruction of the
troops of Herod the tetrarch by Aretas is attributed to the death of
John the Baptist.

10 Ben. " the war through which the city of the Jews, which was
once the mother city, is no city." " al. *' raises."

*' Morel. Ka\ Tracra Ta auToD 0('Tii>s ot-e^^Tr), ws (cai 7r«pi T^«
aojpov TjAcKt'as r^? trAaTTOiiccTjc. *' al. " pitlduce."

" Morel, inserts " hence, away with the thought."

t" al. '* of babes."

*• al. '* would not so."

" al. "because the many."


Homily XIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


45


continually. For those ' of the people who had
surmounted the infirmity of their nature, and
had been released from all the things of sense,
could hear the Voice from heaven, and had no
great need of that of man, but in all things
obeyed ' that other, and were led by it ; but
they who yet moved below, and were wrapt in
many veils, needed that meaner (voice). In
the same way John, because he had stripped
himself in every way of the' things of sense,
needed no other instructors,* but was taught
from heaven. " He that sent me," saith he, " to
baptize with water, the Same said unto me. Upon
whom thou shaltsee the Spirit" of God "descend-
ing, the same is He." (c. i. 33.) But the Jews
who still were children, and could not as yet
reach to that height, had a man for their teacher,
a man who did not speak to them words of his
own, but brought them a message from above.

What then saith he ? He " beareth witness
concerning Him, and crieth, saying." What
means that word " crieth " ? Boldly, he means,
and freely, without any reserve,' he proclaims.
What does he proclaim? to what does he " bear
witness," and "cry"? "This is He of whom I
said. He that cometh after me is preferred before
me ; for He was before me." The testimony is
dark," and contains besides much that is lowly.
For he does not say, " This is the Son of God,
the Only-begotten, the true Son"; but what?
" He that cometh after me, is preferred before
me ; for He was before me." As the mother
birds do not teach their young all at once how
to fly, nor finish their teaching in a single day,
but at first lead them forth so as to be just out-
side the nest, then after first allowing them to
rest, set them again to flying,' and on the next day
continue a flight much farther, and so gently, by
(little and little, bring them to the proper height ;
just so the blessed John did not immediately
bring the Jews to high things, but taught them
for a while to fly up a little above the earth,
saying, that Christ was greater than he. And
yet this, even this, was for the time no small
thing, to have been able to persuade ' the hearers
that one who had not yet appeared nor worked
any wonders was greater than a man, (John, I
mean,) so marvelous, so famous, to whom all
ran, and whom they thought to be an angel.
For a while therefore he labored to establish
this in the minds of his hearers, that He to
whom testimony was borne was greater than he
who bore it ; He that came after, than he that


* al. " those therefore."

* Morel, *' as obeying it in all things: but they who yet moved
below, needed also many other (things), because of their groveling
on the ground, and being wrapt."

' al. " all the." « al. " men for inst."

* i/ffoo-ToAjj. « Lit. " shaded over."

' More!, and MS. Savile reads npoaTi9ia<ri rjj jrT^o-ei iraXiy xai
• • . wAei'oi'a irvvavTOvtrLV.

* al. '* make believe."


came before. He who had not yet appeared,
than he that was manifest and famous. And
observe how prudently he introduces his testi-
mony ; for he does not only point Him out when
He has appeared, but even before He appears,
proclaims Him.. For the expression, "This is
He of whom I spake," is the expression of one
declaring this. As also Matthew says, that when
all came to him, he said, " I indeed baptize
you with water, but He that cometh after me
is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes
I am not worthy to unloose." ' Wherefore then
even before His appearance did he this? In
order that when He appeared, the testimony
might readily be received, the minds of the
hearers being already prepossessed by what was
said concerning Him, and the mean external
appearance not vitiating it.'" For if without
having heard anything at all concerning Him
they had seen the Lord," and as they beheld
Him had at the same time received the testi-
mony of John's words, so wonderful and great,
the meanness of His appearance "^ would have
straightway been an objection to the grandeur
of the expressions. For Christ took on Him an
appearance so mean and ordinary, that even
Samaritan women, and harlots, and publicans,
had confidence boldly to approach and converse
with Him. As therefore, I said, if they had at
once heard these words and seen Himself, they
might perhaps have mocked at the testimony
of John ; but now because even before Christ
appeared, they had often heard and had been
accustomed to '^ what was said concerning Him,
they were affected in the opposite way, not
rejecting the instruction of the words by reason
of the appearance of Him who was witnessed
of, but from their belief of what had been already
told them, esteeming Him even more glorious.

The phrase, " that cometh after," means,
"that" preacheth "after me," not "that" was
born " after me." And this Matthew glances
at when he says," " after me cometh a man,"
not speaking of His birth from Mary, but of
His coming to preach (the Gospel), for had
he been speaking of the birth, he would not have
said, " cometh," but " is come " ; since He was
born when John spake this. What then means
" is before me " ? Is more glorious, more honor-
able. " Do not," he saith, " because I came
preaching first from this, suppose that I am greater /
than He ; I am much inferior, so much inferior |
that I am not worthy to be counted in the rank
of a servant." This is the sense of " is before
me," which Matthew showing in a different
manner, saith,'" " The latchet of whose shoes I


* Matt. iii. ii, and Luke iii. i6.

** Some MSS. add, " but being able to possess the souls of the
many with much fearlessness."
" al. " Christ Himself."

" (Txii^o. 1' Ben. " provoked (to curiosity) by."

" Matt. iii. 1 1 not verbally quoted. " Not found in Matt.


46


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIII.


am not worthy to unloose." (Luke iii. i6.)
Again, that the phrase, " is before me," does not
refer to His coming into Being, is plain from the
sequel ; for had he meant to say this, what fol-
lows, " for He was before me," would be superflu-
ous. For who so dull and foolish as not to
know that He who " was born before " ' him " was
before " ' him ? Or if the words refer to His sub-
sistence ' before the ages, what is said is nothing
else than that " He who cometh after me came
into being before me." Besides, such a thing as
this is unintelligible, and the cause is thrown in
needlessly ; for he ought to have said the con-
trary, if he had wished to declare this, " that He
who cometh after me was before me, since also
He was born before me." For one might with
reason assign this, (the " being born before ")
as the cause of " being before," but not the
" being before," as the cause of " being born."
While what we assert is very reasonable. Since
you all at least know this, that they are always
things uncertain, not things evident, that require
their causes to be assigned. Now if the argu-
ment related to the production of substance,''
it could not have been uncertain that he who
" was bom " first must needs " be " first ; but
because he is speaking concerning honor, he
with reason explains what seems to be a diffi-
culty. For many might well enquire, whence
and on what pretext He who came after, became
before, that is, appeared with great honor; in
reply to this question therefore, he immediately
assigns the reason ; and the, reason is. His Being
first. He does not say, that " by some kind of
advancement he cast me who has been first
behind him, and so became before me," but
that " he was before me," even though he arrives
after me.

But how, says one, if the Evangelist refers'
to His manifestation to men, and to the glory
which was to attend Him from them, does he
speak of what was not yet accomplished, as
having already taken place ? for he does not say,
" shall be," but " was." Because this is a custom
among the prophets of old, to speak of the future
as of the past. Thus Isaiah speaking of His
slaughter, does not say, " He shall be led (which
would have denoted futurity) as a sheep to the
slaughter " ; but " He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter" (Isa. liii. 7) ; yet He was not yet In-
carnate, but the Prophet speaks of what should
be as if it had come to pass. So David, point-
ing to the Crucifixion, said not, "They shall
pierce My hands and My feet," but "They
pierced My hands and My feet, and parted My
garments among them, and cast lots upon My
vesture" (Ps. xxii. 16, 18); and discoursing


* ytyofuvoi tiiirpoadtv,

• virapfcwf.


* outTiuiirtioi ,

• al. " the reference is.'


of the traitor as yet unborn, he says, " He which
did eat of My bread, hath lifted up' his heel
against Me " (Ps. xli. 9) ; and of the circum-
stances of the Crucifixion, " They gave Me gall
for meat, and in My thirst they gave Me vinegar
to drink." (Ps. Ixix. 21.)

[4.] Do you desire that we adduce more
examples, or do these suffice? For my part,
I think they do ; for if we have not dug over the
ground in all its extent,' we have at least dug
down to its bottom ; and this last kind of work
is not less laborious than the former ; and we
fear lest by straining your attention immoder-
ately we cause you to fall back.

Let us then give to our discourse a becoming
conclusion. And what conclusion is becoming ?
A suitable giving of glory to God; and that
is suitable which is given, not by words only,
but much more by actions. For He saith,
" Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven." (Matt. v. 16.)
Now nothing is more full of light than a most
excellent conversation. As one of the wise
men has said, " The paths of the just shine like
the light (Prov. iv. 18, LXX.) ; and they shine
not for them alone who kindle the flame by
their works, and are guides in the way of right-
eousness, but also for those who are their neigh-
bors. Let us then pour oil into these lamps,
that the flame become higher,' that rich light
appear. For not only has this oil great strength
now, but even when sacrifices were at their
height," it was far more acceptable than they
could be. " I will have mercy," '" He saith, " and
not sacrifice." (Matt. xii. 7 ; Hos. vi. 6.) And
with good reason ; for that is a lifeless altar, this
a living ; and all that is laid on that altar be-
comes the food of fire, and ends in dust, and it
is poured forth as ashes, and the smoke of it is
dissolved into the substance of the air ; but here
there is nothing like this, the fruits which it bears
are different. As the words of Paul declare ;
for in describing the treasures of kindness to the
poor laid up by the Corinthians, he writes, " For
the administration of this service not only sup-
plieth the want of the saints, but is abundant
also by many thanksgivings unto God." (2 Cor.
ix. 12.) And again; "Whiles they glorify God
for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of
Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto
them, and unto all men ; and by their prayer
for you, which long after you. Dost thou be-
hold it " resolving itself into thanksgiving and
praise of God, and continual prayers of those


• al. "has magnified."

• al. " more soaring."

• lit. ** flourished.'*


' al. " not much ground."


**> eXeoc. St. Chrysostom plays on the word, which was pro-
nounced nearly as i\a.Lov, " oil." Thus on 3 Tim. ii. 35, Horn, vi,
*^ the " service," \nTttvpyia,


Homily XIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


47


who have been benefited, and more fervent
charity? Let us then sacrifice, beloved, let us
sacrifice every day upon these altars. For this
sacrifice is greater than prayer and fasting, and
many things beside, if only it come from honest
gain, and honest toils, and be pure from all cov-
etousness, and rapine, and violence. For God
accepts such ' offerings as these, but the others
He turns away from and hates ; He will not be
honored out of other men's calamities, such sac-
rifice is unclean and profane, and would rather
anger God than appease Him. So that we must
use all carefulness, that we do not, in the place
of service, insult Him whom we would honor.
J For if Cain for making a second-rate offering,^
; having done no other wrong, suffered extreme
punishment, how shall not we when we offer any-
thing gained by rapine and covetousness, suffer
■yet more severely. It is for this that God has
shown to us the pattern ' of this commandment,
that we might have mercy, not be severe to our


fellow-servants ; but he who takes what belongs
to one and gives it to another, hath not shown
mercy, but inflicted hurt, and done an extreme
injustice. As then a stone cjinnat jjeld oUi- so

T^either ^3" rniplty prndlKg humanity ; for alms

when it has such a root as this is alms' no
longer. Therefore I exhort that we look not to
this only, that we give to those that need, but
also that we give not from other men's plunder.
" When one prayeth, and another curseth, whose
voice will the Lord hear?" (Ecclus. xxxiv. 24.)
If we guide ourselves thus strictly, we shall be
able by the grace of God to obtain much loving-
kindness and mercy and pardon for what we
have done amiss during all this long time, and
to escape the river of fire ; from which may it
come to pass that we be all delivered, and •
ascend to the Kingdom of Heaven, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XIV.


John i. 16.


••Atd of His fcUiiess have all we received, and grace for
grace."

['i.] I SAID the Other day, that John, to resolve
I'ne doubts of those who should question with
themselves how the Lord, though He came after
to the preaching, became before and more glorious
than he, added, "for He was before me." And
this is indeed one reason. But not content with
this, he adds again a second, which now he de-
clares. What is it ? " And of his fullness," says
he, " have all we received, and grace for grace."
With these again he mentions another. What is
this? That

Ver. 17. " The law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ."

And what means that, saith he, " Of His full-
ness have all we received " ? for to this we must
for a while direct our discourse. He possesseth
not, says he, the gift by participation,* but is
Himself the very Fountain and very Root of all
good, very Life, and very Light, and very Truth,
not retaining within Himself the riches of His
good things, but overflowing with them unto all
others, and after the overflowing remaining full,
in nothing diminished by supplying others, but
streaming ever forth, and imparting to others a


' al. *' only such."

' Ta ScvTcpcia irpotrtveyKtuv. St. Chrysostom implies, that the
offering of Cain was not of his best.


share of these blessings, He remains in sameness
of perfection. What I possess is by participa-
tion, (for I received it from another,) and is a
small portion of the whole, as it were a poor'
rain-drop compared with the untold abyss or
the boundless sea ; or rather not even can this
instance fully express what we attempt to say,
for if you take a drop from the sea, you have
lessened the sea itself,' though the diminution
be imperceptible. But of that Fountain we
cannot say this ; how much soever a man draw,
It continues undiminished. We therefore must
needs proceed to another instance, a weak one
also, and not able to establish what we seek, but
which guides us better than the former one to
the thought now proposed to us.

Let us suppose that there is a fountain of fire ;
that from that fountain ten thousand lamps are
kindled, twice as many, thrice as many, ofttimes
as many ; does not the fire remain at the same
degree of fullness even after its imparting of its
virtue to such members? It is plain to every
man that it does. Now if in the case of bodies
which are made up of parts, and are diminished
by abstraction, one has been found of such a
nature, that after supplying to others something
from itself it sustains no loss, much more will


* i^ertfj-oiTvi^t (lit. " mercifulness.") whence our alms.

« Morel. " sit down in the heavenly bride-chamber."

' il. " jttle ." • or, "just so nittsh.'


48


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV.


this take place with that incorporeal and un-
compounded Power. If in the instance given,
ithat which is communicated is substance and
'body, is divided yet does not suffer division,
when our discourse is concerning an energy, and
an energy too of an incorporeal substance, it is
much more probable that this will undergo noth-
ing of the sort. And therefore John said, " Of
His fullness have all we received," and joins his
own testimony to that of the Baptist ; for the
expression, " Of his fullness have we all received,"
belongs not to the forerunner but to the disciple ;
and its meaning is something like this : " Think
not," he says, "that we, who long time com-
panied with Him, and partook of His food ' and
table, bear witness through favor," since even
John, who did not even know Him before, who
had never even been with Him, but merely saw
Him in company with others when he was bap-
tizing, cried out, " He was before me," having
from that source ' received all ; and all we the
twelve, the three hundred, the three thousand,
the five thousand, the many myriads of Jews, all
the fullness of the faithful who then were, and
now are, and hereafter shall be, have " received
of His fullness." What have we received ? " grace
for grace," saith he. What grace, for what ? For
the old, the new. For there was a righteousness,
and again a ngnteousness, (" Touching the right-
eousness which is in the law," saith Paul, "blame-
less.") (Phil. iii. 6.) There was a faith, there
is a faith. (" From faith to faith.") (Rom. i.
17.) There was an adoption, there is an adop-
tion. ("To whom pertaineth the adoption.")
(Rom. ix. 4.) There was a glory, there is a
glory. (" For if that which was done away was
glorious, much more that which remaineth is
glorious.") (2 Cor. iii. 11.) There was a law,
and there is a law. (" For the law of the Spirit
of life hath made me free.") (Rom. viii. 2.)
There was a service, and there is a service.
("To whom pertaineth the service" — Rom. ix.
4 : and again : " Serving God in the Spirit.")
(Phil. iii. 3.) There was a covenant, and there
is a covenant. (" I will make with you ' a new
covenant, not according to the covenant which
I made with your* fathers.") (Jer. xxxi. 31.)
There was a sanctification, and there is a sancti-
fication : there was a baptism, and there is a
Baptism : there was a sacrifice, and there is a
Sacrifice : there was a temple, and there is a tem-
ple : there was a circumcision, and there is a cir-
cumcision ; and so too there was a " grace," and
there is a " grace." But the words in the first
. case are used as types, in the second as realities,
U preserving a sameness of sound, though not of
I ^ sense. So in patterns and figures, the shape of


' lit. "Silt."


* in Orig. " the house of Israel and Judah."

* ia Orij. " their."


' or, '* sight/* cKf i9«i'.


a man scratched with white lines ' upon a black
ground is called a man as well as that which has j
received the correct coloring ; and in the case 1
of statues, the figure whether formed of gold or '
of plaster, is alike called a statue, though in the/
one case as a model, in the other as a reality.

[2.] Do not then, because the same words are
used, suppose that the things are identical, nor
yet diverse either ; for in that they were models
they did not differ from the truth ; but in that
they merely preserved the outline, they were less
than the truth. What is the difference in all
these instances? Will you that we take in hand
and proceed to examine one or two of the cases
mentioned ? thus the rest will be plain to you ;
and we shall see that the first were lessons for
children, the last for high-minded full-grown
men ; that the first laws were made as for mor-
tals, the latter as for angels.

Whence then shall we begin? From the son-
ship itself? What then is the distinction between
the first and second? The first is the honor of
a name, in the second the thing goes with it.
Of the first the Prophet says, " I have said. Ye
are gods, and all of you are children of the
Most High " (Ps. Ixxxii. 6) ; but of the latter,
that they " were born of God." How, and in
what way ? By the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. For they, even
after they had received the title of sons, retained
the spirit of slavery, (for while they remained
slaves they were honored with this appellation,)
but we being made free, received the honor, not
in name, but in deed. And this Paul has de-
clared and said, " For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have re-
ceived the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father." (Rom. viii. 15.) For having
been born again," and, as one may say, thor-
oughly remade,^ we so are called " sons." And
if one consider the character of the holiness,
what the first was and what the second, he will
find there also great' difference. They, when
they did not worship idols, nor commit fornica-
tion or adultery, were called by this name ; but
we become holy, not by refraining from these
vices merely, but by acquiring things greater.
And this gift we obtain first by means of the
coming upon us of the Holy Ghost ; and next,
by a rule of life far more comprehensive ' than
that of the Jews. To prove that these words
are not mere boasting, hear what He saith to
them, " Ye shall not use divination,'" nor make
purification of your children, for ye are a holy
people."" So that holiness with them consisted


* al. " with black on white colors."

* or, " from above."

' avaaToiyttutBevrti, made up of fresh elements.

* So Morel. Ben. and MS. in Bodleian. Savile reads ov iroAA)fr.
^ fiCi'^oi'Of iroAiTeiaf .

*" or, *' purify yourselves," iftoifiairtiTBt.
" Perhaps from Deut. xviii. lo.


Homily XIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


49


in being free from the customs of idolatry ; but
it is not so with us. " That she may be holy,"
saith Paul, "in body and spirit." (i Cor. vii.
34.) " Follow peace, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord" (Heb. xii. 14) : and,
"Perfecting holiness in the fear of God." (2
Cor. vii. I.) For the word "holy" has not
force to give the same meaning in every case to
which it is applied ; since God is called " Holy,"
though not as we are. What, for instance, does
the Prophet say, when he heard that cry raised '
by the flying Seraphim ? " Woe is me ! because
I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the
midst of a people of unclean lips " (Isa. vi. 5) ;
though he was holy and clean ; but if we be
compared with the holiness which is above, we
are unclean. Angels are holy. Archangels are
holy, the Cherubim and Seraphim themselves are
holy, but of this holiness again there is a double
difference ; that is, in relation to us, and to the
higher powers.'^ We might proceed to all the
other points, but then the discussion would be-
come too long, and its extent too great. We
will therefore desist from proceeding farther,
and leave it to you to take in hand the rest, for
it is in your power at home to put these things
together, and examine their difference, and in
the same way to go over what remains. " Give,"
saith one, " a starting place to the wise, and he
becometh wiser." (Prov. ix. 9, LXX.) The
beginning is from us, but the end will be from
you. We must now resume the connection.

After having said, " Of His fullness have all we
received," he adds, "and grace for grace." For
by grace the Jews were saved : " I chose you,"
saith God, "not because you were many in num-
ber, but because of your fathers." (Deut. vii.
7, LXX.) If now they were chosen by God not
for their own good deeds,^ it is manifest that by
grace they obtained this honor. And we too all
are saved by grace, but not in like manner ; not
for the same objects, but for objects much greater
and higher. The grace then that is with us is
not like theirs. For not only was pardon of sins
given to us, (since this we have in common with
them, for all have sinned,) but righteousness
also, and sanctification, and sonship, and the gift
of the Spirit far more glorious'' and more abun-
dant. By this grace we have become the be-
loved of God, no longer as servants, but as sons
and friends. Wherefore he saith, "grace for
grace." Since even the things of the law were
of grace, and the very fact of man" being
created from nothing, (for we did not receive
this as a recompense for past good deeds, how


' al. " sung."

' Morel, and MS. in Bodleian read the passage thus: " are holy,
but the (Holiness) of God is greater than their holiness, and sur-
passing, as ill comparison with us, so also with the powers which
are above us." ^ KaTopBiatidrtav.

« al. " stronger." ' al. "our."


could we, when we even were not? but from
God who is ever the first to bestow His bene-
fits,) and not only that we were created from
nothing, but that when created, we straightway
learned what we must and what we must not do,
and that we received this law in our very nature,
and that our Creator entrusted to us the impar-
tial rule of conscience, these I say, are proofs
of the greatest grace and unspeakable loving-
kindness. And the recovery of this law after it
had become cornipt, by means of the written
(Law), this too was the work of grace. For
what might have been expected to follow was,
that they who falsified" the law once given should
suffer correction and punishments ; but what
actually took place was not this, but, on the con-
trary, an amending of our nature, and pardon,
not of debt, but given through mercy and grace.
For to show that it was of grace and mercy, hear
what David saith ; " The Lord executeth right-
eousness and judgment for all that are oppressed ;
He made known His ways unto Moses, His acts
unto the children of Israel " (Ps. ciii. 6, 7) : and
again ; " Good and upright is the Lord, there-
fore will He give laws to them that are in the
way." (Ps. XXV. 8.)

[3.] Therefore that men received the law was
of pity, mercies, and grace ; and for this reason
he saith, " Grace for grace." But striving yet
more fervently' to (express) the greatness of the
gifts, he goes on to say,

Ver. 17. "The law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ."

See ye how gently, by a single word and by
Httle and little, both John the Baptist and John
the Disciple lead up their hearers to the highest
knowledge, having first exercised them in hum-
bler things? The former having compared to
himself Him who is incomparably superior to
all, thus afterwards shows His superiority, by
saying, "is become before me," and then adding
the words, " was before me " : while the latter
has done much more than he, though too little
for the worthiness of the Only-Begotten, for he
makes the comparison, not with John, but with
one reverenced by the Jews more than John,
with Moses. " For the law," saith he, " was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ."

Observe his wisdom. He makes enquiry not
concerning the person, but the things ; for these\
being proved, it was probable that even the''
senseless would of necessity receive from them
a much higher judgment and notion respecting
Christ. For when facts bear witness, which can-
not be suspected' of doing so either from favor
to any, or from malice, they afford a means of
judging which cannot be doubted even by the


" TTOpaJfCpaTOvrai,

^ al. " clearly."


• al. "accused.*


so


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV.


senseless ; for they remain to open view just as
their actors may have arranged them, and there-
fore their evidence is the least liable to suspicion
of any. And see how he makes the comparison
easy even to the weaker sort ; for he does not
prove the superiority by argument, but points
out the difference by the bare words, opposing
, " grace and truth " to " law," and " came " to
' " was given." Between each of these there is a
\ great difference ; for one, " was given," belongs
to something ministered, when one has received
from another, and given to whom he was com-
manded to give ; but the other, " grace and
truth came," befits a king forgiving all offenses,
with authority, and himself furnishing the gift.
Wherefore He said, "Thy sins be forgiven thee "
(Matt. ix. 2) ; and again, "But that ye may
know that the Son of Man hath power on earth
to forgive sins (He saith to the sick of the
palsy), Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine
house." (Ibid. v. 6.)

Seest' thou how "grace" cometh by Him?
look also to " truth." His " grace " the instance
just mentioned, and what happened in the case
of the thief, and the gift of Baptism, and the
grace of the Spirit given by Him '' declare, and
many other things. But His " truth " we shall
more clearly know, if we understand the types.
For the types like patterns anticipated and
sketched beforehand the dispensations^ which
should be accomplished under the new cove-
nant, and Christ came and fulfilled them. Let
us now consider the types in few words, for we
cannot at the present time go through all that
relates to them ; but when you have learned
some points from those (instances) which I shall
set before you,* you will know the others also.

Will you then that we begin with the Passion
itself? What then saith the type ? " Take ye a
lamb for an house, and kill it, and do as he
commanded and ordained." (Ex. xii. 3.) But
it is not so with Christ. He doth not command
this to be done, but Himself becomes It,' by
offering Himself a Sacrifice and Oblation to His
Father.

[4.] See how the type was "given by Moses,"
but the "Truth came by Jesus Christ." (Ex.
xvii. 12.)

Again, when the Amalekites warred in Mount
Sinai, the hands of Moses were supported, being
stayed up by Aaron and Hur standing on either
side of him (Ex. xvii. 12); but when Christ
came. He of Himself stretched forth His Hands
upon the Cross. Hast thou observed how the
type " was given," but " the Truth came " ?


>al. "sec."

' Morel, and MS. in Bodleian, read, '* and the adoption through
the Spirit, given to us."
' oiKovofjiiai.

* al. " having from a few learned the whole."

• tLvrht avrb yiyyerai.


Again, the Law said, " Cursed is every one
that continueth not in all things that are written
in this book." (Deut. xxvii. 26, LXX.) But
what saith grace ? " Come unto Me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest" (Matt. xi. 28) ; and Paul. "Christ hath
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us." (Gal. iii. 13.)

Since then we have enjoyed such " grace "
and " truth," I exhort you that we be not more
slothful by reason of the greatness of the gift ;
for the greater the honor of which we have been
deemed worthy, the greater our debt of excel-
lence ; for one who has received but small bene-
fits, even though he makes but small returns,
does not deserve the same condemnation ; but
he who has been raised to the highest summit
of honor, and yet manifests groveling and mean
dispositions, will be worthy of much greater pun-
ishment. May I never have to suspect this of
you. For we tnist in the Lord that you have
winged your souls for heaven, that you have
removed from earth, that being in the world ye
handle not the things of the world ; yet though
so persuaded, we do not cease thus continually
to exhort you. In the games of the heathen,
they whom all the spectators encourage are not
those who have fallen and lie supine, but those
who are exerting themselves and running still ;
of the others, (since they would be doing what
would be of no use,' and would not be able to
raise up by their encouragements men once for
all severed from victory,) they cease to take any
notice. But in this case some good may be
expected, not only of you who are sober, but
even of those who have fallen, if they would but
be converted. Wherefore we use every means,
exhorting, reproving, encouraging, praising, in
order that we may bring about your salvation.
Be not then offended by our continual admon-
ishing concerning the Christian conversation,
for the words are not the words of one accusing
you of sloth, but of one who has very excellent
hopes respecting you. And not to you alone,
but to ourselves who speak them, are these
words said, yea, and shall be said, for we too
need the same teaching ; so though they be
spoken by us, yet nothing hinders their being
spoken to us, (for the Word, when it finds a
man in fault, amends him, when clear and free,
sets him as far off from it as possible,) and we
ourselves are not pure from transgressions. The
course of healing is the same for all, the medi-
cines are set forth for all, only the application is
not the same, but is made according to the
choice of those who use the medicines ; for one
who will handle the remedy as he ought, gains
some. benefit from the application, while he who


so great.


' al. '* senseless."


Homily XV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


51


does not place it upon the wound, makes the
evil greater, and brings it to the most painful
end. Let us then not fret when we are being
healed, but much rather rejoice, even though
the system of discipline bring bitter pains, for
hereafter it will show to us fruit sweeter than
any. Let us then do all to this end, that we
may depart to that world,' cleared of the wounds
and strokes which the teeth of sin make in the
soul, so that having become worthy to behold


the countenance of Christ, we may be delivered
in that day, not to the avenging and cruel powers,
but to those who are able to bring us to that in-
heritance of the heavens which is prepared for
them that love Him ; to which may it come to
pass that we all attain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.


HOMILY XV.


John i. 18.


I


" No man hath seen God at any time ; the Only-begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath
declared Him."


[ I .] God will not have us listen to the words
and sentences contained in the Scriptures care-
lessly, but with much attention. This is why the
blessed David hath prefixed in many places to his
Psalms the title " for understanding," ^ and hath
said, " Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of Thy Law." (Ps. xxxii.
42, &c. ; cxix. 18.) And after him his son again
shows that we ought to " seek out wisdom as
silver,^ and to make merchandise of her rather
than of gold." (Prov. ii. 4 and iii. 14 [partially
quoted] ; John v. 39.) And the Lord when
He exhorts the Jews to " search the Scriptures,"
the more urges us to the enquiry, for He would
not thus have spoken if it were possible to com-
prehend them immediately at the first reading.
No one would ever search for what is obvious
and at hand, but for that which is wrapt in
shadow, and which must be found after much
enquiry ; and so to arouse us to the search He
calls them "hidden treasure." (Prov. ii. 4;
Matt. xiii. 44.) These words are said to us
that we may not apply ourselves to the words of
the Scriptures carelessly or in a chance way, but
with great exactness. For if any one listen to
what is said in them without enquiring into the
meaning, and receive all so as it is spoken,
according to the letter, he will suppose many
unseemly things of God, will admit of Him that
He is a man, that He is made of brass, is wrath-
ful, is furious, and many opinions yet worse than
these. But if he fully learn the sense that lies
beneath, he will be freed from all this unseemli-


' ei« (Tuvfinf 7^3U?b Maschil, vvveai^, intelUctHS, et ut Hieron.

reddit, eruditio, aliqui, erudicns, vel inteUectum preestans.
Lorin. in tit. Ps. 31. (32).

' Some MSS. read " silver, and search for it as treasure; He
would not have said Search^ &c."


ness. (Rev. i. 15.) The very text which now
lies before us says, that God has a bosom, a
thing proper to bodily substances, yet no one is
so insane as to imagine, that He who is without
body is a body. In order then that we may
properly interpret the entire passage according
to its spiritual meaning, let us search it through
from its beginning.

" No man hath seen God at any time." By
what connection of thought does the Apostle
come to say this ? After showing the exceeding
greatness of the gifts of Christ, and the infinite
difference between them and those ministered
by Moses, he would add the reasonable cause of
the difference. Moses, as being a servant, was
minister of lower things, but Christ being Lord
and King, and the King's Son, brought to us
things far greater, being ever with the Father,
and beholding Him continually ; wherefore He
saith, " No man hath seen God at any time."
What then shall we answer to the most mighty
of voice, Esaias, when he says, " I saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne high and lifted up " (Isa. vi.
I ) ; and to John himself testifying of Him, that
" he said these things when he had seen His
glory"? (c. xii. 41.) What also to Ezekiel? for
he too beheld Him sitting above the Cheni-
bim. (Ezek. i. and X.) What to Daniel ? for he
too saith, "The Ancient of days did sit" (Dan.
vii. 9.) What to Moses himself, saying, "Show
me Thy Glory, that I may see Thee so as to
know Thee." (Ex. xxxiii. 13, partly from LXX.)
And Jacob took his name from this very thing,
being called * " Israel " ; for Israel is " one that
sees God." " And others have seen him. How
then saith John, " No man hath seen God at
any time " ? It is to declare, that all these were
instances of (His) condescension, not the vision
of the Essence itself unveiled. For had they


* Augus. De Civ, Dei^ lib. 16, 39.


52


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


seen the very Nature, they would not have be-
held It under different forms, since that is sim-
ple, without form, or parts, or bounding lines.
It sits not, nor stands, nor walks : these things
belong all to bodies. But how He Is, He only
knoweth. And this He hath declared by a cer-
tain prophet, saying, " I have multiplied visions,
and used similitudes ' by the hands of the proph-
ets" (Hos. xii. lo), that is, "I have conde-
scended, I have not appeared as I really was."
For since His Son was about to appear in very
flesh. He prepared them from old time to behold
the substance of God, as far as it was possible
for them to see It ; but what God really is, not
only have not the prophets seen, but not even
angels nor archangels. If you ask them, you
shall not hear them answering anything concern-
ing His Essence, but sending up,^ " Glory to
God in the Highest, on earth peace, good will
towards men." (Luke ii. 14.) If you desire
to learn something from Cherubim or Seraphim,
you shall hear the mystic song of His Holiness,
and that " heaven and earth are full of His
glory." (Isa. vi. 3.) If you enquire of the
higher powers, you shall but find ^ that their one
work is the praise of God. " Praise ye Him,"
saith David, "all His hosts." (Ps. cxlviii. 2.)
But the Son only beholds Him, and the Holy
Ghost. How can any created nature even see
the Uncreated? If we are absolutely unable
clearly to discern any incorporeal power what-
soever, even though created, as has been often
proved in the case of angels, much less can we
discern the Essence which is incorporeal and
uncreated. Wherefore Paul saith, " Whom no
man hath seen, nor can see." (i Tim. vi. 16.)
Does then this special attribute * belong to the
Father only, not to the Son? Away with the
thought. It belongs also to the Son ; and to
show that it does so, hear Paul declaring this
point, and saying, that He " is the Image of the
invisible God." (Col. i. 15.) Now if He be
the Image of the Invisible, He must be invisible
Himself, for otherwise He would not be an
" image." And wonder not that Paul saith in
another place, " God was manifested in the
Flesh" (i Tim. iii. 16) ; because the manifes-
tation' took place by means of the flesh, not
according to (His) Essence. Besides, Paul
shows that He is invisible, not only to men, but
also to the powers above, for after saying, " was
manifested in the Flesh," he adds, " was seen of
angels."

[2.] So that even to angels He then became
visible, when He put on the Flesh ; but before
that time they did not so behold Him, because
even to them His Essence was invisible.


* lit. *'bcen likened." * al. "only singing."

* al. " they shall answer again," * f^aipeTov.

* al. therefore saith (Paul), " Who was manifested in the flesh,"
ibr the manifestation, &c.


" How then," asks some one, " did Christ say,
' Despise not one of these little ones, for I tell
you, that their angels do always behold the face
of My Father which is in heaven ' ? (Matt, xviii.
10.) Hath then God a face, and is He bounded
by the heavens?" Who so mad as to assert
this ? What then is the meaning of the words ?
As when He saith, " Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God" (Matt. v. 8), He
means that intellectual vision which is possible
to us, and the having God in the thoughts ; so
in the case of angels, we must understand * that
by reason of their pure and sleepless' nature
they do nothing else, but always image to them-
selves God. And therefore Christ saith, that
" No man knoweth the Father, save the Son."
(Matt. X. 27.) What then, are we all in igno-
rance ? God forbid ; but none knoweth Him as
the Son knoweth Him. As then many* have
seen Him in the mode of vision permitted to
them, but no one has beheld His Essence, so
many of us know God, but what His substance
can be none knoweth, save only He that was
begotten of Him. For by " knowledge " He
here means an exact idea and comprehension,
such as the Father hath of the Son. " As the
Father knoweth Me, even so know I the Father."
(c. X. 15.)

Observe, therefore, with what fullness" the
Evangelist speaks ; for having said that " no
man hath seen God at any time," he does not
go on to say, " that the Son who hath seen, hath
declared Him," but adds something beyond
" seeing " by the words, " Who is in the bosom
of the Father " ; because, " to dwell '" in the
bosom " is far more than " to see." For he that
merely " seeth " hath not an in every way exact
knowledge of the object, but he that " dwelleth
in the bosom " can be ignorant of nothing. Now
lest when thou hearest that " none knoweth the
Father, save the Son," thou shouldest assert
that although He knoweth the Father more than
all, yet He knoweth not how great He is, the
Evangelist says that He dwells in the bosom of
the Father ; and Christ Himself declares, that He
knoweth Him as much as the Father knoweth
the Son. Ask therefore the gainsayer, "Tell
me, doth the Father know the Son ? " And if he
be not mad, he will certainly answer " Yes."
Then ask again ; " Doth He see and know Him
with exact vision and knowledge ? Doth He
know clearly what He Is ? " He will certainly
confess this also. From this next collect the
exact comprehension the Son has of the Father.
For He saith, " As the Father knoweth me, even
so know I the Father" (ex. 15) ; and in an-
other place, " Not that any man hath seen the


^ al. " many say."

' aypvirvov,

' al. " many prophets."


^ rrepiouatac, al. " exactness.'


Homily XV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


53


Father, save He which is of God." (c. vi. 46.)
Wherefore, as I said, the Evangelist mentions
" the bosom," to show all this to us by that one
word ; that great is the affinity and nearness
of the Essence, that the knowledge is nowise
different, that the power is equal. For the
Father would not have in His bosom one of
another essence, nor would He have dared,
had He been one amongst many servants, to
live ' in the bosom of his Lord, for this belongs
only to a true Son, to one who has' much con-
fidence towards His Father, and who is in noth-
ing inferior to Him.

Wouldest thou learn also His eternity? Hear
what Moses saith concerning the Father. When
he asked what he was commanded to answer
should the Jews enquire of him, "Who it was
that had sent him," he heard these words : "Say,
I AM hath sent me." (Ex. iii. 14.) Now the
expression "I AM," ^ is significative of Being ever,
and Being without beginning, of Being really and
absolutely. And this also the expression, " Was
in the beginning," declares, being indicative of
Being ever ; so that John uses this word to show
that the Son Is from everlasting to everlasting*
in the bosom of the Father. For that you may
not from the sameness of name, suppose that
He is some one of those who are made sons by
grace, first, the article is added, distinguishing
Him from those by grace. But if this does not
content you, if you still look earthwards, hear a
name more absolute than this, " Only-Begot-
ten." If even after this you still look below,
" I will not refuse," says he, (St. John,) " to ap-
ply to God a term belonging to man, I mean the
word ' bosom,' only suspect nothing degrading."
Dost thou see the lovingkindness and careful-
ness of the Lord ? God applies ° to Himself un-
worthy expressions, that even so thou mayest
see through them, and have some great and
lofty thought of Him ; and dost thou tarry be-
low ? For tell me, wherefore is that gross and
carnal word " bosom " employed in this place ?
Is it that we may suppose God to be a body ?
Away, he by no means saith so. Why then is it
spoken? for if by it neither the genuineness of
the Son is established, nor that God is not a
body, the word, because it serves no purpose, is
superfluously thrown in. Why then is it spoken ?
For I shall not desist from asking thee this ques-
tion. Is it not very plain, that it is for no other
reason but that by it we might understand the
genuineness of the Only-Begotten, and His Co-
eternity with the Father?

[3.] " He hath declared Him," saith John.
What hath he declared ? That " no man hath


' Tp«4>evOai, al. (TTpf^tadai, versari.

* lit. " uses."

* lit. *' He Who Is." Another reading of the passage is, " if he
were asked . . . and should answer, he is bidden to say that, &c."

* avap^wc Ncu aifiunf. ^ al. " allows to be applied."


seen God at any time " ? That " God is one " ?
But this all the other prophets testify, and Moses
continually ° exclaims, " The Lord thy God is
one Lord " (Deut. vi. 4) ; and Esaias, " Before
Me there was no God formed, neither shall there
be after me." (Isa. xliii. 10.) What more then
have we learned from " the Son which is in the
bosom of the Father " ? What from " the Only-
Begotten " ? In the first place, these very words
were uttered by His working ; in the next place,
we have received a teaching that is far clearer,
and learned that " God is a spirit, and they that
worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in
truth " (c. iv. 24) ; and again, that it is impossi-
ble to see God ; " that no man knoweth " Him,
"save the Son " (Matt. xi. 27) ; that He is the
Father of the true and Only-Begotten ; and all
other things that are told us of Him. But the
word "hath declared"' shows the plainer and
clearer teaching which He gave not to the Jews
only but to all the world, and established. To
the prophets not even all the Jews gave heed,
but to the Only-Begotten Son of God all the
world yielded and obeyed. So the " declara-
tion " in this place shows the greater clearness
of His teaching, and therefore also He is called
"Word," and "Angel* of great counsel."'

Since then we have been vouchsafed a larger
and more perfect teaching, God having no longer
spoken by the prophets, but " having in these
last days spoken to us by His Son " (Heb. i. i),
let us show forth a conversation far higher than
theirs, and suitable to the honor bestowed on us.
Strange would it be that He should have so far
lowered Himself, as to choose to speak to us no
longer by His servants, but by His own mouth,
and yet we should show forth nothing more than
those of old. They had Moses for their teacher,
we, Moses' Lord. Let us then exhibit a heavenly
wisdom '" worthy of this honor, and let us have
nothing to do with earth. It was for this that
He brought His teaching from heaven above,
that He might remove our thoughts thither, that
we might be imitators of our Teacher according
to our power. But how may we become imi-
tators of Christ? By acting in everything for
the common good, and not merely seeking our
own. " For even Christ," saith Paul, " pleased
not Himself, but as it is written. The reproaches
of them that reproached Thee fell on Me."
(Rom. XV. 3 ; Ps. Ixix. 9.) Let no one there-
fore seek his own. In truth, a man (really)
seeks his own good when he looks to that of his
neighbor. What is their good is ours ; we are
one body, and parts and limbs one of another.
Let us not then be as though we were rent
asunder. Let no one say, " such a person is no


avm Kai icaTiu.


' €^i)YT)o-aTo. * or, *' Messenger."

» p.eya.\ri^ ^ouA^c ayytKo^. The LXX. version of the titles ol
Christ, Isa. ix. 6.
^^ ^tAotro^iai'.


54


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


friend of mine, nor relation, nor neighbor, I
have nought to do with him, how shall I approach,
how address him?" Though he be neither
relation nor friend, yet he is a man, who shares
the same nature with thee, owns the same Lord,
is thy fellow-servant, and fellow-sojourner,' for
he is born in the same world. And if besides
he partakes of the same faith, behold he hath
also become a member of thee : for what friend-
ship could work such union, as the relationship
of faith? And our intimacy one with another
must not be such nearness only as friends ought
to show to friends, but such as is between limb
and limb, because no man can possibly discover
any intimacy greater than this sort of friend-
ship and fellowship.' As then you cannot say,
"\Vhence arises my intimacy and connection
with this limb? " (that would be ridiculous ;) so
neither can you say so in the case of your
brother. " We are all baptized into one body "
(i Cor. xii. 13), saith Paul. "Wherefore into
one body ? " That we be not rent asunder, but
preserve the just proportions of that one body
by our intercourse and friendship one with
another.

Let us not then despise one another, lest we be
neglectful of ourselves.' " For no man ever yet
hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth
it." (Eph. V. 29.) And therefore God hath given
to us but one habitation, this earth, hath dis-
tributed all things equally, hath lighted one sun


for us all, hath spread above us one roof, the
sky, made one table, the earth, bear* food for
us. And another table hath He given far better
than this, yet that too is one, (those who share
our mysteries understand my words,) one manner
of birth He hath bestowed on all, the spiritual,
we all have one country, that in the heavens, of
the same cup drink we all. He hath not be-
stowed on the rich man a gift more abundant
and more honorable, and on the poor one more
mean and small, but He hath called all alike.
He hath given carnal things with equal regard
to all,' and spiritual in like manner. Whence
then proceeds the great inequality of conditions
in life? From the avarice and pride of the
wealthy. But let not, brethren, let not this any
longer be ; and when matters of universal in-
terest and more pressing necessity bring us to-
gether, let us not be divided by things earthly
and insignificant : I mean, by wealth and poverty,
by bodily relationship, by enmity and friendship ;
for all these things are a shadow, nay less sub-
stantial than a shadow, to those who possess the
bond of charity from above. Let us then pre-
serve this unbroken, and none of those evil
spirits * will be able to enter in, who cause divis-
ion in so perfect union ; ' to which may we all
attain by the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XVI.

John i. 19.


' And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent
priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him. Who
art thou? "


[i.] A DREADFUL thing is envy, beloved, a
dreadful thing and a pernicious, to the enviers,not
to the envied. For it harms and wastes them first,
like some mortal venom deeply seated in their
souls ; and if by chance it injure its objects, the
harm it does is small and trifling, and such as
brings greater gain than loss. Indeed not in the
case of envy only, but in every other, it is not he
that has suffered, but he that has done the wrong,
who receives injury. For had not this been so,
Paul would not have enjoined the disciples rather
to endure wrong than to inflict it, when he says,
" Why do ye not rather take wrong ? Why do
ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded ? "


* o^otTKiji'ot, '* tent-fellow." ' al. **carc."

* al. '* let us then so care for our neighbors, as not neglecting
each his own flesh."


(i Cor. vi. 7.) Well he knew, that destruction
ever follows, not the injured party, but the injur-
ing. All this I have said, by reason of the envy
of the Jews. Because those who had flocked
from the cities to John, and had condemned
their own sins, and caused themselves to be
baptized, repenting as it were after Baptism,
send to ask him, " Who art thou? " Of a truth
they were the offspring of vipers, serpents, and
even worse if possible than this. O evil and
adulterous and perverse generation, after having
been baptized, do ye then become vainly curious,
and question about the Baptist? What folly
can be greater than this of yours ? How was it
that ye came forth? that ye confessed your sins,
that ye ran to the Baptist? How was it that
you asked him what you must do? when in all


* avriKtv.

8 OfX0TLiUW9.

* al. *' passions."

* al. ** union with Him.'*


Homily XVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


55


this you were acting unreasonably, since you
knew not the principle and purpose of his
coming. Yet of this the blessed John said
nothing, nor does he charge or reproach them
with it, but answers them with all gentleness.

It is worth while to learn why he did thus. It
was, that their wickedness might be manifest
and plain to all men. Often did John testify of
Christ to the Jews, and when he baptized them
he continually made mention of Him to his
company, and said, " I indeed baptize you with
water, but there cometh One after me who is
mightier than I ; He shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with fire." (Matt. iii. ii.)
With regard to him they were affected by a
human feeling ; for, tremblingly attentive ' to
the opinion of the world, and looking to " the
outward appearance " (2 Cor. x. 7), they deemed
it an unworthy thing that he should be subject
to Christ. Since there were many things that
pointed out John for an illustrious person. In
the first place, his distinguished and noble de-
scent ; for he was the son of a chief priest.
Then his conversation, his austere mode of life,
his contempt of all human things ; for despising
dress and table, and house and food itself, he
had passed his former time in the desert. In
the case of Christ all was the contrary of this.
His family was mean, (as they often objected
to Him, saying, " Is not this the carpenter's son ?
Is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren
James and Joses?") (Matt. xiii. 55) ; and that
which was supposed to be His country was held
in such evil repute, that even Nathanael said,
" Can there any good thing come out of Naza-
reth?" (c. i. 46.) His mode of living was
/■ordinary, and His garments not better than

' those of the many. For He was not girt with a
leathern girdle, nor was His raiment of hair, nor
did He eat honey and locusts. But He fared
like all others, and was present at the feasts of
wicked men and publicans, that He might draw
them to Him. Which thing the Jews not under-
standing reproached Him with, as He also saith
Himself, " The Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and they say. Behold a gluttonous man
and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners." (Matt. xi. 19.) When then John con-

r tinually sent them from himself to Jesus, who
seemed to them a meaner person, being ashamed
and vexed at this, and wishing rather to have

'^im for their teacher, they did not dare to say
so plainly, but send to him, thinking by their
flattery to induce him to confess that he was the
Christ. They do not therefore send to him mean
men, as in the case of Christ, for when they
wished to lay hold on Him, they sent servants,
and then Herodians, and the like, but in this


instance, " priests and Levites," and not merely
" priests," but those " from Jerusalem," that is,
the more honorable ; for the Evangelist did not
notice this without a cause. And they send to
ask, "Who art thou?" Yet the manner of his
birth was well known to all, so that all said,
"What manner of child shall this be?" (Luke i.
66) ; and the report had gone forth into all the
hill country. And afterwards when he came to
Jordan, all the cities were set on the wing, and
came to him from Jerusalem, and from all Judaea,
to be baptized. Why then do they* now ask?
Not because they did not know him, (how could
that be, when he had been made manifest in so
many ways?) but because they wished to bring
him to do that which I have mentioned.

[2.] Hear then how this blessed person an-
swered to the intention with which they asked
the question, not to the question itself. When
they said, " Who art thou? " he did not at once
give them what would have been the direct
answer, " I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness." But what did he? He removed
the suspicion they had formed ; for, saith the
Evangelist, being asked, " Who art thou ? "

Ver. 20. " He confessed, and denied not ;
but confessed, I am not the Christ."

Observe the wisdom of the Evangelist. He
mentions this for the third time, to set forth the
excellency of the Baptist, and their wickedness
and folly. And Luke also says, that when the
multitudes supposed him to be the Christ, he
again removes their suspicion." This is the part
of an honest servant, not only not to take to
himself his master's honor, but also to reject it*
when given to him by the many. But the mul-
titudes arrived at this supposition from simpli-
city and ignorance ; these questioned him from
an ill intention, which I have mentioned, expect-
ing, as I said, to draw him over to their purpose
by their flattery. Had they not expected this,
they would not have proceeded immediately to
another question, but would have been angry
with him for having given them an answer
foreign to their enquiry, and would have said,
"Why, did we suppose that? did we come to
ask thee that? " But now as taken and detected
in the fact, they proceed to another question,
and say,

Ver. 21. " What then ? art thou Elias ? And
he saith, I am not."

For they expected that Elias also would come,
as Christ declares ; for when His disciples en-
quired, " How then do the scribes say that Elias
must first come?" (Matt. xvii. 10) He replied,
"Elias truly shall first come, and restore all


' al. " these therefore."

3 Morel. " in like manner one may_ see in Luke, (iii. i6,) John
saying to those who reasoned concerning him whether he was the
Christ, that " One mightier than 1 cometh," and by his answer
again removing such a suspicion," * 6ia«pou«rtfai.


56


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


things." Then they ask, " Art thou that prophet ?
and he answered, No." (Matt. xvii. lo.) Yet
surely he was a prophet. Wherefore then doth
he deny it ? Because again he looks to the in-
tention of his questioners. For they expected
that some especial prophet should come, be-
cause Moses said, " The Lord thy God will
raise up unto thee a Prophet of thy brethren
like unto me, unto Him shall ye barken."
(Deut. xviii. 15.) Now this was Christ. Where-
fore they do not say, "Art thou a prophet?"
meaning thereby one of the ordinary prophets ;
but the expression, " Art thou the prophet?"
with the addition of the article, means, " Art
thou that Prophet who was foretold by Moses ? "
and therefore he denied not that he was a
prophet, but that he was " that Prophet."

Ver. 22. " Then said they unto him. Who art
thou ? that we may give an answer to them that
sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? "

Observe them pressing him more vehemently,
urging him, repeating their questions, and not
desisting ; while he first kindly removes false
opinions concerning himself, and then sets be-
fore them one which is true. For, saith he,

Ver. 23. " I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord,
as said the prophet Esaias."

When he had spoken some high and lofty
words concerning Christ, as if (replying) to
their opinion, he immediately betook himself to
the Prophet to draw from thence confirmation
of his assertion.

Ver. 24, 25. "And [saith the Evangelist] they
who were sent were of the Pharisees. And
they asked him, and said unto him. Why bap-
tizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ,
neither Elias, neither that Prophet ? "

Seest thou not without reason I said that they
wished to bring him to this? and the reason why
fhey did not at first say so was, lest they should
be detected by all men. And then when he said,
" I am not the Christ," they, being desirous to
conceal what they were plotting ' within, go on to
"Elias," and "that Prophet." But when he said
that he was not one of these either, after that,
in their perplexity, they cast aside the mask, and
without any disguise show clearly their treach-
erous intention, saying, " Why baptizest thou
then, if thou be not that Christ?" And then
again, wishing to throw some obscurity over the
thing,' they add the others also, " Elias," and
" that Prophet." For when they were not able
to trip ' him by their flattery, they thought that
by an accusation they could compel him'' to
say the thing that was not.


1 tTVptVOV.

' Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " scest thou how, disguising what
they had, they add." • u»ro<r*ccAto'oi.

* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " they attempt to involve him in an
accusation, compelling him."


What folly, what insolence, what ill-timed
officiousness ! Ye were sent to learn who and
whence he might be, not to" lay down laws for
him also. This too was the conduct of men who
would compel him to confess himself to be the
Christ. Still not even now is he angry, nor
does he, as might have been expected, say to
them anything of this sort, " Do you give orders
and make laws for me?" but again shows great
gentleness towards them.

Ver. 26, 27. "I," saith he, "baptize with
water : but there standeth one among you, whom
ye know not ; He it is, who coming after me is
preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am
not worthy to unloose."

[3.] What could the Jews have left to say to
this? for even from this the accusation against
them cannot be evaded, the decision against
them admits not of pardon, they have given sen-
tence against themselves. How? In what way?
They deemed John worthy of credit, and so
truthful, that they might believe him not only
when he testified of others, but also when he spoke
concerning himself. For had they not been so
disposed, they would not have sent to learn from
him what related to himself. Because you know
that the only persons whom we believe, espe-
cially when speaking of themselves, are those
whom we suppose to be more veracious than any
others. And it is not this alone which closes
their mouths, but also the disposition with which
they had approached him ; for they came forth
to him at first with great eagerness, even though
afterwards they altered. Both which things
Christ declared, when He said, " He was a burn-
ing (and a shining) light, and ye were willing for
a season to rejoice in his light." Moreover, his
answer made him yet more worthy of credit.
For (Christ) saith, " He that seeketh not his
own glory ,° the same is true, and no unrighteous-
ness is in him." Now this man sought it not,
but refers the Jews to another. And those who
were sent were of the most tnistworthy among
them, and of the highest rank, so that they could
have in no way any refuge or excuse, for the
unbelief which they exhibited towards Christ.
Wherefore did ye not receive the things spoken
concerning Him by John? you sent men who
held the first rank among you, you enquired by
them, you heard what the Baptist answered, they
manifested all possible officiousness, sought into
every point, named all the persons you suspected
him to be ; and yet most publicly and plainly he
confessed that he was neither " Christ," nor
" Elias " nor " that Prophet." Nor did he stop
even there, but also informed them who he was,
and spoke of the nature of his own baptism,
that it was but a slight and mean thing, nothing


* al. " will ye."


Homily XVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


57


more than some water, and told of the superi-
ority of the Baptism given by Christ ; he also
cited Esaias the prophet, testifying of old very
long ago, and calling Christ " Lord" (Isa. xl. 3),
but giving him the names of " minister and ser-
vant." What after this ought they to have done?
Ought they not to have believed on Him who
was witnessed of, to have worshiped Him, to
have confessed Him to be God ? For the char-
acter and heavenly wisdom of the witness
showed that his testimony proceeded, not from
flattery, but from truth ; which is plain also from
this, that no^tnan prefers hisjodghbor to himself,
nor, when he may lawfully give honoi. to himself.
1 will yield it up to another, especially when it is
\so great as that of which we speak. So that John
(would not have renounced ' this testimony (as
belonging) to Christ, had He not been God.
For though he might have rejected it for himself
as being too great for his own nature, yet he
would not have assigned it to another nature
that was beneath it.

" But there standeth One among you, whom
ye know not." Reasonable it was that Christ
should mingle among the people as one of the
many, because everywhere He taught men not
to be puffed up and boastful. And in this place
by " knowledge " the Baptist means a perfect
acquaintance with Him, who and whence He
was. And immediately next to this he puts,
"Who Cometh after me " ; all but saying, "Think
not that all is contained in my baptism, for had
that been perfect, Another would not have arisen
after me to offer you a different One, but this of
mine is a preparation and a clearing the way for
that other. Mine is but a shadow and image,
but One must come who shall add to this the
reality. So that His very coming ' after me '
especially declares His dignity : for had the first
been perfect, no place would have been required
for a second." " Is ^ before me," is more hon-
orable, brighter. And then, lest they should
imagine that His superiority was found by com-
parison, desiring to establish His incomparable-
ness, he says, " Whose shoe's latchet I am not
worthy to unloose " ; that is, who is not simply
"before me," but before me in such a way, that
I am not worthy to be numbered among the
meanest of His servants. For to loose the shoe
is the office of humblest service.

Now if John was not worthy to " unloose the
latchet" (Matt.xi. 11), John, than whom "among
them that are born of women there hath not
risen a greater," where shall we rank ourselves?
If he who was equal to, or rather greater than,
all the world,'' (for saith Paul, " the world was
not worthy" of them — Heb. xi. 38,) declares
himself not worthy to be reckoned even among


' <fc(TTij, * " is preferred." E. V.

' Morel, and MS. in Bodl. "for thus Paul speaks of the saints
concerning whom he writes, * of whom," etc."


the meanest of those who should minister unto
Him, what shall we say, who are full of ten
thousand sins, and are as far from the excellenqe
of John, as earth from heaven.

[4.] He then saith that he himself is not
"worthy so much as to unloose the latchet of
His shoe " ; while the enemies of the truth are
mad with such a madness, as to assert* that they
are worthy to know Him even as He knows
Himself. What is worse than such insanity,
what more frenized than such arrogance?
Well hath a wise man said, " The beginning of
pride is not to know the Lord." '

The devil would not have been brought down
and become a devil, not being a devil before,
had he not been sick of this disease. This it
was that cast him out from that confidence,* this
sent him to the pit of fire, this was the cause of
all his woes. For it is enough of itself to destroy
every excellence of the soul, whether it find
almsgiving, or prayer, or fasting, or anything.
For, saith the Evangelist, " That which is highly
esteemed among men is impure before the
Lord." (Luke xvi. 15 — not quoted exactly.)
Therefore it is not only fornication or adultery
that are wont to defile those who practice them,
but pride also, and that far more than those
vices. Why? Because fornication though it is
an unpardonable sin, yet a man may plead the
desire ; but pride cannot possibly find any cause
or pretext of any sort whatever by which to ob-
tain so much as a shadow of excuse ; it is noth- ^
ing but a distortion and most grievous disease of f
the soul, produced from no other source but-)
folly. For there is nothing more foolish than
a proud man, though he be surrounded with
wealth, though he possess much of the wisdom
of this world, though he be set in royal place,
though he bear about with all things that among
men appear desirable.

For if the man who is proud of things really
good is wretched and miserable, and loses the
reward of all those things, must not he who is
exalted by things that are nought, and puffs
himself up because of a shadow or the flower of
the grass, (for such is this world's glory,) be
more ridiculous than any, when he does just
as some poor needy man might do, pining all
his time~witfr ITunger] "yet if ever he should
£liaiice_o^~jriight to see a dream of good for-
tune, filled with conceil"Because of it ?

O wretched and miserable ! when thy soul is
perishing by a most grievous disease, when thou
art poor with utter poverty, art thou high-minded
because thou hast such and such a number of
talents of gold ? because thou hast a multitude
of slaves and cattle ? Yet these are not thine ;


* Morel, and MS. in Hodl. *' boldly speaking out, (airavSaito-
^o^tVous,) say that, &c."

* Ecclus. X. 12, LXX. avBpianov o<^t(rTo^i«Vov iiro toO K. Eng.
ver. " when one departeth." < napprfaiai.


58


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


and if thou dost not believe my words, learn
from the experience of those who have gone be-
fore ' thee. And if thou art so drunken, that
thou canst not be instructed even from what has
befallen others, wait a little, and thou shalt know
by what befalls thyself that these things avail
thee nothing, when gasping for life, and master
not of a single hour, not even of a little moment,
thou shalt unwillingly leave them ^ to those who
are about thee, and these perhaps those whom
thou wouldest not. For many have not been
permitted even to give directions concern-
ing them, but have departed suddenly,' desiring
to enjoy them, but not permitted, dragged from
them, and forced to yield them up to others,
giving place by compulsion to those to whom
they would not. That this be not our case, let
us, while we are yet in strength and health, send
forward our riches hence to our own city, for
thus only and in no other way shall we be able
to enjoy them ; so shall we lay them up in a
place inviolate and safe. For there is nothing.


there is nothing there that can take them from
us ; no death, no attested wills,'' no successors to
inheritances,' no false informations, no plottings
against us, but he who has departed hence bear-
ing away great wealth with him may enjoy it
there for ever. Who then is so wretched as not
to desire to revel in riches which are his own
throughout? Let us then transfer our wealth, and
remove it thither. We shall not need for such
a removal asses, or camels, or carriages, or ships.
(God hath relieved even us from this difficulty,)
but we only want the poor, the lame, the crip-
pled, the infirm. These are entrusted with this
transfer, these convey our riches to heaven, these
introduce the masters of such wealth as this tc
the inheritance of goods everlasting. Which
may it be that we all attain through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY XVII.

John i. 28, 29.


" These things were done in Bethany beyond Jordan,
where John was baptizing. The next day he seeth
Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb
of God, which taketh away the sin of the world."

[ I .] A GREAT virtue is boldness and freedom of
speech, and the making all things second in im-
portance to the confessing of Christ ; so great
and admirable, that the Only-begotten Son of
God proclaims such an one in the presence of
the Father. (Luke xii. 8.) Yet the recompense
is more than just, for thou confessest upon earth.
He in heaven, thou in the presence of men. He
before the Father and all the angels.

Such an one was John, who regarded not the
multitude, nor opinion, nor anything else belong-
ing to men, but trod all this beneath his feet,
and proclaimed to all with becoming freedom
the things respecting Christ. And therefore the
Evangelist marks the very place, to show the
boldness of the loud-voiced herald. For it was
not in a house, not in a corner, not in the wil-
derness, but in the midst of the multitude, after
that he had occupied Jordan, when all that were
baptized by him were present, (for the Jews
came upon him as he was baptizing,) there it
was that he proclaimed aloud that wonderful


^ or, *' received them before,'
* 3^. " pass thein on.'*


confession concerning Christ, full of those sub-
lime and great and mysterious doctrines, and
that he was not worthy to unloose the latchet 01
His shoe. Wherefore he saith,^ " These thing;
were done in Bethany," or, as all the more cor
rect copies have it, " in Bethabara." For Beth-
any was not " beyond Jordan," nor bordering or
the wilderness, but somewhere nigh to Jerusa
lem.

He marks the places also for another reason
Since he was not about to relate matters of ol(
date, but such as had come to pass but a littl
time before, he makes those who were pres
ent and had beheld, witnesses of his words
and suppUes proof from the places themselves |
For confident that nothing was added by himse
to what was said, but that he simply and wit
truth described things as they were, he draws
testimony from the places, which, as I saic
would be no common demonstration of h:
veracity.

" The next day he seeth Jesus coming to hin
and saith. Behold the Lamb of God, which tal
eth away the sin of the world."

The Evangelists distributed the period
amongst them ; and Matthew having cut sho.


' al. " DOW then doth he this? adding and saying.'


Homily XVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


59


his notice of the time before John the Baptist
was bound, hastens to that which follows, while
the Evangelist John not only does not cut short
this period, but dwells most on it. Matthew,
after the return of Jesus from the wilderness,
saying nothing of the intermediate circum-
stances, as what John spake, and what the Jews
sent and said, and having cut short all the rest,
passes immediately to the prison. " For," saith
he, "Jesus having heard" that John was be-
trayed, "departed thence." (Matt. xiv. 13.)
But John does not so. He is silent as to the
journey into the wilderness, as having been de-
scribed by Matthew ; but he relates what fol-
lowed the descent from the mountain, and after
having gone through many circumstances, adds,
" For John was not yet cast into prison." (c.
iii. 24.)

And wherefore, says one, does Jesus now come
to him ? why does he come not merely once,
but this second time also? For Matthew says
that His coming was necessary on account of
Baptism : since Jesus adds, that " thus it becom-
eth us to fulfill all righteousness." (Matt. iii. 15.)
But John says that He came again after Baptism,
and declares it in this place, for, " I saw," saith
he, " the Spirit descending from heaven like a
dove, and It abode upon Him." Wherefore then
did He come to John? for He came not casu-
ally, but went expressly to him. " John," saith
the Evangelist, " seeth Jesus coming unto him."
Then wherefore cometh He? In order that
since John had baptized Him with many (oth-
ers), no one might suppose that He had has-
tened to John for the same reason as the rest,
to confess sins, and to wash in the river unto re-
pentance. For this He comes, to give John an
opportunity of setting this opinion right again,
for by saying, " Behold the Lamb of God, that
taketh away the sin of the world," he removes
the whole suspicion. For very plain it is that
One so pure as to be able to wash away ' the
sins of others, does not come to confess sins, but
to give opportunity to that marvelous herald to
impress what he had said more definitely on
those who had heard his former words, and to
add others besides. The word " Behold " is
used, because many had been seeking Him by
reason of what had been said, and for a long
time. For this cause, pointing Him out when
present, he said, " Behold," this is He so long
sought, this is "the Lamb." He calls Him
"Lamb," to remind the Jews of the prophecy of
Isaiah, and of the shadow under the law of
Moses, that he may the better lead them from
the type to the reality. That Lamb of Moses
took not at once away the sin of any one ; but
this took away the sin of all the world ; for

* al. " to redeem."


when it was in danger of perishing, He quickly
delivered it from the wrath of God.

Ver. 30. "This is He of whom I said, He
that cometh after me is preferred before me."

[2.] Seest thou here also how he interprets
the word "before"? for having called Him
" Lamb," and that He " taketh away the sin of
the world," then he saith that " He is preferred
before me, for He was before me " ; declaring
that this is the " before," the taking upon Him
the sins of the world, " and the baptizing with the
Holy Ghost." " For my coming had no farther
object than to proclaim the common Benefactor
of the world, and to afford the baptism of water ;
but His was to cleanse all men, and to give them
the power of the Comforter." " He is preferred
before me," that is to say, has appeared brighter
than I, because " He was before me." Let those
who have admitted the madness of Paul of Samo-
sata be ashamed when they withstand so mani-
fest a truth.

Ver. 31. "And I knew Him not," he saith.

Here he renders his testimony free from sus-
picion, by showing that it was not from human
friendship, but had been caused by divine reve-
lation. " I knew Him not," he saith. How then
couldest thou be a tnistworthy witness? How
shalt thou teach others, while thou thyself art
ignorant? He did not say " I know Him not,"
but, " I knew Him not " ; so that in this way he
would be shown most trustworthy ; for why
should he have shown favor to one of whom he
was ignorant?

" But that He should be made manifest unto
Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with
water."

He then did not need baptism, nor had that
laver any other object than to prepare for all
others a way to faith on Christ. For he did
not say, " that I might cleanse those who are
baptized," or, " that I might deliver them from
their sins," but, "that He should be made mani-
fest unto Israel." " And why, tell me, could he
not without baptism have preached and brought
the multitudes to Him?" But in this way it
would not have been by any means easy. For
they would not so all have run together, if the
preaching had been without the baptism ; they
would not by the comparison have learned His
superiority. For the multitude came together
not to hear his words, but for what? To be
"baptized, confessing their sins." But when
they came, they were taught the matters con-
cerning Christ, and the difference of His bap-
tism. Yet even this of John was of greater
dignity than the Jewish, and therefore all ran
to it ; yet even so it was imperfect.

" How then didst thou know Him ? " " By
the descent of the Spirit," he saith. But again,
lest any one should suppose that he was in need


6o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


of the Spirit as we are, hear how he removes
the suspicion, by showing that the descent of
the Spirit was only to declare Christ. For hav-
ing said, " And I knew Him not," he adds,
" But He that sent me to baptize with water,
the Same said unto me. Upon whom thou shalt
see the Spirit descending and remaining on
Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost." (Ver. :i3.)

Seest thou that this was the work of the
Spirit, to point out Christ? The testimony of
John was indeed not to be suspected, but wish-
ing to make it yet more credible, he leads it
up to God and the Holy Spirit. For when
John had testified to a thing so great and won-
derful, so fit to astonish all his hearers, that He
alone took on Him the sins of all the world,
and that the greatness of the gift sufficed for
so great a ransom, afterwards he proves this
assertion.' And the proof is that He is the Son
of God, and that He needed not baptism, and
that the object of the descent of the Spirit was
only to make Him known. For it was not in
the power of John to give the Spirit, as those
who were baptized by him show when they say,
" We have not so much as heard whether there
be any Holy Ghost." (Acts xix. 2.) In truth,
Christ needed not baptism, neither his nor any
other ; " but rather baptism needed the power
of Christ. For that which was wanting was the
crowning blessing of all, that he who was bap-
tized should be deemed worthy of the Spirit ;
this free gift' then of the Spirit He added when
He came.

Ver. 32-34. " And John bare record, saying,
I saw the Spirit descending from the heaven like
a dove, and It abode upon Him. And I knew
Him not : but He that sent me to baptize with
water, the Same said unto me, Upon whom thou
shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining
on Him, the same is He which baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record
that this is the Son of God."

He puts the " I knew Him not " repeatedly.''
On what account, and wherefore ? He was His
kinsman according to the flesh. " Behold,"
saith the angel, " thy cousin Elisabeth, she also
hath received a son." (Luke i. 36.) That
therefore he might not seem to favor Him be-
cause of the relationship, he repeats the " I
knew Him not." And this happened with
good reason ; for he had passed all his time
in the wilderness away from his father's house.

How then, if he knew Him not before the
descent of the Spirit, and if he then for the first
time recognized Him, did he forbid Him be-
fore baptism, saying, " I have need to be bap-
tized of Thee, and comest Thou to me ? " (Matt.


* airoiaatv.

* or, *' of any other man.**


* ffvvtxvS'


iii. 14), since this was a proof that he knew
Him very well. Yet he knew Him not before
or for a long time, and with good cause ; for
the marvels which took place when He was a
child, as the circumstances of the Magi and
others the like, had happened long before, while
John himself was very young, and since much
time had elapsed in the interval. He was natu-
rally unknown to all. For had He been known,
John would not have said, " That He should be
made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come
baptizing."

[3.] Hence it remains clear to us, that the
miracles which they say belong to Christ's
childhood, are false, and the inventions of
certain who bring them into notice. For if He
had begun from His early age to work wonders,
neither could John have been ignorant of Him,
nor would the multitude have needed a teacher
to make Him known. But now he says, that
for this he is come, " that He might be made
manifest to Israel " ; and for this reason he said
again, " I have need to be baptized of Thee."
Afterwards, as having gained more exact knowl-
edge of Him, he proclaimed Him to the multi-
tude, saying, " This is He of whom I said, After
me cometh a Man which is preferred before me."
For " He who sent me to baptize with water,"
and sent me for this end, " that He should be
made manifest to Israel," Himself revealed Him
even before the descent of the Spirit. Where-
fore even before He came, John said, "One
cometh after me who is preferred before me."
He knew Him not before he came to Jordan and
baptized all men, but when He was about to be
baptized, then he knew Him ; and this from the
Father revealing Him to the Prophet, and the
Spirit showing Him when He was being baptized
to the Jews, for whose sake indeed the descent
of the Spirit took place. For that the witness
of John might not be despised who said, that
" He was before me," and that " He baptizeth
with the Spirit," and that " He judgeth the
world," the Father utters a Voice proclaiming
the Son, and the Spirit descends, directing" that
Voice to the Head of Jesus. For since one was
baptizing, the other receiving baptism, the Spirit
comes to correct the idea which some of those
present might form, that the words were spoken
of John. So that when he says, " I knew Him
not," he speaks of former time, not that near to
His baptism. Otherwise how could he have
forbidden Him, saying, "I have need to be
baptized of Thee " ? How could he have said
such words concerning Him?

"But," says one, "how then did not the Jews
believe ? for it was not John only that saw the
Spirit in the likeness of a dove." It was, be-
cause, even if they did see, such things require

' CfrcAjcof.


Homily XVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


6l


not only the eyes of the body, but more than
these, the vision of the understanding, to prevent
men from supposing the whole to be a vain illu-
sion. For if when they saw Him working won-
ders, touching with His own hands the sick and
the dead, and so bringing them back to life and
health, they were so dnmk with malice as to
declare the contrary of what they saw ; how
could they shake off their unbelief by the de-
scent of the Spirit only? And some say, that
they did not all see it, but only John and those
of them who were better' disposed. Because,
even though it were possible with fleshly eyes to
see the Spirit descending as in the likeness of a
dove, still not for this was it absolutely necessary
that the circumstance should be visible to all.
For Zacharias saw many things in a sensible
form, as did Daniel and Ezekiel, and had none
to share in what they saw ; Moses also saw
Many things such as none other hath seen ; nor
did all the disciples enjoy ^ the view of the
Transfiguration on the mount, nor did they all
alike behold Him at the time of the Resurrection.
And this Luke plainly shows, when he says, that
He showed Himself " to witnesses chosen before
of God." (Acts X. 41.)

"And I saw, and bare record that this is the
Son of God."

Where did he "bear record that this is the
Son of God?" he called Him indeed "Lamb,"
and said that He should "baptize with the
Spirit," but nowhere did he say of Him, "Son
of God." But the other Evangelists do not
write that He said anything after the baptism,
but having been silent as to the time intervening,
they mention the miracles of Christ which were
done after John's captivity,' whence we may
reasonably conjecture that these and many
others are omitted. And this our Evangelist
himself has declared, at the end of his narra-
tive. For they were so far from inventing any-
thing great concerning Him, that the things
which seem to bring reproach, these they have
all with one voice* and with all exactness set
down, and you will not find one of them omit-
ting one of such circumstances ; but of the
miracles, part some have left for the others to
relate,^ part all have passed over in silence.

I say not this without cause, but to answer
the shamelessness of the heathen.* For this is
a sufficient proof of their truth-loving disposition,
and that they say nothing for favor. And thus
as well as in other ways you may arm yourselves
for trial of argument' with them. But take heed.
Strange were it that the physician, or the shoe-
maker, or the weaver, in short all artists, should


* evyvtitfiovitTTtpov. 8 al. " have made room for others."

* al. "were thought worthy.** * lit. *' Greeks."

* al. " mind.'*


be able each to contend correctly for his own
art, but that one calling himself Christian should 1
not be able to give a reason for his own faith ; /
yet those things if overlooked bring only loss tqr
men's property, these if neglected destroy our
very souls. Yet such is our wretched disposition,
that we give all our care to the former, and the
things which are necessary, and which are the
groundwork' of our salvation, as though of little
worth, we despise.

[4.] That it is which prevents the heathen from
quickly deriding his own error. For when they,
though established in a lie, use every means to
conceal the shamefulness of their opinions, while
we, the servants of the truth, cannot even open
our mouths, how can they help condemning the
great weakness of our doctrine? how can they
help suspecting our religion to be fraud and
folly? how shall they not blaspheme Christ as a
deceiver, and a cheat, who used the folly of the
many to further his fraud? And we are to
blame for this blasphemy, because we will not
be wakeful in arguments for godliness, but deem
these things superfluous, and care only for the
things of earth. He who admires a dancer or
a charioteer, or one who contends with beasts,
uses every exertion and contrivance not to come
off worst in any disputes concerning him, and
they string together long panegyrics, as they
compose their defense against those who find
fault with them, and cast sneers without number
at their opponents : but when arguments for
Christianity are proposed, they all hang their
heads, and scratch themselves, and gape, and
retire at length the objects of contempt.

Must not this deserve excessive wrath, when
Christ is shown to be less honorable in your
estimation than a dancer ? since you have con-
trived ten thousand defenses for the things
they have done, though more disgraceful than
any, but of the miracles of Christ, though
they have drawn to Him the world, you can-
not bear even to think or care at all. We
believe in the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, in the Resurrection of bodies,
and in Life everlasting. If now any heathen
say, " What is this Father, what this Son, what
this Holy Ghost? How do you who say that
there are three Gods, charge us with having
many Gods?" What will you say? What will
you answer? How will you repel the attack
of these arguments? But what if when you are
silent, the unbeliever should again propose this
other question, and ask, " What in a word is
resurrection? Shall we rise again in this body?
or in another, different from this? If in this,
what need that it be dissolved?" What will
you answer? And what, if he say, "Why did
Christ come now and not in old time ? Has it


62


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


seemed good to Him now to care for men, and
did He despise us during all the years that are
past?" Or if he ask other questions besides,
more than these ? for I must not propose many
questions, and be silent as to the answers to
them, lest, in so doing, I harm the simpler
among you. What has been already said is
sufficient to shake off your slumbers. Well
then, if they ask these questions, and you abso-
lutely cannot even listen to the words, shall we,
tell me, suffer trifling punishment only, when we
have been the cause of such error to those who
sit in darkness ? I wished, if you had sufficient
leisure, to bring before you all the book of a cer-
tain impure heathen philosopher written against
us, and that of another of earlier date, that so
at least I might have roused you, and led you
away from your exceeding slothfulness. For
if they were wakeful that they might say these
things against us, what pardon can we deserve,
if we do not even know how to repel the attacks
made upon us? For what purpose have we
been brought forward?' Dost thou not hear
the Apostle say, " Be ready to give an answer to
every man that asketh you a reason of the hope
that is in you"? (i Pet. iii. 15.) And Paul
exhorts in like manner, saying, " Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly." (Col. iii. 16.)
What do they who are more slothful^ than
drones reply to this ? " Blessed is every simple


soul," and, " he that walketh simply ' walketh
surely." (Prov. x. 8.) For this is the cause
of all sorts of evil, that the many do not know
how to apply rightly even the testimony of the
Scriptures. Thus in this place, the writer does
not mean (by "simple ") the man who is foolish,
or who knows nothing, but him who is free from
wickedness, who is no evil-doer, who is wise. If
it were not so, it would have been useless to say,*
" Be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as doves."
(Matt. X. 16.) But why should I name these
things, when the discourse comes in quite out of
place? For besides the things already men-
tioned, other matters are not right with us,
those, I mean, which concern our life and con-
versation. We are in every way wretched and
ridiculous, ever ready to find fault with each
other, but slow to correct in ourselves things
for which we blame and accuse our neighbor.
Wherefore I exhort you, that now at least we
attend to ourselves, and stop not at the finding
fault, (this is not enough to appease God ;) but
that we show forth a change in every way Inost
excellent, in order that having lived here to the
glory of God, we may enjoy the glory to come ;
which may it come to pass that we will all
attain, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XVIII.


John i. 35-37.


" Again the next day after John stood, and two of his
disciples; and looking upon Jesus as He walked, he
saith, Behold the Lamb of God. And the two dis-
ciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus."

[i.] The nature of man is somehow a thing
slothful, and easily declining to perdition, not by
reason of the constitution of the nature itself,
but by reason of that sloth which is of deliberate
choice. Wherefore it needs much reminding.
And for this cause Paul, writing to the Philip-
pians, said, " To write the same things to you,
to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is
safe." (Phil. iii. i.)

The earth when it has once received the seed,
straightway gives forth its fruits, and needs not
a second sowing ; but with our souls it is not so,
and one must be content, after having sown
many times, and manifested much carefulness,
to be able once to receive fruit. For in the
first place, what is said settles in the mind with


« »api)x»i|(4€i'.


* al. " irrational,"


difficulty, because the ground is very hard, and
entangled with thorns innumerable, and there
are many which lay plots, and carry away the
seed ; afterwards, when it has been fixed and
has taken root, it still needs the same attention,
that it may come to maturity, and having done
so may remain uninjured, and take no harm
from any. For in the case of seeds, when the
ear is fully formed and has gained its proper
strength, it easily despises rust, and drought, and
every other thing ; but it is not so with doctrines ;
in their case after all the work has been fully
done, one storm and flood often comes on, and
either by the attack of unpleasant circumstances,
or by the plots of men skilled to deceive, or by
various other temptations brought against them,,
brings them to ruin.

I have not said this without cause, but thati
when you hear John repeating the same words,,
you may not condemn him for vain talking,' nor^

•" uprightly," E. V, « al. " to hear." 'al. "wantoftaau."


Homily XVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


63


deem hiin impertinent or wearisome. He de-
sired to have been heard by once speaking, but
because not many gave heed to what was spoken
from the first, by reason of deep sleep, he again
rouses them by this second call. Now observe ;
he had said, " He that cometh after me, is pre-
ferred before me " : and that " I am not worthy
to unloose the latchet of His shoe " ; and that
" He baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire " ; and that he " saw the Spirit descending
like a dove, and it abode upon Him," and he
" bare record that this is the Son of God." No
one gave heed, nor asked, nor said, " Why say-
est thou these things ? in whose behalf ? for what
reason? " Again he had said, " Behold the Lamb
of God, which taketh away the sin of the world " ;
yet not even so did he touch their insensibiUty.
Therefore, after this he is compelled to repeat
the same words again, as if softening by tillage ^
some hard and stubborn soil, and by his word
as by a ^ plow, disturbing the mind which had
hardened into clods,' so as to put in the seed
deep. For this reason he does not make his
discourse a long one either ; because he desired
one thing only, to bring them over and join them
to Christ. He knew that as soon as they had
/received this saying, and had been persuaded,
they would not afterwards need one to bear wit-
ness unto Him. As also it came to pass. For,
if the Samaritans could say to the woman after
hearing Him, " Now we believe, not because of
thy saying, for we know that this is indeed the
Christ, the Saviour of the world," the disciples
would be much more quickly subdued,* as was
the case. For when they had come and heard
Him but one evening, they returned no more to
John, but were so nailed to Him, that they took
upon them the ministry of John, and themselves
proclaimed Him. For, saith the Evangelist, " He
findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto
him. We have found the Messias, which is, being
interpreted, the Christ." And observe, I pray
you, this, how, when he said, " He that cometh
after me is preferred before me " ; and that, " I
am not worthy to unloose the lachet of His
shoe " ; he caught no one, but when he spoke
of the Dispensation, and lowered his discourse
to a humbler tone, then the disciples followed
Him.

And we may remark this, not only in the in-
stance of the disciples, but that the many are
not so much attracted when some great and
sublime thing is said concerning God, as when
some act of graciousness and lovingkindness,
something pertaining to the salvation of the
hearers, is spoken of. They heard that " He


* vtutaei. ' al. " a kind of."
' TTtwtkrfiiivriv,

* Morel, and MS. in Bodleian, " much more would the disciples
have been thus affected, and when they had come would have been
subdued by His words."


taketh away the sin of the world," and straight-
way they ran to Him. For, said they, " if it is
possible to wash away' the charges that lie
against us, why do we delay ? here is One who
will deliver us without labor of ours. Is it not
extreme folly to put off accepting the Gift?"
Let those hear who are Catechumens, and are
putting off their salvation * to their latest breath.

" Again," saith the Evangelist, " John stood,
and saith. Behold, the Lamb of God." Christ
utters no word, His messenger saith all. So it
is with a bridegroom. He saith not for a while
anything to the bride, but is there in silence,
while some show him to the bride, and others
give her into his hands ; she merely appears, and
he departs not having taken her himself, but
when he has received her from another who
gives her to him. And when he has received
her thus given, he so disposes her, that she no
more remembers those who betrothed her. So
it was with Christ. He came to join to Himself
the Church ; He said nothing, but merely came.
It was His friend, John, who put into His the
bride's right hand, when by his discourses he
gave into His hand the souls of men. He hav-
ing received them, afterwards so disposed them,
that they departed no more to John who had
committed them to Him.

[2.] And here we may remark, not this only,
but something besides. As at a marriage the
maiden goes not to the bridegroom, but he
hastens to her, though he be a king's son, and
though he be about to espouse some poor and
abject person, or even a servant, so it was here.
Man's nature did not go up,' but contemptible
and poor as it was. He came to it, and when the
marriage had taken place. He suffered it no
longer to tarry here, but having taken it to Him-
self, transported it to the house of His Father.

" Why then doth not John take his disciples
apart, and converse with them on these matters,
and so deliver them over to Christ, instead of
saying pubUcly to them in common with all the
people, ' Behold the Lamb of God ' ? " That it
may not seem to be a matter of arrangement ;
for had they gone away from him to Christ after
having been privately admonished by him, and
as though to do him a favor, they would perhaps
soon have started away again ; but now, having
taken upon them the following Him, from teach-
ing which had been general, they afterwards re-
mained His firm disciples, as not having followed
Him in order to gratify the teacher, but as look-
ing purely to their own advantage.

The Prophets and Apostles then all preached
Him absent ; the Prophets before His coming
according to the flesh, the Apostles after He was
taken up ; John alone proclaimed Him present.


5 al. " to release ourselves from.'
" i.e. their baptism.


I al, " depart."


64


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


Wherefore he calls himself the "friend of the
Bridegroom" (c. iii. 29), since he alone was
present at the marriage, he it was that did and
accomplished all, he made a beginning of the
work.. And "looking upon Jesus walking, he
saith, Behold the Lamb of God." Not by voice
alone, but with his eyes also he bore witness to,
and expressed his admiration of, Christ, rejoicing
and glorying. Nor does he for awhile address
any' word of exhortation to his followers, but
only shows wonder and astonishment at Him
who was present, and declares to all the Gift
which He came to give, and the manner of puri-
fication. For " the Lamb " declares both these
things. And he said not, " Who shall take," or
"Who hath taken"; but, "Who taketh away
the sins of the world " ; because this He ever
doth. He took them not then only when He
suffered, but from that time even to the present
doth He take them away, not being repeatedly ''■
crucified, (for He offered One Sacrifice for sins,)
but by that One continually purging them. As
then The Word shows us His pre-eminence,^ and
The Son His superiority in comparison with
others, so " The Lamb, The Christ, that Prophet,
the True Light, the Good Shepherd," and what-
ever other names are applied to Him with the
addition of the article, mark a great difference.
For there were many " Lambs," and " Prophets,"
and " Christs," and " sons," but from all these
John separates Him by a wide interval. And
this he secured not by the article only, but by
the addition of " Only-Begotten " ; for He had
nothing in common with the creation.

If it seems to any unseasonable that these
things should be spoken at " the tenth hour "
(that was the time of day, for he says, " It was
about the tenth hour" — (v. 39), such an one
seems to me to be much mistaken. In the case
indeed of the many, and those who serve the
flesh, the season after feasting is not very suit-
able for any matters of pressing moment, be-
cause their hearts ■* are burdened with meats :
but here was a man who did not even partake
of common food, and wh() at evening was as
sober as we are at morning, (or rather much
more so ; for often the remains of our evening
food that are left within us, fill our souls with
imaginations, but he loaded his vessel with none
of these things ;) he with good reason spake late
in the evening of these matters. Besides, he
was tarrying in the wilderness by Jordan, where
all came to his baptism with great fear, and car-
ing little at that time for the things of this life ; as
also they continued with Christ three days, and
had nothing to eat. (Matt. xv. 32.) For this
is the part of a zealous herald and a careful hus-
bandman, not to desist before he see that the


• al. " even any."


' TO f^liptTOV.

* or, " stomachs."


planted seed has got a firm hold.' " Why then
did he not go about all the parts of Judaea
preaching Christ, rather than stand by the river
waiting for Him to come, that he might point
Him out when He came ? " Because he wished
that this should be effected by His works ; his
own object being in the mean time only to make
Him known, and to persuade some to hear of
eternal life. But to Him he leaves the greater
testimony, that of works, as also He saith, " I
receive not testimony of men. The works which
My Father hath given Me, the same bear wit-
ness of Me." (c. v. 34, 36.) Observe how
much more effectual this was ; for when he had
thrown in a little spark, at once the blaze rose
on high. For they who before had not even
given heed to his words, afterwards say, "All
things which John spake were true." (ex. 41.)

[3.] Besides, if he had gone about saying these
things, what was being done would have seemed
to be done from some human motive, and the
preaching to be full of suspicion."

"And the two disciples heard him, and fol-
lowed Jesus."

Yet John had other disciples, but they not
Only did not " follow Jesus," but were even jeal-
ously disposed towards him. " Rabbi," says
one, " He that was with thee beyond Jordan, to
whom thou barest witness, behold, the same
baptizeth, and all men come unto him." (c. iii.
26.) And again' they appear bringing a charge
against him ; " Why do we fast, but thy disciples
fast not?" (Matt. ix. 14.) But those who
were better than the rest had no such feeling,
but heard, and at once followed ; followed, not
as despising their teacher, but as being most
fully persuaded by him, and producing the
strongest proof that they acted thus from a right
judgment of his reasonings. For they did not
do so by his advice, that might have appeared
suspicious ; but when he merely foretold what
was to come to pass, that " He should baptize
with the Holy Ghost, [and with fire,] " they fol-
lowed. They did not then desert their teacher,
but rather desired to learn what Christ brought
with Him more than John. And observe zeal
combined with modesty. They did not at once
approach and question Jesus on necessary and
most important matters, nor were they desirous
to converse with Him publicly, while all were
present, at once and in an off-hand manner, but
privately ; for they knew that the words of theii
teacher proceeded not from humility, but from
truth.

Ver. 40. " One of the two who heard, and'
followed Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter';
brother."


* al. ** is retained."

* Morel, reads: (tai un-oi/'iat T/v ^cret TO Krfpvytia Kotnev,
' al. " these same."


Homily XVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


65


Wherefore then has he not made known the
name of the other also? Some say, because it
was the writer himself that followed ; others, not
so, but that he was not one of the distinguished
disciples ; it behooved not therefore to say more
than was necessary. For what would it have
advantaged us to learn his name, when the writer
does not mention the names even of the seventy-
two? St. Paul also did the same.* "We have
sent," says he, " with him the brother," (who has
often in many things been forward,) "whose
praise is in the Gospel." (2 Cor. viii. 18.) More-
over, he mentions Andrew for another reason.
What is this ? It is, that when you are informed
that Simon having in company with him heard,
" Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of
men" (Matt. iv. 19), was not perplexed at so
strange a promise, you may learn that his brother
had already laid down within him the beginnings
of the faith.

Ver. 38. "Then Jesus turned, and saw them
following, and saith unto them, What seek ye?"

Hence we are taught, that God does not pre-
vent our wills by His gifts, but that when we
begin, when we provide the being willing, then
He gives us many opportunities of salvation.
"What seek ye?" How is this? He who
knoweth the hearts of men, who dwelleth^ in
our thoughts, doth He ask ? He doth ; not that
He may be informed ; how could that be? but
that by the question He may make them more
familiar, and impart to them greater boldness,
and show them that they are worthy to hear
Him ; for it was probable that they would blush
and be afraid, as being unknown to him, and as
having heard such accounts of Him from the
testimony of their teacher. Therefore to remove
all this, their shame and their fear, he questions
them, and would not let them come all the way
to the house in silence. Yet the event would
have been the same had He not questioned
them ; they would have remained by following
Him, and walking in His steps would have
reached His dwelling. Why then did He ask ?
To effect that which I said, to calm their minds,'
yet disturbed with shame and anxiety, and to
give them confidence.

Nor was it by their following only that they
showed their earnest desire, but by their ques-
tion also : for when they had not as yet learned
or even heard anything from Him, they call
Him, " Master " ; thrusting themselves as it
were among His disciples, and declaring what
was the cause of their following, that they might
hear somewhat profitable. Observe their wisdom
also. They did not say, " Teach us of Thy doc-
trines, or some other thing that we need to
know"; but what? "Where dwellest Thou?"


* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " this also may be seen with Paul."


Because, as I before said, they wished in quiet
to say somewhat to Him, and to hear somewhat
from Him, and to learn. Therefore they did
not defer the matter, nor say, " We will come
to-morrow by all means, and hear thee speak in
public " ; but showed the great eagerness they
had to hear Him, by not being turned back
even by the hour, for the sun was already near
its setting, (" it was," saith John, " about the
tenth hour.") And therefore Christ does not
tell them the marks of His abode, nor its situa-
tion, but rather induces them to follow Him by
showing them that He had accepted them. For
this reason He did not say anything of this kind
to them, " It is an unseasonable time now for
you to enter into the house, to-morrow you shall
hear if you have any wish, return home now " ; *
but converses with them as with friends, and
those who had long been with Him.

How then saith He in another place, "But
the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head "
(Luke ix. 58), while here He saith, " Come and
see " (v. 39) where I abide ? Because the ex-
pression " hath not where to lay His head,"
signifies that He had no dwelling place of His
own, not that He did not abide in a house.
And this too is the meaning of the comparison.'
The Evangelist has mentioned that " they abode
with Him that day," but has not added where-
fore, because the reason was plain ; for from no
other motive did they follow Christ, and He
draw them to Him, but only that they might
have instruction ; and this they enjoyed so
abundantly and eagerly even in a single night,
that they both proceeded straightway to the
capture ° of others.

[4.] Let us then also learn hence to consider
all things secondary^ to the hearing the word
of God, and to deem no season unseasonable,
and, though a man may even have to go into
another person's house, and being a person un-
known to make himself known to great men,
though it be late in the day, or at any time
whatever, never to neglect this traffic. Let food
and baths and dinners and the other things of
this life have their appointed time ; but let the
teaching of heavenly philosophy have no sepa-
rate time, let every season belong to it. For
Paul saith, " In season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort " (2 Tim. iv. 2) ; and the Prophet
too saith,' " In His law will he meditate day and
night "(Ps. i. 3); and Moses commanded the
Jews to do this always. For the things of this
life, baths, I mean, and dinners, even if they are
necessary, yet being continually repeated, ren-
der the body feeble ;" but the teaching of the soul


* al. " for the present." * i.e. with the foxes and birds.
' al. " the door." ' Trapepya.

* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. '* and David also glances at this,
saying." ' efirij^ox.


66


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


//


the more it is prolonged, the stronger it renders
the soul which receives it. But now we portion
out all our time for trifles and unprofitable silly
talking, and we sit together idly during the
morning and afternoon,' midday and evening
besides, and we have appointed places for this ;
but hearing the divine doctrines twice or thrice
in the week we become sick," and thoroughly
sated. What is the reason? We are in a bad
state of soul ; its faculty of desiring and reaching
after these things we have relaxed altogether.
And therefore it is not strong enough to have an
appetite for spiritual food. And this among
others is a great proof of weakness, not to hunger
nor thirst, but to be disinclined to both. Now
if this, when it takes place in our bodies, is a
sure sign of grievous disease, and productive of
weakness, much more is it so in the soul.

" How then," says one, " shall we be able to
renew it, thus fallen and relaxed, to strength?
what doing, what saying?" By applying our-
selves to the divine words of the prophets, of
the Apostles, of the Gospels, and all the others ;
then we shall know that it is far better to feed
on these than on impure food, for so we must
term our unseasonable idle talking and assem-
blies. For which is best, tell me, to converse
on things relating to the market, or things in
the law courts, or in the camp, or on things in
heaven, and on what shall be after our depart-
ure hence? Which is best, to talk about our
neighbor and our neighbor's affairs, to busy our-
selves in what belongs to other people, or to en-
quire into the things of angels, and into matters
which concern ourselves? For a neighbor's af-
fairs are not thine at all; but heavenly things
are thine. " But," says some one, " a man may
by once speaking finish these subjects alto-
gether." Why do you not think this in matters
on which you converse uselessly and idly, why
though ye waste your lives on this have ye never
exhausted the subject? And I have not yet
named what is far more vile than this. These
are the things about which the better sort con-
verse one with the other; but the more indif-
ferent and careless carry about in their talk
players and dancers and charioteers, defiling
men's ears, corrupting their souls, and driving


their nature into mad excesses by these narratives,
and by means of this discourse introducing every
kind of wickedness into their own imagination.
For as soon as the tongue has uttered the name
of the dancer, immediately the soul has figured
to itself his looks, his hair, his delicate clothing,
and himself more effeminate than all. Another
again fans the flame in another way, by introduc-
ing some harlot into the conversation, with her
words, and attitudes, and glances, her languish-
ing looks and twisted locks, the smoothness of
her cheeks, and her painted eyelids.* Were
you not somewhat affected when I gave this de-
scription ? Yet be not ashamed, nor blush, for
the very necessity of nature requires this, and so
disposes the soul according as the tendency of
what is said may be. But if, when it is I that
speak, you, standing in the church, and at a dis-
tance from these things, were somewhat affected
at the hearing, consider how it is likely that they
are disposed, who sit in the theater itself, who
are totally free from dread, who are absent from
this venerable and awful assembly, who both see
and hear those things with much shamelessness.
" And why then," perhaps one of those who heed
not may say, " if the necessity of nature so dis-
poses the soul, do you let go that, and blame
us?" Because, to be softened* when one hears
these things, is nature's work ; but to hear them
is not a fault of nature, but of deliberate choice.
For so he who meddles with fire must needs be
injured, so wills the weakness of our nature ; yet
nature does not therefore draw us to the fire and
to the injury thence arising ; this can be only
from deliberate perversity. I beseech you, there-
fore, to remove and correct this fault, that you
may not of your own accord cast yourself down
the precipice, nor thrust yourselves into the pits
of wickedness, nor run of yourselves to the blaze,
lest we place ourselves in jeopardy of the fire pre-
pared for the devil. May it come to pass, that
we all being delivered both from this fire and
from that, may go to the very bosom of Abraham,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and Holy Ghost, be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


L ili\lJVt


' yavTtvfUV,


' viroypa^ai.


* ^oAaTTcrOat.


Homily XIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


67


HOMILY XIX.


John i. 41, 42.


" He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto
him, We have found the Messias, which is, being
interpreted, the Christ. And he brought him to
Jesus."

[i.] When God in the beginning made man,
He did not suffer him to be alone, but gave him
woman for a helpmate, and made them to dwell
together, knowing that great advantage would
result from this companionship. What though
the woman did not rightly employ this bertefit?
still if any one make himself fully acquainted
with the nature of the matter, he will see, that
to the wise great advantage arises from this
dwelling together ; not in the cause of wife or
husband only, but if brothers do this, they also
shall enjoy the benefit. Wherefore the Prophet
hath said, " What is good, what is pleasant, but
that brethren should dwell together?" (Ps.
cxxxiii. I, LXX.) And Paul exhorted not to
neglect the assembling of ourselves together.
(Heb. X. 25.) In this it is that we differ from
beasts, for this we have built cities, and markets,
and houses, that we may be united one with
another, not in the place of our dwelling only,
but by the bond of love. For since our nature
came imperfect ' from Him who made it, and
is not self-sufficient,^ God, for our advantage,
ordained that the want hence existing should be
corrected by the assistance arising from mutual
intercourse ; so that what was lacking in one
should be supplied by another,'' and the defective
nature thus be rendered self-sufficient ; as, for
instance, that though made mortal,^ it should by
succession for a long time maintain immortality.
I might have gone into this argument at greater
length, to show what advantages arise to those
who come together from genuine and pure'
intercourse with each other : but there is another
thing which presses now, that on account of
which we have made these remarks.

Andrew, after having tarried with Jesus and
learned what He did, kept not the treasure to
himself, but hastens and runs quickly to his
brother, to impart to him of the good things
which he had received.^ But wherefore has
not John said on what matters Christ con-
versed with them? Whence is it clear that it
was for this that they "abode with Him"?'


* ivitT)!;. ' avrdpKJJ^.

_' Ben. Morel, and MS. in Bodl. read the passage thus: "For
this cause also marriage is arranged, in order that what is want-
ing," &c.

_* jcadairep ovy KoX QyyjTijv ytvo/ifprly* Ben. and MS. in Bodl.
Kad, wf aiiTrjv f\eiv Kai 0, y,

^ ttMKfiiVQui, ^ al. " shared."


It was proved by us the other day ; but we
may learn it from what has been read to-
day as well. Observe what Andrew says to his
brother ; " We~ have found the Messias, which
is, being interpreted, the Christ." You see
how, as far as he had learned in a short time,
he showed* the wisdom of the teacher who pei-
suaded them, and their own zeal, who cared
for these things long ago,' and from the begin-
ning. For this word, " we have found," is the
expression of a soul which travails '" for His
presence, and looks for His coming from above,
and is made overjoyed when the looked-for
thing has happened," and hastens to impart to
others the good tidings. This is the part of
brotherly affection, of natural friendship, of a
sincere disposition, to be eager to stretch out
the hand to each other in spiritual things. Hear
him besides speak with the addition of the arti-
cle ; for he does not say " Messias," but " the
Messias " ; thus they were expecting some one
Christ,'^ having nothing in common with the
others. And behold, I beg of you, the mind of
Peter obedient and tractable from the very be-
ginning ; he ran to Him without any delay ;
" He brought him," saith St. John, " to Jesus."
Yet let no one blame his easy temper if he
received the word without much questioning,
because it is probable that his brother had told
him these things more exactly and at length ;
but the Evangelists from their care for concise-
ness constantly cut many things short. Besides,
it is not said absolutely that " he believed," but
that " he brought him to Jesus," to give him up
for the future to Him, so that from Him he
might learn all ; for the other disciple also was
with him, and contributed to this. And if John
the Baptist, when he had said that He was "the
Lamb," and that He " baptized with the Spirit,"
gave them over to learn the clearer doctrine
concerning this thing from Him, much more
would Andrew have done this, not deeming him-
self sufficient to declare the whole, but drawing
him to the very fount of light with so much zeaJ
and joy, that the other'' neither deferred nor
delayed at all."

Ver. 42. "And when Jesus beheld him," saith

' Morel, and MS. in Bodl. *' conversed with them, when they
straightway followed and abode with Him."

• Ben. Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " he showed hence, for he be<b
establishes the wisdom," &c.

** avia6fv. U fffCifOk.

^' al. "has appeared.** *♦ to Tv^^r,

^' Anointed od».


68


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX.


the Evangelist, " He said, Thou art Simon, the
son of Jonas ; thou shalt be called Cephas, which
is, by interpretation, a stone."

[2.] He begins from this time forth to reveal
the things belonging to His Divinity, and to open
It out little by little by predictions. So He did in
the case of Nathaniel and the Samaritan woman.
For prophecies bring men over not less than
miracles ; and are free from the appearance of
boasting. Miracles may possibly be slandered
among foolish men, (" He casteth out devils,"
said they, "by Beelzebub" — Matt. xii. 24), but
nothing of the kind has ever been said of proph-
ecy. Now in the case of Nathaniel and Simon
He used this method of teaching, but with An-
drew and Philip He did not so. Why was this?
Because those ^ (two) had the testimony of John,
no small preparation, and Philip received a credi-
ble evidence of faith, when he saw those who
had been present.

"Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas." By the
present, the future is guaranteed ; for it is clear
that He who named Peter's father foreknew the
future also. And the prediction is attended with
praise ; but the object was not to flatter, but to
foretell something future. Hear ^ at least in the
case of the Samaritan woman, how He utters a
prediction with severe reproofs ; ' " Thou hast
had," he saith, " five husbands, and he whom
thou now hast is not thy husband." (c. iv. 18.)
So also His Father makes great account of
prophecy, when He sets Himself against the
honor paid to idols : " Let them declare to you,"
saith He, " what shall come upon you " (Isa.
xlvii. 13) ; and again, " I have declared, and
have saved, and there was no foreign God
amongst you" (Isa. xliii. 12, LXX.) ; and He
brings this forward through all prophecy. Be-
cause prophecy is especially the work of God,
which devils cannot even imitate, though they
strive exceedingly. For in the case of miracles
there may be delusion ; but exactly to foretell
the future belongs to that pure Nature alone.
Or if devils ever have done so, it was by deceiv-
ing the simpler sort ; whence their oracles are
always easily detected.

But Peter makes no reply to these words ; as
yet he knew nothing clearly, but still was learn-
ing. And observe, that not even the prediction
is fully set forth ; for Jesus did not say, " I will
change thy name to Peter, and upon this rock I
will build My Church," but, "Thou shalt be
called Cephas." The former speech would have
expressed too great authority * and power ; for
Christ does not immediately nor at first declare
all His power, but speaks for a while in a hum-


* i.e. those mentioned above, v. 40, who were present when St.
John Baptist gave his testimony, one of whom was Andrew.

' al. consider."

* al. ** reproving with earnestness."

* AvtfcFTlOf.


bier tone ; and so, when He had given the proof
of His Divinity, He puts it more authoritatively,
saying," " Blessed art thou, Simon, because My
Father hath revealed it to thee " ; and again,
" Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
My Church." (Matt. xvi. 17, 18.) Him there-
fore He so named, and James and his brother
He called "sons of thunder." (Mark iii. 17.)
Why then doth He this ? To show that it was
He who gave the old covenant, that it was He
who altered names, who called Abram " Abra-
ham," and Sarai " Sarah," and Jacob " Israel."
To many he assigned names even from their
birth, as to Isaac, and Samson, and to those in
Isaiah and Hosea (Isa. viii. 3 ; Hos. i. 4, 6, 9) ;
but to others He gave them after they had been
named by their parents, as to those we have
mentioned, and to Joshua the son of Nun. It
was also a custom of the Ancients to give names
from things, which in fact Leah also has done ; °
and this takes place not without cause, but in
order that men may have the appellation to re-
mind them of the goodness of God, that a per-
petual memory of the prophecy conveyed by the
names may sound in the ears of those who re-
ceive it. Thus too He named John early,'
because they whose virtue was to shine forth
from their early youth, from that time received
their names ; while to those who were to become
great ' at a later period, the title also was given
later.

[3.] But then they received each a different
name, we now have all one name, that which is
greater than any, being called ° " Christians,"
and "sons of God," and (His) " friends," and
(His) " Body." For the very term itself is able
more than all those others to rouse us, and make
us more zealous '" for the practice of virtue. Let
us not then act unworthily of the honor belong-
ing to the title, considering " the excess of our
dignity, we who are called Christ's ; for so Paul
hath named us. LetJis bear in mind and respect
the grandeur of the appellation, (i Cor. iii. 23.)
For if one who is said to be descended from
some famous general, or one otherwise distin-
guished, is proud to be called this or that man's
son, and deems the name a great honor, and
strives in evf ry way so as not to affix, by remiss-
ness of his own, reproach to him after whom he
is called ; shall not we who are called after the
name, not of a general, nor any of the princes
upon earth, nor Angel, nor Archangel, nor Sera-
phim, but of the King of these Himself, shall


* al. " And I say unto thee, * Thou art Simon, thou shalt be
called Cephas, which is by interpretation a stone.' "

* oireft Sr/iTov Kal 'HAia? iTeiroi7j(f«, and there are no various read-
ings. Savile has in the margin ojr«p ovt- icai 'HAia. We_ may ven-
ture to read " i) Xtia." as he praises her for this, Hom. Ivi. on Gen-
esis. '* Observe how she gave names to those she bore, not lightly
nor at random."

7 avtuQiv, " al. *' more ready."

6 iniZihovai. " al. " consider at least.'*

» al. " the being called,"


Homily XX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


69


not we freely give even our very life, so as not
to insult Him who has honored us? Know ye
not what honor the royal bands of shield-bearers
and spearmen that are about the king enjoy?
So let us who have been deemed worthy to be
near Him, and much closer, and as much nearer
than those just named, as the body is closer to
the head than they, let us, I say, use every means
to be imitators of Christ.

What then saith Christ? "The foxes have
holes, and birds of the air have nests ; but the
Son of man hath not where to lay His head."
(Luke ix. 58.) Now if I demand this of you,
it will seem perhaps to most of you grievous and
burdensome ; because therefore of your infirmity
I speak not of such perfection, but desire you
not to be nailed to riches ; and as I, because of
the infirmity of the many, retire somewhat from
(demanding) the excess of virtue, I desire that
you do so and much more on the side of vice.
I blame not those who have houses, and lands,
and wealth, and servants, but wish them to pos-
sess ' these things in a safe and becoming way.
And what is " a becoming way " ? As masters,
not as slaves ; so that they rule them, be not
ruled by them ; that they use, not abuse them.
This is why they are called, " things to be used," ^
that we may employ them on necessary services,
not hoard them up ; this is a domestic's office,
that a master's ; it is for the slave to keep them,
but for the lord and one who has great authority
to expend. Thou didst not receive thy wealth to
bury, but to distribute. Had God desired riches
to be hoarded. He would not have given them to
men, but would have let them remain as they
were in the earth ; but because He wishes them
to be spent, therefore He has permitted us to


have them, that we may impart them to each
other. And if we keep them to ourselves, we
are no longer masters of them. But if you wish
to make them greater and therefore keep them
shut up, even in this case the best plan of all is
to scatter and distribute them in all directions ; 1
because there can be no revenue without an out- \
lay, no wealth without expenditure. One may
see that it is so even in worldly matters. So it
is with the merchant, so with the husbandman,
who put forth the one his wealth, the other his
seed ; the one sails the sea to disperse his wares,
the other labors all the year putting in and tend-
ing his seed. But here there is no need of any
one of these things, neither to equip a vessel,
nor to yoke oxen, nor to plough land, nor to be
anxious about uncertain weather, nor to dread a
fall of hail ; here are neither waves nor rocks ;
this voyage and this sowing needs one thing only,
that we cast forth our possessions ; all the rest
will that Husbandman do, of whom Christ saith,
"My Father is the Husbandman." (c. xv. i.)
Is it not then absurd to be sluggish and slothful
where we may gain all without labor, and where
there are many toils and many'* troubles and
cares, and after all, an uncertain hope, there to
display all eagerness? Let us not, I beseech
you, let us not be to such a degree senseless
about our own salvation, but let us leave the
more troublesome task, and run to that which is
most easy and more profitable, that we may
obtain also the good things that are to come ;
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy and quickening Spirit be glory,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.


b


HOMILY XX.

John i. 43, 44.


"The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee,
and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow Me.
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew
and Peter."

[i.] "To every careful thinker there is a
gain " * (Prov. xiv. 23, LXX.), saith the proverb ;
and Christ implied more than this, when He said,
"He that seeketh findeth." (Matt. vii. 8.)
Wherefore it does not occur to me any more to
Wonder how Philip followed Christ. Andrew


* d(^ii]fii. » al. " to use."

* jrai/Ti Tw fiepLfxvCivTi «v€<TTt Tt iTtpiccrov,

Morel. Ben. and most MSS. read odec xai inrttri fiot. Savile 60*
oufif in. fi. which seems the better reading,


In the next sentence


was persuaded when he had heard from John,
and Peter the same from Andrew, but Philip
not having learned anything from any but Christ
who said to him only this, " Follow Me,"
straightway obeyed, and went not back, but
even became a preacher to others. For he ran
to Nathanael and said to him, " We have found
Him of whom Moses in the Law and the Proph-
ets did write." Seest thou what a thoughtful'
mind he had, how assiduously he meditated on
the writings of Moses, and expected the Advent ?
for the expression, "we have found," belongs


• al. " more.'


' ^c/*cptin}^CKlIF.


70


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX.


always to those who are in some way seeking.
" The day following Jesus went forth into Galilee."
Before any had joined Him, He called no one ;
and He acted thus not without cause, but accord-
ing to his own wisdom and intelligence. For
if, when no one came to Him spontaneously,
He had Himself drawn them, they might per-
haps have started away ; but now, having chosen
this of themselves, they afterwards remained firm.
He calls Philip, one who was better acquainted
with Him ; for he, as having been bom and
bred in Galilee, knew Him more than others.
Having then taken the disciples. He next goes
to the capture of the others, and draws to Him
Philip and Nathanael. Now in the case of
Nathanael this was not so wonderful, because
the fame of Jesus had gone forth into all Syria.
(Matt. iv. 24.) But the wonderful thing was
respecting Peter and James and Philip, that they
believed, not only before the miracles, but that
they did so being of Galilee, out of which
" ariseth no prophet," nor " can any good thing
come " ; for the Galilaeans were somehow of a
more boorish and dull disposition than others ;
but even in this Christ displayed forth His power,
by selecting from a land which bore no fruit His
choicest disciples. It is then probable that
Philip having seen Peter and Andrew, and having
heard what John had said, followed ; and it is
probable also that the voice of Christ wrought
in him somewhat ; for He knew those who would
be serviceable. But all these points the Evange-
list cuts short. That Christ should come, he
knew ; that this was Christ, he knew not, and
this I say that he heard either from Peter or
John. But John mentions his village also, that
you may learn that " God hath chosen the weak
things of the world." (i Cor. i. 27.)

Ver. 45. " Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith
unto him, We have found Him of whom Moses
irt the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth, the son of Joseph."

He says this, to make his preaching credible,
which it must be if it rests on Moses and the
Prophets besides, and by this to abash his hearer.
For since Nathanael was an exact ^ man, and one
who viewed all things with truth, as Christ also
testified and the event showed, Philip with reason
refers him to Moses and the Prophets, that so
he might receive Him who was preached. And
be not troubled though he called Him "the son
of Joseph " ; for still he was supposed to be his
son. " And whence, O Philip, is it plain that
this is He ? What proof dost thou mention to
us ? for it is not enough merely to assert this.
What sign hast thou seen, what miracle ? Not
without danger is it to believe without cause in
such matters. What proof then hast thou?"


" The same as Andrew," he replies ; for he
though unable to produce the wealth which he
had found, or to describe his treasure in words,
when he had discovered it, led his brother to it.
So too did Philip. How this is the Christ, and
how the prophets proclaimed Him beforehand,
he said not ; but he draws him to Jesus, as
knowing that he would not afterwards fall off, if
he should once taste His words and teaching.

Ver. 46, 47. "And Nathanael said unto him.
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth ?
Philip saith unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw
Nathanael coming to Him, and saith of him.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile."

He praises and approves the man, because he
had said, "Can any good thing come out of
Nazareth?" and yet he ought to have been
blamed. Surely not ; for the words are not those
of an unbeliever, nor deserving blame, but praise.
" How so, and in what way ? " Because Nathanael
had considered the writings of the Prophets
more than Philip. For he had heard from the
Scriptures, that Christ rtiust come from Bethle-
hem, and from the village in which David was.
This belief at least prevailed among the Jews,
and the Prophet had proclaimed it of old, say-
ing, "And thou, Bethlehem, art by no means
the least among the princes of Judah, for out of
thee shall come a Governor, that shall feed*
My people Israel." (Matt. ii. 6 ; Mic. v. 2.)
.\nd so when he heard that He was " from
Nazareth," he was confounded, and doubted,
not finding the announcement of Philip to agree
with the prediction of the Prophet.

But observe his wisdom and candor even in
his doubting. He did not at once say, " Philip,
thou deceivest me, and speakest falsely, I believe
thee not, I will not come ; I have learned from
the prophets that Christ must come from Bethle-
hem, thou sayest ' from Nazareth ' ; therefore
this is not that Christ." He said nothing like
this ; but what does he ? He goes to Him him-
self; showing, by not admitting that Christ was
"of Nazareth," his accuracy respecting. the Scrip-
tures, and a character not easily deceived ; and
by not rejecting him who brought the tidings,
the great desire which he felt for the coming of
Christ. For he thought within himself that
Philip was probably mistaken about the place.

[2.] And observe, I pray you, his manner of
decUning, how gentle he has made it, and in the
form of a question. For he said not, " Galilee
produces no good " ; but how said he ? " Can
any good thing come out of Nazareth ?" Philip
also was very prudent ; for he is not as one per»
plexed, angry, and annoyed, but perseveres,
wishing to bring over the * man, and manifesting


» or." rule."


• »l.*"ihi»."


Homily XX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


7f


to us from the first of his preaching ' the firm-
ness* which becomes an Apostle. Wherefore
also Christ saith, " Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no guile." So that there is such a
person as a false Israelite ; but this is not such
an one ; for his judgment, Christ saith, is impar-
tial, he speaks nothing from favor, or from ill-
feeling. Yet the Jews, when they were asked
where Christ should be born, replied, " In Beth-
lehem" (Matt. ii. 5), and produced the evidence,
saying, " And thou, Bethlehem, art by no means
the least among the princes of Judah." (Mic.
V. 2.) Before they had seen Him they bore this
witness, but when they saw Him in their malice
they concealed the testimony, saying, " But as
for this fellow, we know not whence He is."
(c. ix. 29.) Nathanael did not so, but con-
tinued to retain the opinion which he had from
the beginning, that He was not "of Nazareth."

How then do the prophets call Him a Naza-
rene ? From His being brought up and abiding
there. And He omits to say, "I am not 'of
Nazareth,' as Philip hath told thee, but of Beth-
lehem," that He may not at once make the
account seem questionable ; and besides this,
because, even if He had gained belief, He would
not have given sufficient proof that He was the
Christ. For what hindered Him without being
Christ, from being of Bethlehem, like the others
who were born there ? This then He omits ;
but He does that which has most power to bring
him over, for He shows that He was present
when they were conversing. For when Nathanael
had said,

Ver. 48. " Whence knowest Thou me ? " He
replies, " Before that Philip called thee, when
thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee."

Observe a man firm and steady.' When
Christ had said, " Behold an Israelite indeed,"
he was not made vain by this approbation, he
ran not after this open praise, but continues
seeking and searching more exactly, and desires
to learn something certain. He still enquired
as of a man,'' but Jesus answered as God. For
He said, "I have known thee from the first,""
(him and the candor ° of his character,'' this He
knew not as a man, from having closely followed
him, but as God from the first,) "and but now
I saw thee by the fig-tree " ; when there was no
one present there but only Philip and Nathanael
who said all these things in private. It is men-
tioned, that having seen him afar off. He said,
" Behold an Israelite indeed " ; to show,' that
before Philip came near, Christ spoke these

* irpooi/At'wf. * tvroviav. ' ^tBrjKora,

* uv avOpitinov f^rjra^fv. So Morel, and MSS. in Bodleian. Sa-
*Ue and the Bencd. read ws a»'0pwirof, " he enquired as a man.'*

' One MS. reads, oy yap tlntv, aviitBiv <rt oT£a, Kal toi* rponov,

■«i TSlf tIT.

* «*•« ixa^. Saviic conjectures Iva }ia9jli, but without authority.


words, that the testimony might not be suspected.
For this reason also He named the time, the
place, and the tree ; because if He had only
said, " Before Philip came to thee, I saw thee,"
He might have been suspected of having sent
him, and of saying nothing wonderful ; but now,
by mentioning both the place where he was when
addressed by Philip, and the name of the tree,
and the time of the conversation. He showed
that His foreknowledge " was unquestionable.

And He did not merely show to him His fore-
knowledge, but instructed him also in another
way. For He brought him to a recollection of
what they then had said ; as, " Can there any
good thing come out of Nazareth? " And it was
most especially on this account that Nathanael
received Him, because when he had uttered
these words. He did not condemn, but praised
and approved him. Therefore he was assured
that this was indeed the Christ, both from His
foreknowledge, and from His having exactly
searched out his sentiments, which was the act
of One who would show that He knew what
was in his mind ; and besides, from His not
having blamed, but rather praised him when he
had seemed to speak against Himself. He said
then, that Philip had "called" him; but what
Philip had said to him or he to Philip, He
omitted, leaving it to his own conscience, and
not desiring farther to rebuke him.

[3.] Was it then only " before Philip called
him " that He " saw " him ? did He not see him
before this with His sleepless eye? He saw
him, and none could gainsay it ; but this is what
it was needful to say at the time. And what
did Nathanael ? \Vhen he had received an
unquestionable proof of His foreknowledge, he
hastened to confess Him, showing by his previous
delay his caution,'" and his fairness by his assent
afterwards. For, said the Evangelist,

Ver. 49. " He answered and saith unto Him,
Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the
King of Israel."

Seest thou how his soul is filled at once with
exceeding joy, and embraces Jesus with words?
"Thou art," saith he, "that expected, that
sought-for One." Seest thou how he is amazed,
how he marvels ? how he leaps and dances with
delight ?

So ought we also to rejoice, who have been
thought worthy to know the Son of God ; to re-
joice, not in thought alone, but to show it also
by our actions. And what must they do who
rejoice ? Obey Him who has been made known
to them ; and they who obey, must do whatever
He willeth. For if we are going to do what
angers Him, how shall we show that we rejoice?
See ye not in our houses when a man entertains


**> oKfiiptiav,


7i


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI.


one whom he loves, how gladly he exerts him-
self, running about in every direction, and
though it be needful to spend all that he has,
sparing nothing so that he please his visitor?
But if one who invites should not attend to his
guest,* and not do such things as would procure
him ease, though he should say ten thousand
times that he rejoices at his coming, he could
never be believed by him. And justly ; for this
should be shown by actions. Let us then, since
Christ hath come to us, show that we rejoice,
and do nothing that may anger him ; let us gar-
nish the abode to which He has come, for this
they do who rejoice ; let us set before Him the
meal ' which He desires to eat, for this they do
who hold festival. And what is this meal ? He
saith Himself; " My meat is, that I may do the
will of Him that sent me." (c. iv. 34.) When
He is hungry, let us feed Him ; when He is
thirsty, let us give Him drink : though thou give
Him but a cup of cold water, He receives it ;
for He loves thee, and to one who loves, the
offerings of the beloved, though they be small,
appear great. Only be not thou slothful ; though
thou cast in but two farthings. He refuses them
not, but receives them as great riches. For since
He is without wants, and receives these offerings,
not because He needs them, it is reasonable


that all distinction should be not in the quantity
of the gifts, but the intention' of the giver.
Only show that thou lovest Him who is come,
that for His sake thou art giving all diligence,
that thou rejoicest at His coming. See how He
is disposed toward thee. He came for thee.
He laid down His Ufe for thee, and after all this
He doth not refuse even to entreat thee. "We
are ambassadors," saith Paul, " for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us." (2 Cor. v.
20.) " And who is so mad," saith some one,
"as not to love his own Master?" I say so too,
and I know that not one of us would deny this
in words or intention ; but one who is beloved
desires love to be shown, not by words only, but
by deeds also. For to say that we love, and not
to act like lovers, is ridiculous, not only before
God, but even in the sight of men. Since then
to confess Him in word only, while in deeds we
oppose Him, is not only unprofitable, but also
hurtful to us ; let us, I entreat you, also make
confession by our works ; that we also may ob-
tain a confession from Him in that day, when
before His Father He shall confess those who
are worthy in Christ Jesus our Lord, by whom
and with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world with-
out end. Amen.


HOMILY XXI.

John i. 49, 50.


" Nathanael answered and saith unto Him, Rabbi, Thou
art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel.
Jesus answered, and said unto him. Because I said
unto thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, behevest
thou? Thou shall see greater things than these."

[i.] Beloved, we need much care, much
watchfulness, to be able to look into the depth
of the Divine Scriptures. For it is not possible
to discover their meaning in a careless way, or
while we are asleep, but there needs close
search, and there needs earnest prayer, that
we may be enabled to see some little way into
the secrets of the divine oracles. To-day, for
instance, here is no trifling question proposed
to us, but one which requires much zeal and
enquiry. For when Nathanael said, " Thou art
the Son of God," Christ replies, "Because I
said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree,
believest thou? Thou shalt see greater things
than these."


I Ben. conj. xoAouFTt for koAwv Tif. " But if he mind not when
)k calls." * ifmrroy^


Now what is the question arising from this
passage? It is this.* Peter, when after so
many miracles and such high doctrine he con-
fessed that, "Thou art the Son of God" (Matt,
xvi. 16), is called "blessed," as having received
the revelation from the Father ; while Nathanael,
though he said the very same thing before see
ing or hearing either miracles or doctrine, had
no such word addressed to him, but as though
he had not said so much as he ought to have
said, is brought* to things greater still. What
can be the reason of this ? It is, that Peter and
Nathanael both spoke the same words, but noti
both with the same intention. Peter confessed!
Him to be "The Son of God ' but as being;
Very God ; Nathanael, as being mere man.
And whence does this appear? Fron what hi
said after these words ; for after, " Thou ait
the Son of God," he adds, " Thou art the King


* irpoatpeo'ct.

* Morel, and MS. in Bodleian read the passage thus: woXAoi t«I'
avaytvutaKovTitiv to ^tjtoj' toiito SiaTiopovvre^ (f>a<ri ■ Ti fi^irore Ilrf'
Tpo« (t.T.A. * al. " led forward."


HOMILV XXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


73


of Israel." But the Son of God is not " King
of Israel " only, but of all the world.

And what I say is, clear, not from this only,
but also from what follows. For Christ added
nothing more to Peter, but as though his faith
were perfect, said, that upon this confession of
his He would build the Church ; but in the
other case He did nothing like this, but the
contrary. For as though some large, and that
the better, part were wanting to his confession,
He added what follows. For what saith He ?

Ver. 51. "Verily, verily I say unto you. Here-
after ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels
of God ascending and descending upon the Son
of Man."

Seest thou how He leads him up by little and
little from the earth, and causes him no longer
to imagine Him a man merely? for One to
whom Angels minister, and on whom Angels
ascend and descend, how could He be man?
For this reason He said, " Thou shalt see greater
things than these." And in proof of this. He
introduces the ministry of Angels. And what
He means is something of this kind : " Doth
this, O Nathanael, seem to thee a great matter,
and hast thou for this confessed me to be King
of Israel ? What then wilt thou say, when thou
seest the Angels ascending and descending upon
Me ? " Persuading him by these words to own
Him Lord also of the Angels. For on Him as
on the King's own Son, the royal ministers
ascended and descended, once at the season
of the Crucifixion, again at the time of the
Resurrection and the Ascension, and before
this also, when they " came and ministered
unto Him" (Matt. iv. 11), when they pro-
claimed the glad tidings of His birth, and cried,
" Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace " (Luke ii. 14), when they came to Mary,
when they came to Joseph.

And He does now what He has done in many
instances ; He utters two predictions, gives pres-
ent proof of the one, and confirms that which
has to be accomplished by that which is so
already. For of His sayings some had been
proved, such as, " Before Philip called thee,
under the fig-tree I saw thee " ; others had yet
to come to pass, and had partly done so, namely,
the descending and ascending of the Angels, at
the Crucifixion, the Resurrection, and the As-
cension ; and this He renders credible by His
words even before the event. For one who had
known His power by what had gone before, and
heard from Him of things to come, would more
readily receive this prediction too.

What then does Nathanael ? To this he makes
no reply. And therefore at this point Christ
stopped His discourse with him, allowing him to
consider in private what had been said ; and not
choosing to pour forth all at once, having cast


seed into fertile ground, He then leaves it to
shoot at leisure. And this He has shown in an-
other place, where He saith, " The kingdom of
heaven is like to a man that soweth good seed,
but while he slept, his enemy cometh, and sow-
eth tares among the wheat"'

Chap. ii. ver. i, 2. "On the third day there
was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. And Jesus
was called to the marriage. And the mother of
Jesus was there, and His brethren."^

I said before that He was best known in Gali-
lee ; therefore they invite Him to the marriage,
and He comes ; for He looked not to His own
honor, but to our benefit. He who disdained
not to " take upon Him the form of a servant "
(Phil. ii. 7), would much less disdain to be pres-
ent at the marriage of servants ; He who sat
down "with publicans and sinners" (Matt. ix.
13), would much less refuse to sit down with
those present at the marriage. Assuredly they
who invited Him had not formed a proper judg-
ment of Him, nor did they invite Him as some
great one, but merely as an ordinary acquain-
tance ; and this the Evangelist has hinted at,
when he says, " The mother of Jesus was there,
and His brethren." Just as they invited her dnd^
His brethren, they invited Jesus.

Ver. 3. " And when they wanted wine, His
mother saith unto Him, They have no wine."

Here it is worth while to enquire whence it
came into His mother's mind to imagine any-
thing great of her Son ; for He had as yet done
no miracle, since the Evangelist saith, " This be-
ginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Gali-
lee." (c. ii. It.)

[2.] Now if any say that this is not a suffi-
cient proof that it was the " beginning of His
miracles," because there is added simply " in
Cana of Galilee," as allowing it to have been the
first done there, but not altogether and abso-
lutely the first, for He probably might have done
others elsewhere, we will make answer to him of
that which we have said before. And of what
kind? The words of John (the Baptist) ; "And
I knew Him not ; but that He should be made
manifest to Israel, therefore am I come, baptiz-
ing with water." Now if He had wrought mira-
cles in early age, the Israelites would not have
needed another to declare Him. For He who
came among men, and by His miracles was so
made known, not to those only in Judaea, but
also to those in Syria and beyond, and who did
this in three years only, or rather who did not
need even these three years to manifest Himself
(Matt. iv. 24), for immediately and from the
first His fame went abroad everywhere ; He, I
say, who in a short time so shone forth by the
multitude of His miracles, that His name was

* Matt. xiii. 24. 25, slightlv varying from G. T.

* The reading is different in G. T,


74


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI.


well known to all, was much less likely, if while
a child He had from an early age wrought mira-
cles, to escape notice so long. For what was
done would have seemed stranger as done by a
boy, and there would have been time for twice
or thrice as many, and much more. But in fact
He did nothing while He was a child, save only
that one thing to which Luke has testified (Luke
ii. 46), that at the age of twelve years He sat
hearing the doctors, and was thought admirable
for His questioning. Besides, it was in accord-
ance with likelihood and reason that He did not
begin His signs at once from an early age ; for
they would have deemed the thing a delusion.
For if when He was of full age many suspected
this, much more, if while quite young He had
wrought miracles, would they have hurried Him
sooner and before the proper time to the Cross,
in the venom of their malice ; and the very
facts of the Dispensation would have been
discredited.

" How then," asks some one, " came it into
the mind of His mother to imagine anything
great of Him?" He was now beginning to
reveal Himself, and was plainly discovered by
the witness of John, and by what He had said
to His disciples. And before all this, the Con-
ception itself and all its attending circumstances '
had inspired her with a very great opinion of
the Child ; " for," said Luke, " she heard all the
sayings concerning the Child, and kept them in
her heart."* "Why then," says one, "did not
she speak this before? "' Because, as I said, it
was now at last that He was beginning to mani-
fest Himself. Before this time He lived as one of
the many, and therefore His mother had not con-
fidence to say any such thing to Him ; but when
she heard that John had come on His account,
and that he had borne such witness to Him as
he did, and that He had disciples, after that she
took confidence, and called Him, and said, when
they wanted, wine, " They have no wine." For
she desired both to do them a favor, and through
her Son to render herself more conspicuous ;
perhaps too she had some human feelings, like
His brethren, when they said, " Show thyself to
the world" (c. xvii. 4), desiring to gain credit
from His miracles. Therefore He answered
somewhat vehemently,* saying,

Ver. 4. " Woman, what have I to do with
thee? Mine hour is not yet come."

To prove that He greatly respected His mother,
hear Luke relate how He was " subject to " His
parents (Luke ii. 51), and our own Evangelist
declare how He had forethought for her at the


■ a\. " and all that took place after His birth."

' This is the common reading, but the passage {Luke ii. 51) is
not so found in G. T.; Morel, and MS. in Bodleian read: toOto xal
O Aouieos rfttlv itiKwat Xiyuf • ij ii Mapca^ avftrriptt ra ^ruiara
■acra (rv^0aAAou(ra cl* Tn K,

■" » |.e- as she spoke at the marriage. • v^pirtftv.


very season of the Crucifixion. For where par-
ents cause' no impediment or hindrance in things
belonging to God, it is our bounden duty to give
way to them, and there is great danger in not
doing so ; but when they require anything un-
seasonably, and cause hindrance in any spiritual
matter, it is unsafe to obey. And therefore He
answered thus in this place, and again elsewhere,
" Who is My mother, and who are My breth-
ren?" (Matt. xii. 48), because they did not yet
think rightly of Him ; and she, because she had
borne Him, claimed, according to the custom of
other mothers, to direct Him in all things, when
she ought to have reverenced and worshiped
Him. This then was the reason why He an-
swered as He did on that occasion. For con-
sider what a thing it was, that when all the peo-
ple high and low were standing round Him,
when the multitude was intent on hearing' Him,
and His doctrine had begun to be set forth, she
should come into the midst and take Him away
from the work of exhortation, and converse with
Him apart, and not even endure to come within,
but draw Him outside merely to herself. This
is why He said, " Who is My mother and My
brethren?" Not to insult her who had borne
Him, (away with the thought !) but to procure
her the greatest benefit, and not to let her think
meanly of Him. For if He cared for others, and
used every means to implant in them a becom-
ing opinion of Himself, much more would He
do so in the case of His mother. And since it
was probable that if these words had been ad-
dressed to her by her Son, she would not readily
have chosen even then to be convinced, but
would in all cases have claimed the superiority
as being His mother, therefore He replied as He
did to them who spake to Him ; otherwise He
could not have led up her thoughts from His
present lowliness to His future exaltation, had
she expected that she should always be honored
by Him as by a son, and not that He should
come as her Master.

[3.] It was then from this motive that He said
in this place, " Woman, what have I to do with
thee?" and also for another reason not less
pressing. What was that? It was, that His
miracles might not be suspected. The request
ought to have come from those who needed, not
from His mother. And why so? Because what
is done at the request of one's friends, great
though it be, often causes offense to the specta-
tors ; but when they make the request who have
the need, the miracle is free from suspicion,
the praise unmixed, the benefit great. So if
some excellent physician should enter a house
where there were many sick, and be spoken to
by none of the patients or their relations, but be


' lit. " hanging on the bearing."


Homily XXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


75


directed only by his own mother, he would be
suspected' and disliked by the sufferers, nor
would any of the patients or their attendants
deem him able to exhibit anything great or re-
markable. And so this was a reason why He
rebuked her on that occasion, saying, " Woman,
what have I to do with thee?" instructing her
for the future not to do the like ; because,
though He was careful to honor His mother, yet
He cared much more for the salvation of her
soul, and for the doing good to the many, for
which He took upon Him the flesh.

These then were the words, not of one speak-
ing rudely to his mother, but belonging to a wise
dispensation, which brought her into a right
frame of mind, and provided that the miracles
should be attended with that honor which was
meet. And setting other things aside, thi^s very
appearance which these words have of having
been spoken chidingly, is amply enough to show
that He held her in high honor, for by His dis-
pleasure He showed that He reverenced her
greatly ; in what manner, we will say in the next
discourse. Think of this then, and when you
hear a certain woman saying, " Blessed is the
womb that bare Thee, and the paps which Thou
hast sucked," and Him answering, " rather
blessed are they that do the will of my Father "-
(Luke xi. 27), suppose that those other words
also were said with the same intention. For the
answer was not that of one rejecting his mother,
but of One who would show that her having
borne Him would have nothing availed her, had
she not been very good and faithful. Now if,
setting aside the excellence of her soul, it prof-
ited Mary nothing that the Christ was born of
her, much less will it be able to avail us to have
a father or a brother, or a child of virtuous and
noble disposition, if we ourselves be far removed
from his virtue. "A brother," saith David,
"doth not redeem, shall man redeem?" (Ps.
xlix. 7, LXX.) We must place our hopes of
salvation in nothing else, but only in our own
righteous deeds (done) after' the grace of God.
P'or if this by itself could have availed,* it would
have availed the Jews, (for Christ was their kins-
man according to the flesh,) it would have
availed the town in which He was born, it would
have availed His bretliren. But as long as His
brethren cared not for themselves, the honor of
their kmdred availed them nothing, but they
were condemned with the rest of the world, and
then only were approved, when they shone by
their own virtue ; and the city fell, and was
burnt, havmg gained nothing from this ; and His
kinsmen according to the flesh were slaughtered
and perished very miserably, having gained


* [and tiresome] Morel.

* aKouofTtc TOf Aoyoi' Toy 0eoi), G. T.
^ or " next lo." (ufra with ace.

* [the Virgin] Morel, and MS.


nothing towards being saved from their relation-
ship to Him, because they had not the defense
of virtue. The Apostles, on the contrary, ap-
peared greater than any, because they followed
the true and excellent way of gaining relation-
ship with Him, that by obedience. And from
this we learn that we have always need of faith,
and a life shining and bright, since this alone
will have power to save us. For though His
relations were for a long time everywhere held
in honor, being called the Lord's kinsmen,' yet
now we do not even know their names, while
the lives and names of the Apostles are every-
where celebrated.

Let us then not be proud of nobleness of
birth ^ according to the flesh, but though we have
ten thousand famous ancestors, let us use dili-
gence ourselves to go beyond their excellences,
knowing that we shall gain nothing from the
diligence of others to help us in the judgment
that is to come ; nay, this will be the more
grievous condemnation, that though born of
righteous parents and having an example at
home, we do not, even thus, imitate our teachers.
And this I say now, because I see many heathens,'
when we lead them to the faith and exhort them
to become Christians, flying to their kinsmen
and ancestors and house, and saying, " All my
relations and friends and companions are faithful
Christians." What is that to thee, thou wretched
and miserable ? This very thing will be espec-
ially thy ruin, that thou didst not respect the
number of those around thee, and run to the
truth. Others again who are believers but live
a careless life, when exhorted to virtue make
the very same defense, and say, " my father and
my grandfather and my great-grandfather were
very pious and good men." But this will assur-
edly most condemn thee, that being descended
from such men, thou hast acted unworthily of
the root from whence thou art sprung. For
hear what the Prophet says to the Jews, " Israel
served for a wife, and for a wife he kept
(sheep)" (Hos. xii. 12) ; and again Christ,
" Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day,
and he saw it, and was glad." (c. viii. 56.) And
everywhere they bring forward ' to them the
righteous acts of their fathers, not only to praise
them, but also to make the charge against their
descendants more heavy. Knowing then this,
let us use every means that we may be saved by
our own works, lest having deceived ourselves
by vain trusting on others, we learn that we have
been deceived when the knowledge of it will
profit us nothing. " In the grave," saith David,
" who shall give thee thanks? " (Ps. vi. 5.) Let
us then repent here, that we may obtain the
everlasting goods, which may God grant we all


" a). •* relationship.'


' lit. '! Greeks.'
• al. " apply."


76


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


do, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father


and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY XXIL

John ii. 4.


"Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour is
not yet come."

Si.] In preaching the word there is some toil,
this Paul declares when he says, " Let the
elders that rule well be counted worthy of
double honor, especially they who labor in the
word and doctrine." ( i Tim. v. 17.) Yet it is in
your power to make this labor light or heavy ;
for if you reject our words, or if without actu-
ally rejecting them you do not show them forth
in your works, our toil will be heavy, because
we labor uselessly and in vain : while if ye heed
them and give proof of it by your works, we
shall not even feel the toil, because the fruit
produced by our labor will not suffer the great-
ness of that labor to appear. So that if you
would rouse our zeal, and not quench or weaken
it, show us, I beseech you, your fruit, that we
may behold the fields waving' with corn, and
being supported by hopes of an abundant crop,
and reckoning up your' riches, may not be
slothful' in carrying on this good traffic.

It is no slight question which is proposed to
us also to-day. For first, when the mother of
Jesus says, "They have no wine," Christ re-
plies, " Woman, what have I to do with thee ?
Mine hour is not yet come." And then, having
thus spoken. He did as His mother had said ;
an action which needs enquiry no less than the
words. Let us then, after calling upon Him
who wrought the miracle, proceed to the ex-
planation.

The words are not used in this place only,
but in others also ; for the -same Evangehst says,
"They could not lay hands on Him,* because
His hour was not yet come " (c. viii. 20) ; and
again, " No man laid hands on Him, because
His hour was not yet come " (c. vii. 30) ; and
again, " The hour is come, glorify Thy Son."
(c. xvii. I.) What then do the words mean?
I have brought together more instances, that I
may give one explanation of all. And what is
that explanation? Christ did not say, "Mine
hour is not yet come," as being subject to the
necessity of seasons, or the observance of an


* Konuyra.
» »1. '■ our."


' lit. *' numb," al. " be weary."
* ovSt'tt iiricatv avTOv, G. T.


" hour " ; how can He be so, who is Maker of
seasons, and Creator of the times and the ages ?
To what else then did He allude? He desires
to show' this ; that He works all things at their
convenient season, not doing all at once ; be-
cause a kind of confusion and disorder would
have ensued, if, instead of working all at their
proper seasons. He had mixed all together. His
Birth, His Resurrection, and His coming to
Judgment. Observe this ; creation was to be,
yet not all at once ; man and woman were to be
created, yet not even these together ; mankind
were to be condemned to death, and there was
to be a resurrection, yet the interval between
the two was to be great ; the law was to be
given, but not grace with it, each was to be
dispensed at its proper time. Now Christ was
not subject to the necessity of seasons, but
rather settled their order, since He is their
Creator ; and therefore He saith in this place,
" Mine hour is not yet come." And His mean-
ing is, that as yet He was not manifest' to the
many, nor had He even His whole company of
disciples ; Andrew followed Him, and next to '
him Philip, but no one else. And moreover,
none of these, not even His mother nor HIf
brethren, knew Him as they ought ; for aftei
His many miracles, the Evangelist says of His
brethren, " For neither did His brethren believe
in Him." (c. vii. 5.) And those at the wed-
ding did not know Him either, for in their neec
they would certainly have come to and entreatec
Him. Therefore He saith, " Mine hour is no
yet come " ; that is, " I am not yet known t(
the company, nor are they even aware that thi
wine has failed ; let them first be sensible o
this. I ought not to have been told it fror
thee ; thou art My mother, and renderest th
miracle suspicious. They wlio wanted the win
should have come and besought Me, not that
need this, but that they might with an entin
assent accept the miracle. For one who know
that he is in need, is very grateful when h
obtains assistance ; but one who has not a sens


s Ben.MoreK and MS. in Bodi. read; aWa Sia twv ovtu}^
fievtav toiJto Sr}\toaai k.t.K.

" Morel, and MS. in Bodl. read; aA\d 'Iwai-cTif ivravB^


rfKfi i} Moa HQV tiffdytt rby 'iipiCTOV Kiyovra 6ec<t»'ut on k.t.
1. " h^'^ifif*.'*


' al. " beside


II


Homily XXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


77


of his need, will never have a plain and clear
sense of the benefit."

Why then after He had said, " Mine hour is
not yet come," and given her a denial, did He
what His mother desired ? Chiefly it was, that
they who opposed Him, and thought that He
was subject to the " hour," might have sufficient
proof that He was subject to no hour ; for had
He been so, how could He, before the proper
" hour " was come, have done what He did ?
And in the next place. He did it to honor His
mother, that He might not seem entirely to
contradict and shame her that bare Him in the
presence of so many ; and also, that He might
not be thought to want power,' for she brought
the servants to Him.

Besides, even while saying to the Canaanitish
woman, " It is not meet to take the children's
bread, and to give - it unto dogs " (Matt. xv. 26),
He still gave the bread, as considering her per-
severance ; and though after his first reply, He
said, " I am not sent save unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel," yet even after saying
this, He healed the woman's daughter. Hence
we learn, that although we be unworthy, we
often by perseverance make ourselves worthy
to receive. And for this reason His mother
remained by, and openly^ brought to Him the
servants, that the request might be made by a
greater number ; and therefore she added,

Ver. 5. "Whatsoever He saith unto you, do
it."

For she knew that His refusal proceeded not
from want of power, but from humility, and that
He might not seem without cause'' to hurry
to^ the miracle; and therefore she brought the
servants.^

Ver. 6, 7. " And there were set there six
waterpots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three
firkins apiece. Jesus said unto them. Fill the
waterpots with water ; and they filled them up
to the brim."

It is not without a reason that the Evangelist
says, " After the manner of the purifying of the
Jews," but in order that none of the unbelievers
might suspect that lees having been left in the
vessels, and water having been poured upon and
mixed with them, a very weak wine had been
made. Therefore he says, " after the manner of
the purifying of the Jews," to show that those
vessels were never receptacles for wine. For
because Palestine is a country with but little
water, and brooks and fountains were not every-
where to be found, they always used to fill water-
pots with water, so that they might not have to


* This passage is wanting in the MS. in Hodleian.
' 3aAc(i', G. r. 3 al. " wisely."

* oirAu)?. G fntppiiTTdv,

* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. read: 6i' o Kai rT}v inraKorjv avafiiX-
Ac rat.


hasten to the rivers if at any time they were de-
filed, but might have the means of purification
at hand.

" And why was it, that He did not the miracle
before they filled them, which would have been
more marvelous by far? for it is one thing to
change given matter to a different quality, and
another to create matter out of nothing." The
latter would indeed have been more wonderful,
but would not have seemed so credible to the
many. And therefore He often purposely les-
sens' the greatness of His miracles, that it may
be the more readily received.

" But why," says one, " did not He Himself
produce the water which He afterwards showed
to be wine, instead of bidding the servants bring
it?" For the very same reason ; and also, that
He might have those who drew it out to witness
that what had been effected was no delusion ;
since if any had been inclined to be shameless,
those who ministered might have said to them,
"We drew the water, we filled the vessels."
And besides what we have mentioned. He thus
overthrows those doctrines which spring up
against the Church. For since there are some who
say that the Creator of the world is another, and
that the things which are seen are not His works,
but those of a certain other opposing god, to curb
these men's madness He doth most of His mir-
acles on matter foimd at hand.' Because, had
the creator of these been opposed to Him, He
would not have used what was another's to set
forth His own power. But now to show that it"
is He who transmutes water in the vine plants, >
and who converts the rain by its passage
through the root into wine, He effected that in a
moment at the wedding which in the plant is ,
long in doing. When they had filled the water-
pots, He said,

Ver. 8-10. " Draw out now, and bear unto
the governor of the feast ; and they bare it.
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water
that was made wine, and knew not whence it
was, (but the servants which drew the water
knew,) the governor of the feast called the
bridegroom, and saith unto him. Every man at
the beginning doth set forth good wine, and
when men have well drunk, then that which is
worst ; but thou hast kept the good wine until
now."

Here again some mock,' saying, " this was an
assembly of drunken men, the sense of the judges
was spoilt, and not able to taste '" what was made,
or to decide on what was done, so that they did
not know whether what was made was water or
wine : for that they were dnmk," it is alleged,
" the ruler himself has shown by what he said."


' lit. "clips round."


• al. " impeach."
w ai'TiAa/Sctrtfaw


78


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


Now this is most ridiculous, yet even this suspi-
cion the Evangelist has removed. For he does not
say that the guests gave their opinion on the
matter, but " the ruler of the feast," who was
sober, and had not as yet tasted anything. For
of course you are aware, that those, who are en-
trusted with the management ' of such banquets
are the most sober, as having this one business,
to dispose all things in order and regularity ;
and therefore the Lord called such a man's sober
senses to testify to what was done. For He did
not say, " Pour forth to them that sit at meat,"
but, " Bear unto the governor of the feasK"

" And when the ruler of the feast had tasted
the water that was made wine, and knew not
whence it was, (but the servants knew,) the gov-
ernor of the feast called the bridegroom." " And
why did he not call the servants ? for so the mir-
acle would have been revealed." Because Jesus
had not Himself revealed what had been done,
but desired that the power of His miracles
should be known gently, little by little. And
suppose that it had then been mentioned,^ the
servants who related it would never have been
believed, but would have been thought mad to
bear such testimony to one who at that time
seemed to the many a mere man ; and although
they knew the certainty of the thing by experi-
ence, (for they were not likely to disbelieve
their own hands,) yet they were not sufficient to
convince others. And* so He did not reveal it
to all, but to him who was best able to under-
stand what was done, reser\'ing the clearer knowl-
edge of it for a future time ; since after the
manifestation of other miracles this also would
be credible. Thus when he was about to heal
the nobleman's son, the Evangelist has shown
that it had already become more clearly known ;
for it was chiefly because the nobleman had be-
come acquainted with the miracle that he called
upon Him, as John incidentally shows when he
says, " Jesus came into Cana of Galilee, where
He made the water wine." (c. iv. 46.) And
not wine simply, but the best.

[3.] For such are the miraculous works of
Christ, they are far more perfect and better than
the operations of nature. This is seen also in
other instances ; when He restored any infirm
member of the body, He made' it better than
the sound.

That it was wine then, and the best of wine,
that had been made, not the servants only,
but the bridegroom and the ruler of the feast
would testify ; and that it was made by Christ,
those who drew the water ; so that although the
miracle were not then revealed, yet it could not
in the end be passed in silence, so many and
constrainBig testimonies had He provided for the


' iittKOfiaf.


' al. " examined." •


• Ut, " showed."


future. That He had made the water wine, He
had the servants for witnesses ; that the wine
was good that had been made, the ruler of the
feast and the bridegroom.

It ipight be expected that the bridegroom
would reply to this, (the ruler's speech,) and say
something, but the Evangelist, hastening to more
pressing matters, has only touched upon this
miracle, and passed on. For what we needed to
learn was, that Christ made the water wine, and
that good wine ; but what the bridegroom said
to the governor he did not think it necessary to
add. And many miracles, at first somewhat ob-
scure, have in process of time become more
plain, when reported more exactly by those who
knew them from the beginning.

At that time, then, Jesus made of water wine,
and both then and now He ceases not to change
our weak and unstable * wills. For there are,
yes, there are men who in nothing differ from
water, so cold, and weak, and unsettled. But
let us bring those of such disposition to the Lord,
that He may change their will to the quality of
wine, so that they be no longer washy,* but have '
body,^ and be the cause of gladness in them-
selves and others. But who can these cold ones
be ? They are those who give their minds to the
fleeting things of this present life, who despise
not this world's luxury, who are lovers of glory
and dominion : for all these things are flowing
waters, never stable, but ever rushing violently
down the steep. The rich to-day is poor to-
morrow, he who one day appears with herald,
and girdle, and chariot, and numerous attend-
ants, is often on the next the inhabitant of a
dungeon, having unwillingly quitted all that show
to make room for another. Again, the glutton-
ous and dissipated ' man, when he has filled
himself to bursting,' cannot retain even for a
single day the supply ' conveyed by his delica-
cies, but when that is dispersed, in order to re-
new it he is obliged to put in more, differing in
nothing from a torrent. For as in the torrent
when the first body of water is gone, others in
turn succeed ; so in gluttony, when one repast
is removed, we again require another. And
such is the nature and the lot of earthly things,
never to be stable, but to be always pouring
and hurrying by ; but in the case of luxury, it
is not merely the flowing and hastening by, but
many other things that trouble us. By the vio-
lence of its course it wears away '" the strength of
the body, and strips the soul of its manliness,
and the strongest currents of rivers do not so
easily eat away their banks and make them sink
down, as do luxury and wantonness sweep away


* lit. " flowing away." ^ ' fitappeif.

• TO entiTTv^i.ijiivoVf " astringcncy."

• lit. " has burst his stomach."

* x'eit'"- " •"of lite, " abnde*.*


HOMILV XXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


79


all the bulwarks of our health ; and if you enter
a physician's house and ask him, you will find
that almost all the causes of diseases arise from
this. For frugality and a plain' table is the
mother of health, and therefore physicians ^ have
thus named it ; for they have called the not be-
ing satisfied " health," (because not to be satis-
fied with food is health,) and they have spoken
of sparing diet as the " mother of health." Now
if the condition of want ' is the mother of health,
it is clear that fullness is the mother of sickness
and debility, and produces attacks which are be-
yond the skill even of physicians. For gout in
the feet, apoplexy, dimness of sight, pains in the
hands, tremors, paralytic attacks, jaundice, linger-
ing and inflammatory fevers, and other diseases
many more than these, (for we have not time to
go over them all,) are the natural offspring, not
of abstinence and moderate'' diet, but of glut-
tony and repletion. And if you will look to the
diseases of the soul that arise from them, you
will see that feelings of coveting, sloth, melan-
choly, dullness, impurity, and folly of all kinds,
have their origin here. For after such banquets
the souls of the luxurious become no better than
asses, being torn to pieces by such wild beasts
as these (passions) . Shall I say also how many


pains and displeasures they have who wait upon
luxury? I could not enumerate them all, but
by a single principal point I will make the whole
clear. At a table such as I speak of, that is, a
sumptuous one» men never eat with pleasure ;
for abstinence is the mother of pleasure as well
as health, while repletion is the source and root
not only of diseases, but of displeasure. For
where there is satiety there desire cannot be,
and where there is no desire, how can there be
pleasure ? And therefore we should find that the
poor are not only of better understanding and
healthier than the rich, but also that they enjoy
a greater degree of pleasure. Let us, when we
reflect on this, flee drunkenness and luxury, not
that of the table alone, but all other which is
found in the things of this life, and let us take
in exchange for it the pleasure arising from
spiritual things, and, as the Prophet says, delight
ourselves in the Lord ; " Delight thyself in the
Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine
heart " (Ps. xxxvii. 4) ; that so that we may en-
joy the good things both here and hereafter,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom,
to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory,
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXIII.


JoHjJ ii. II.


" This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee."

[1 .] Frequent and fierce is the devil in his at-
tacks, on all sides besieging our salvation ; we
therefore must watch and be sober, and every-
where fortify ourselves against his assault, for
if he but gain some slight vantage ground,' he
goes on to make for himself a broad passage,
and by degrees introduces all his forces. If
then we have any care at all for our salvation,
let us not allow him to make his approaches
even in trifle^, that thus we may check him
beforehand in important matters ; for it would
be the extreme of folly, if, while he displays
such eagerness to destroy our souls, we should
not bring even an equal amount in defense of
our own salvation.

I say not this without a cause, but because I
fear lest that wolf be even now standing unseen


* lit. " children of phys.'*

• ivStia, *


6 d0opM^$.


by us in the midst of the fold,' and some sheep
become a prey to him, being led astray from the
flock and from hearkening by its own careless-
ness and his craft. Were the wounds' sensible,
or did the body receive the blows, there would be
no difficulty in discerning his plots ; but since
the soul is invisible, and since that it is which
receives the wounds, we need great watchfulness
that each may prov6 himself; for none knoweth
the things of a man as the spirit of a man that
is in him. (i Cor. ii. 11.) The word is spoken
indeed to all, and is off"ered as a general remedy
to those who need it, but it is the business of
every individual hearer to take what is suited to
his complaint. I know not who are sick, I know
not who are well. And therefore I use every sort
of argument, and introduce remedies suited to
all maladies,' at one time condemning covet-
ousness, after that touching on luxury, and again


• or " sacred enclosure/* <n)K^.

' al. ** words.*' , ^

• Morel, and MS. in Bodl. read the passage thus: nivfi, *«VU>


8o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOStOMi


[Homily XXllL


on impurity, then composing something in praise
of and exhortation to charity, and each of the
other virtues in their turn. For I fear lest when
my arguments are employed on any one subject,
I may without knowing it be treating you for
one disease while you are ill of others. So that
if this congregation were but one person, I
should not have judged it so absolutely neces-
sary to make my discourse varied ; but since in
such a multitude there are probably also many
maladies, I not unreasonably diversify my teach-
ing, since my discourse will be sure to attain its
object when it is made to embrace you all. For
this cause also Scripture is something multiform,'
and speaks on ten thousand matters, because it
addresses itself to the nature of mankind in
common, and in such a multitude all the passions
of the soul must needs be ; though all be not in
each. Let us then cleanse ourselves of these,
and so listen to the divine oracles, and with
contrite heart ^ hear what has been this day read
to us.

And what is that ? " This beginning of mir-
acles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee." I told you
the other day, that there are some v/ho say that
this is not the beginning. " For what," says
one, " if ' Cana of Galilee ' be added ? This
shows that this was ' the beginning ' He made
' in Cana.' " ' But on these points I would not
venture to assert anything exactly. I before
have shown that He began His miracles after
His Baptism, and wrought no miracle before it ;
but whether of the miracles done after His Bap-
tism, this or some other was the first, it seems
to me unnecessary to assert positively.
" And manifested forth His glory."
" How? " asks one, " and in what way? For
only the servants, the ruler of the feast, and the
bridegroom, not the greater number of those
present, gave heed to what was done." How
then did he " manifest forth His glory " ? He
manifested it at least for His own part, and if
all present hear not of the miracle at .the time,
they would hear of it afterwards, for unto the
present time it is celebrated, and has not been
unnoticed. That all did not know it on the
same day is clear from what follows, for after
having said that He "manifested forth His
glory," the Evangelist adds,

" And His disciples believed on Him."
His disciples, who even before this regarded
Him with wonder.* Seest thou that it was
especially necessary to work the miracles at
times when men were present of honest minds,
and who would carefully give heed to what was


' Morel, and MS. in Bodleian read: outiu rote dft'oif Aoyotc
wpoafidWrnfitv, Kai oi/Tw ^«Td avvTtTpiiifiitnj^ <T<t>6opa T^9 5ia»'oiaf
(t.T.A.

' Morel, and MS. in Bodleian read: tI yap oltoitov irpoaictia0ai
if Kav^, «oi t/.r} apx^" fly^i TavTjjtr riav to» 'Irfirov arjfitmv,

* [admired and believed] Morel, and MS.


done? for these would more readily believe,
and attend more exactly to the circumstances.
" And how could He have become known with-
out miracles ? " Because His doctrine and pro-
phetic powers were sufficient to cause wonder ia
the souls of His hearers, so that they took heed
to wliat He did with a right disposition, their
minds being already well affected towards Him.
And therefore in many other places the Evange-
lists say, that He did no miracle on account of
the perversity of the men who dwelt there.
(Matt. xii. 38 ; ch. xiii. 58, &c.)

Ver. 12. "After this He went down to Ca-
pernaum, He, and His mother, and His brethren,
and His disciples ; and they continued there not
many days."

Wherefore comes He with " His mother to
Capernaum"? for He hath done no miracle
there, and the inhabitants of that city were not
of those who were rightminded towards Him,
but of the utterly coriupt. And this Christ de-
clared when He said, " And thou, Capernaum,
which are exalted to heaven, shall be thrust
down to hell." (Luke x. 15.) Wherefore then
goes He ? I think it was, because He intended
a little after to go up to Jerusalem, that He then
went to Capernaum, to avoid leading about*
everywhere with Him, His mother and His
brethren. And so, having departed and tarried
a Hide while to honor His mother, He again
commences His miracles after restoring to her
home her who had borne Him. Therefore the
Evangelist says. After " not many days,"

Ver. 13. " He went up to Jerusalem."

He received baptism then a few days before
the passover. But on going up to Jerusalem,
what did He, a deed full of high authority ; for
He cast out of the Temple those dealers and
money changers, and those who sold doves, and
oxen, and sheep, and who passed their time
there for this purpose.-

[2.] Another Evangelist writes, that as He
cast them out. He said. Make not my Father's
house * " a den of thieves," but this one,

Ver. 16. ("Make not My Father's house) an
house of merchandise."

They do not in this contradict each other, but
show that he did this a second time, and that
both these expressions were not used on the
same occasion, but that He acted thus once at
the beginning of Flis ministry, and again when
He had come to the very time of His Passion.
Therefore, (on the latter occasion,) employing
more strong expressions. He spoke of it as''
(being made) " a den of thieves," but here at
the commencement of His miracles He does
not so, but uses a more gentle rebuke; from


* t1Tl<TVp«<T0ai.

® Luke xix. 46, i/fiilt eiroiija'aTi k.t.A. G. T.
' lit. "called it."


Homily XXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


8i


which it is probable that this took place* a
second time.

" And wherefore," says one, " did Christ do
this same, and use such severity against these
men, a thing which He is nowhere else seen to
do, even when insulted and reviled, and called
by them ' Samaritan ' and ' demoniac ' ? for He
was not even satisfied with words only, but took
a scourge, and so cast them out." Yes, but it
was when others were receiving benefit, that the
Jews accused and raged against Him ; when it
was probable that they would have been made
savage by His rebukes, they showed no such
disposition towards Him, for they neither accused
nor reviled Him. What say they?

Ver. i8. " What sign showest Thou unto us,
seeing that Thou doest these things?"

Seest thou their excessive malice, and how
the benefits done to others incensed them more
(than reproofs) ?

At one time then He said, that the Temple
was made by them " a den of thieves," sliowing
that what they sold was gotten by theft, and
rapine, and covetousness, and that they were
rich through other men's calamities ; at another,
" a house of merchandise," pointing to their
shameless traffickings. " But wherefore did He
this?" Since he was about to heal on the Sab-
bath day, and to do many such things which
were thought by diem transgressions of the Law,
in order that He might not seem to do this as
though He had come to be some rival God * and
opponent of His Father, He takes occasion
hence to correct any such suspicion of theirs
For One who had exhibited so much zeal for
the House was not likely to oppose Him who
was Lord of the House, and who was worshiped
in it. No doubt even the former years during
which He lived according to the Law, were
sufficient to show His reverence for the Legis-
lator, and that He came not to give contrary
laws ; yet since it was likely that those years
were forgotten through lapse of time, as not
having been known to all because He was
brought up in a poor and mean dwelling, He
afterwards does this in the presence of all, (for
many were present because the feast was nigh
at hand,) and at great risk. For he did not
merely " cast them out," but also " overturned
the tables," and "poured out the money," giving
them by this to understand, that He who threw
Himself into danger for the good order of the
House could never despise his Master. Had
He acted as He did from hypocrisy. He should
only have advised them ; but to place Himself
in danger was very daring. For it was no light
thing to offer Himself to the anger of so many


Or, " that He did this." o0ev ctxbt fievrepo** tovto ytytv^aSai.

Bl. w«iroiiJK€i/at.

" or, " adversary of God."


market-folk,' to excite against Himself a most
brutal mob of petty dealers by His reproaches
and His blows, this was not the action of a
pretender, but of one choosing to suffer every-
thing for the order of the House.

And therefore not by His actions only, but
by His words. He shows his agreement with the
Father ; * for He saith not " the Holy House,"
but " My Father's House." See, He even calls
Him, " Father," and they are not wroth ; they
thought He spoke in a general way : " but when
He went on and spoke more plainly, so as to
set before them the idea of His Equality, then
they become angry.

And what say they? "What sign showest
Thou unto us, seeing that Thou doest these
things?" Alas for their utter madness! Was
there need of a sign before they could cease
their evil doings, and firee the house of God from
such dishonor? and was it not the greatest sign
of His Excellence that He had gotten such zeal
for that House ? In fact, the well-disposed * were
distinguished by this very thing, for "They,"
His disciples, it says,

Ver. 1 7. " Remembered that it is written,
The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."

But the Jews did not remember the Prophecy,
and said, "What sign showest Thou unto us?"
(Ps. Ixix. 9), both grieving that their shameful
traffic was cut off, and expecting by these means
to stop Him, and also desiring to challenge Him
to a miracle, and to find fault with what He was
doing. Wherefore He will not give them a sign ;
and before, when they came and asked Him, He
made them the same answer, " A wicked and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign ; and
there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign
of the prophet Jonas." (Matt. xvi. 4.) Only
then the answer was clear, now it is more am-
biguous. This He doth on account of their
extreme insensibility ; for He who prevented '
them without their asking, and gave them signs,
would never when they asked have turned away
from them, had He not seen that their minds
were wicked and false, and their intention treach-
erous.' Think how full of wickedness the ques-
tion itself was at the outset. When they ought
to have applauded Him for His earnestness and
zeal, when they ought to have been astonished
that He cared so greatly for the House, they
reproach Him, saying, that it was lawful to traffic,
and unlawful for any to stop their traffic, except
he should show them a sign. What saith Christ?

Ver. 19. " Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up."

Many such sayings He utters which were not
intelligible to His immediate hearers, but which


* or, " base persons," ayopcM

* rifv npbi avTOf wi^^viav,

* airAws.


• evyvwunvi^.

' al. " took to Him."

* iJirovAoi'.


82


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


were to be so to those that should come after.
And wherefore Joth He this? In order that
when the accomplishment of His prediction
should have come to pass, He might be seen to
have foreknown from the beginning what was
to follow ; which indeed was the case with this
prophecy. For, saith the Evangelist,

Ver. 2 2. " When He was risen from the dead.
His disciples remembered that He had said this ;
and they believed the Scripture, and the word
which Jesus had said."

But at the time when this was spoken, the
Jews were perplexed as- to what it might mean,
and cast about to discover, saying,

Ver. 20. " Forty and six years was this Tem-
ple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three
days?"

" Forty and six years," they said, referring to
the latter building, for the former was finished
in twenty years' time. (Ezra vi. 15.)

[3.] Wherefore then did He not resolve the
difficulty and say, " I speak not of that Temple,
but of My flesh"? Why does the Evangelist,
writing the Gospel at a later period, interpret
the saying, and Jesus keep silence at the time ?
Why did He so keep silence? Because they
would not have received His word ; for- if not
even the disciples were able to understand the
saying, much less were the multitudes. " When,"
saith the Evangelist, " He was risen from the dead,
then they remembered, and believed the Scrip-
ture and His word." There were two things that
hindered' them for the time, one the fact of
the Resurrection, the other, the greater question
whether He was God^ that dwelt within; of
both which things He spake darkly when He
said, " Destroy this Temple, and I will rear it
up in three days." And this St. Paul declares
to be no small proof of His Godhead, when he
writes, " Declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by
the Resurrection from the dead." (Rom. i. 4.)

But why doth He both there, and here, and
everywhere, give this for a sign, at one time
saying,'' " When ye have lifted up the Son of
Man, then ye shall know that I Am " (c. viii.
28) ; at another, "There shall no sign be given
you* but the sign of the prophet Jonas " (Matt,
xii. 39) ; and again in this place, " In three days
I will raise it up " ? Because what especially
) showed that He was not a mere man, was His
'being able to set up a trophy of victory over
death, and so quickly to abolish His long endur-
ing tyranny, and conclude that difficult war.
Wherefore He saith, " Then ye shall know."
"Then." When? When after My Resurrection


* al. " were proposed to."

» Savilc, 'O ©(6?, *' whether He was the One God": but the
article is not found in Ben. Morel, or MSS. _ ^ ■

* [orav v}piMdu] Ben. * out^ [yevt^] G. T.


I shall draw (all) the world to Me, then ye shall
know that I did these things as God, and Very
Son of God, avenging the insult offered to My
Father.

" Why then, instead of saying, ' What need is
there of " signs " to check evil deeds ? ' did He
promise that He would give them a sign?"
Because by so doing He would have the more
exasperated them ; but in this way He rather
astonished them. Still they made no answer to
this, for He seemed to them to say what was
incredible, so that they did not stay even to
question Him upon it, but passed it by as
impossible. Yet had they been wise, though it
seemed to them at the time incredible, still when
He wrought His many miracles they would then
have come and questioned Him, would then
have intreated that the diflficulty might be re-
solved to them ; but because they were foolish,
they gave no heed at all to part of what was
said, and part they heard with evil frame of
mind. And therefore Christ spoke to them in
an enigmatical way.

The question still remains, " How was it that
the disciples did not know that He must rise
from the dead ? " It was, because they had not
been vouchsafed the gift of the Spirit ; and
therefore, though they constantly heard His dis-
courses concerning the Resurrection, they under-
stood them not, but reasoned with themselves
what this might be. For very strange and para-
doxical was the assertion that one could raise
himself, and would raise himself in such wise.
And so Peter was rebuked, when, knowing noth-
ing about the Resurrection, he said, " Be it far
from Thee." {Matt. xvi. 22.) And Christ did
not reveal it clearly to them before the event,
that they might not be offended at the very out-
set, being led to distnist His words on account
of the great improbability of the thing, and
because they did not yet clearly know Him,
who He was. For no one could help believing
what was proclaimed aloud by facts, while some
would probably disbelieve what was told to them
in words. Therefore He at first allowed the
meaning of His words to be concealed ; but
wheri by their experience He had verified His
sayings. He after that gave them understanding
of His words, and such gifts of the Spirit that
they received them all at once. " He," saith
Jesus, "shall bring all things to your remem
brance." (c. xiv. 26.) For they who in a single
night cast off all respect for Him, and fled from,
and denied that they even knew Him, would
scarcely have remembered what He had done
and said during the whole time, unless they had
enjoyed much grace of the Spirit.

" But," says one, " if they were to hear from
the Spirit, why needed they to accompany Christ
when they would not retain His words?" Be


Homily XXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


83


■cause the Spirit taught them not, but called to
their mind what Christ had said before ; and it
contributes not a little to the glory of Christ,
that they were referred to the remembrance of
the words He had spoken to them. At the first
then it was of the gift of God that the grace of
the Spirit lighted upon them so largely and
abundantly ; but after that, it was of their own
virtue that they retained the Gift. For they
displayed a shining life, and much wisdom, and
great labors, and despised this present life, and
thought nothing of earthly things, but were above
them all ; and like a sort of light-winged eagle,
soaring high by their works, reached ' to heaven
itself, and by these possessed the unspeakable
grace of the Spirit.

Let us then imitate them, and not quench our
lamps, but keep them bright by alms-doing, for


so is the light of this fire preserved. Let us
collect the oil into our vessels whilst we are
here, for we cannot buy it when we have de-
parted to that other place, nor can we procure
it elsewhere, save only at the hands of the poor.
Let us therefore collect it thence very abund-
antly, if, at least, we desire to enter in with the
Bridegroom. But if we do not this, we must
remain without the bridechamber, for it is im-
possible, it is impossible, though we perform ten
thousand other good deeds, to enter the portals
of the Kingdom without alms- doing. Let us
then show forth this very abundantly, that we
may enjoy those ineffable blessings ; which may
it come to pass that we all attain, by the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXIV.

John ii. 23.


" Now when He was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the
feast, many believed on Him."

[i.] Of the men of that time some clung to
their error, others laid hold on the truth, while
of these last, some having retained it for a little
while again fell off from it. Alluding to these,
Christ compared them to seeds not deeply sown,
but having their roots upon the surface of the
earth ; and He said that they should quickly
perish. And these the Evangelist has here
pointed out to us, saying,

" When He was in Jerusalem, at the Passover,
in the feast, many believed on Him,'' when they
saw the miracles which He did."

Ver. 24. " But Jesus did not commit Himself
unto them."

For they were the more perfect* among His
disciples, who came to Him not only because of
His miracles, but through His teaching also.
The grosser sort the miracles attracted, but the
better reasoners His prophecies and doctrines ;
and so they who were taken by His teaching
were more steadfast than those attracted by His
miracles. And Christ also called them " blessed,"
saying, "Blessed are they that have not seen,
and yet have believed." (c. xx. 29.) But that
these here mentioned were not real disciples, the
following passage shows, for it saith, "Jesus did
not commit Himself unto them." Wherefore?


* al, " were drawn away.'*
<i? TO ovofd-a avToO, G. T.
' aKpt^fiTTtpotf al. avi^oAcffTcpOit


" Because He knew all things," *

Ver. 25. "And needed not that any should
testify of man, for He knew what was in man."

The meaning is of this kind. " He who
dwells in men's hearts, and enters into their
thoughts, took no heed of outward words ; and
knowing well that their warmth was but for a
season. He placed not confidence in them as in
perfect disciples, nor committed all His doctrines
to them as though they had already become firm
believers." Now, to know what is in the heart
of men belongs to God alone, "who hath
fashioned hearts one by one" (Ps. xxxiii. 15,
LXX.), for, saith Solomon, "Thou, even Thou
only, knowest the hearts" (i Kings viii. 39) ;
He therefore needed not witnesses to learn the
thoughts of His own creatures, and so He felt
no confidence in them because of their mere
temporary belief. Men, who know neither the
present nor the future, often tell and entrust all
without any reserve to persons who approach
them deceitfully and who shortly will fall off
from them ; but Christ did not so, for well He
knew all their secret thoughts.

And many such now there are, who have
indeed the name of faith, but are unstable,' and
easily led away ; wherefore neither now doth
Christ commit Himself to them, but concealeth
from them many things ; and just as we do not
place confidence in mere acquaintances but in
real friends, so also doth Christ. Hear what He


* ffdyra [irdrras, G. T.J.


^ ti/pintaxot.


84


WORKS OF ST. GHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIV.


saith to His disciples, "Henceforth I call you
not servants, ye are My friends." (c. xv. 14, 15.)
Whence is this and why ? " Because all things that
I have heard of My Father I have made known
unto you." And therefore He gave no signs to
the Jews who asked for them, because they asked
tempting Him. Indeed the asking for signs is
a practice of tempters both then and now ; for
even now there are some that seek them and
say, "Why do not miracles take place also at
this present time ? " If thou art faithful, as thou
oughtest to be, and lovest Christ as thou oughtest
to love Him, thou hast no need of signs, they
are given to the unbelievers. " How then," asks
one, " were they not given to the Jews? " Given
they certainly were ; and if there were times
when though they asked they did not receive
them, it was because they asked them not that
they might be delivered from their unbelief, but
in order the more to confirm their wickedness.

Chap. iii. i, 2. "And there was a man of the
Pharisees, named Nicodemus, The same came
to Jesus by night."

This man appears also in the middle of the
Gospel, making defense for Christ ; for he saith,
"Our law judgeth no man' before it hear him"
(c. vii. 51); and the Je.ws in anger replied to
him, " Search and look, for out of Galilee ariseth
no prophet." Again after the crucifixion he be-
stowed great care upon the burial of the Lord's
body : " There came also," saith the Evangelist,
" Nicodemus, which came to the Lord ^ by night,
and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about
an hundred pound weight." (c. xix. 39.) And
even now he was disposed towards Christ,' but
not as he ought, nor with proper sentiments
respecting Him, for he lyas as yet entangled
in Jewish infirmity. Wherefore he came by
night, because he feared to do so by day. Yet
not for this did the merciful God reject or re-
buke him, or deprive him of His instruction, but
even with much kindness conversed with him,
and disclosed to him very exalted doctrines,
enigmatically indeed, but nevertheless He dis-
closed them. For far more deserving of pardon
was he than those who acted thus through wick-
edness. They are entirely without excuse ; but
he, though he was liable to condemnation, yet
was not so to an equal degree. " How then does
th« Evangelist say nothing of the kind concern-
ing him ? " He has said in another place, that " of
the nllers also many believed on Him, but be-
cause of the Jews* they did not confess (Him),
lest they should be put out of the synagogue "
(c. xii. 42) ; but here he has implied the whole
by mentioning his coming " by night." What
then saith Nicodemus ?

"Rabbi, we know that Thou art a Teacher


* uij 6 vofioi itt^v x.rA. G. T.
» 'imroli'. G. T.


* Ktpi TOI' X.

* ^opio-fuovf, G. T.


come from God : for no man can do the mira-
cles that Thou doest, except God be with him."

[2.] Nicodemus yet lingers'' below, has yet
human thoughts concerning Him, and speaks of
Him as of a Prophet, imagining nothing great
from His miracles. " We know," he says, " that
Thou art a Teacher come from God." "Why
then comest thou by night and secretly, to Him
that speaketh the things of God, to Him who
Cometh from God? Why conversest thou not
with Him openly ? " But Jesus said nothing like
this to him, nor did He rebuke him ; for, saith
the Prophet, "A braised reed shall He not
break, and smoking flax shall he not quench ;
He shall not strive nor cry" (Isa. xlii. 2, 3 ; as
quoted Matt. xii. 19, 20) : and again He saith
Himself, " I came not to condemn the world,
but to save the world." (c. xii. 47.)

" No man can do these miracles, except God
be with him."

Still here Nicodemus speaks like the heretics,
in saying, that He hath a power working within
Him," and hath need of the aid of others to do
as He did. What then saith Christ? Observe
His exceeding condescension. He refrained
for a while from saying, " I need not the help of
others, but do all things with power, for I am
the Very Son of God, and have the same power
as My Father," because this would have been
too hard for His hearer ; for I say now what I
am always saying, that what Christ desired was,
not so much for a while to reveal His own Dig-
nity, as to persuade men that He did nothing
'contrary to His Father. And therefore in many
places he appears in words confined by limits,'
but in His actions He doth not so. For when
He worketh a miracle, He doth all with power,
saying, "I will, be thou clean." (Matt. viii. 3.)
"Talitha, arise." (Mark v. 41; not verbally
quoted.) "Stretch forth thy hand." (Mark
iii. 5.) "Thy sins be forgiven thee." (Matt.
ix. 2.) " Peace, be still." (Mark iv. 39.)
" Take up thy bed, and go unto thine house."
(Matt. ix. 6.) "Thou foul spirit, I say unto
thee, come out of him."' (Mark ix. 25; not
verbally quoted.) " Be it unto thee even as
thou wilt." (Matt. xv. 28.) " If any one say
(aught) unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath
need of him." (Mark xi. 3.) "This day shall
thou be with Me in Paradise." (Luke xxiii.
43.) " Ye have heard that it was said by them
of old time. Thou shalt not kill ; but I say unto
you, that whosoever is angry with his brother;
without a cause, shall be in danger of the judg-
ment." (Matt. V. 21,, 22.) " Come ye aften
Me, and I will make you fishers of men."
(Mark i. 17.) And everywhere we observe that'
His authority is great ; for in His actions no one


'^ CTfii^trait


^ ivrpyoifufvfiv avTOf* ^ ficTpta^wi'.


HOMILV XXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


85


could find fault with what was done. How was
it possible ? Had His words not come to pass,
nor been accomplished as He commanded, any
one miglit have said that they were the com-
mands of a madman ; but since they did come
to pass, the reality of their accomplishment
stopped men's mouths even against their will.
But with regard to His discourses, they might
often in their insolence charge Him with mad-
ness. Wherefore now in the case of Nicodemus,
He utters nothing openly, but by dark sayings
leads him up from his low thoughts, teaching
him, that He has sufficient power in Himself to
show forth miracles ; for that His Father begat
Him Perfect and All-sufficient, and without any
imperfection.

But let us see how He effects this. Nico-
demus saith, " Rabbi, we know that Thou art a
Teacher come from God, for no man can do
the miracles that Thou doest, except God be
with him." He thought he had said something
great when he had spoken thus of Christ. What
then saith Christ? To show that he had not yet
set foot even on the threshold of right knowledge,
nor stood in the porch, but was yet wandering
somewhere without the palace, both he and
whoever else should say the like, and that he
had not so much as glanced towards true knowl-
edge when he held such an opinion of the Only-
Begotten, what saith He?

Ver. 3. " Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except
a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom
of God."

That is, " Unless thou art born again and
receivest the right doctrines, thou art wandering
somewhere without, and art far from the King-
dom of 4ieaven." But He does not speak so
plainly as this. In order to make the saying
less hard to bear, He does not plainly direct it
at him, but speaks indefinitely, " Except a man
be born again " : all but saying, " both thou,
and any other, who may have such opinions
concerning Me, art somewhere without the
Kingdom." Had He not spoken from a desire
to establish this, His answer would have been
suitable to what had been said. Now the Jews,
if these words had been addressed to them,
would have derided Him and departed ; but
Nicodemus shows here also his desire of instruc-
tion.' And this is why in many places Christ
speaks obscurely, because He wishes to rouse
His hearers to ask questions, and to render them
more attentive. For that which is said plainly
often escapes the hearer, but what is obscure
renders him more active and zealous. Now
what He saith, is something like this : " If thou
art not bom- again, if thou partakest not of the
Spirit which is by the washing^ of Regeneration,


• al. " of truth."


• or, " laver,'


thou canst not have a right opinion of Me, for
the opinion which thou hast is not spiritual, but
carnal."' (Tit. iii. 5.) But He did not speak
thus, as refusing to confound* one who had
brought such as he had, and who had spoken
to the best of his ability ; and He leads him
unsuspectedly up to greater knowledge, saying,
" Except a man be born again." The word
"again,"* in this place, some understand to
mean " from heaven," others, " from the begin
ning." " It is impossible," saith Christ, " for one
not so born to see the Kingdom of God " ; in
this pointing to Himself, and declaring that there
is another beside the natural sight, and that we
have need of other eyes to behold Christ. Hav-
ing heard this,

Ver. 4. " Nicodemus saith, How can a man be
bom when he is old?"

Callest thou Him " Master," sayest thou that
He is " come from God," and yet receivest thou
not His words, but usest to thy Teacher a manner
of speaking which expresses" much perplexity?
For the "How," is the doubting question of
those who have no strong belief, but who are
yet of the earth. Therefore Sarah laughed when
she had said, " How?" And many others having
asked this question, have fallen from the faith.

[3.] And thus heretics continue in their
heresy, because they frequently make this eti-
quiry, saying, some of them, " How was He
begotten?" others, " How was He made flesh?"
and subjecting that Infinite Essence to the weak-
ness of their own reasonings.' Knowing which,
we ought to avoid this unseasonable curiosity,
for they who search into these matters shall,
without learning the " How," fall away from the
right faith. On this account Nicodemus, being
in doubt, enquires the manner in which this can
be, (for he understood that the words spoken
referred to himself,) is confused, and dizzy,' and
in perplexity, having come as to a man, and
hearing more than man's words, and such as no
one ever yet had heard ; and for a while he
rouses himself at the sublimity of the sayings,
but yet is in darkness, and unstable, borne about
in every direction, and continually falling away
from, the faith. And therefore he perseveres in
proving the impossibility, so as to provoke Him
to clfearer .teaching.

"Can a man," he saith, "enter into his
mother's womb, and be bom?"

Seest thou how when one commits spiritual
things to his own reasonings, he speaks ridicu-
lously, seems to be trifling, or to be drunken, when
he pries into what has been said beyond what
seems good to God, and admits not the submission


* i^vxtKi;, *' belonging to the natural life," opposed in N. T. W
irv€VfiaTiKTJ. * or, " strike."

6 avwOei' (*' again," or " from above ").

* lit. '* introduces."

^ Ben. transposes the clauses. ' iAiyyi^,


86


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV XXIV.


of faith ? Nicodemus heard of the spiritual Birth,
yet perceived it not as spiritual, but dragged
down the words to the lowness of the flesh, and
made a doctrine so great and high depend upon
physical consequence. And so he invents fri-
volities, and ridiculous difficulties. Wherefore
Paul said, " The natural ' man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit." (i Cor. ii. 14.) Yet even
in this he preserved his reverence for Christ, for
he did not mock at what had been said, but,
deeming it impossible, held his peace. There
were two difficulties ; a Birth of this kind, and
the Kingdom ; for neither had the name of the
Kingdom ever been heard- among the Jews, nor
of a Birth like this. But he stops for a while at
the first, which most astonished ' his mind.

Let us then, knowing this, not enquire into
things relating to God by reasoning, nor bring
heavenly matters under the rule of earthly con-
sequences, nor subject them to the necessity of
nature ; but let us think of all reverently, believ-
ing as the Scriptures have said ; for the busy
and curious person gains nothing, and besides
not finding what he seeks, shall suffer extreme
punishment. Thou hast heard, that (the Father)
begat (the Son) : believe what thou hast heard ;
but do ask not, " How," and so take away the
Generation; to do so would be extreme folly.
For if this man, because, on hearing of a Gener-
ation, not that ineffable Generation, but this
which is by grace, he conceived nothing great
concerning it, but human and earthly thoughts,
was therefore darkened and in doubt, what pun-
ishment must they deserve, who are busy and cu-
rious about that most awful Generation, which
transcends all reason and intellect? For nothing
causes such dizziness' as human reasoning, all
whose words are of earthy and which cannot en-
dure to be enlightened from above. Earthly
I reasonings are full of mud, and therefore need
we streams from heaven, that when the mud has
setded, the clearer portion may rise and mingle
with the heavenly lessons; and this comes to
pass, when we present an honest soul and an up-
right life. For certainly it is possible for the
intellect to be darkened, not only by unseason-
able curiosity, but also by corrupt manners;


I ^;(wk<..


• lit. " shook."


• al. " dreadful darkncM."


wherefore Paul hath said to the Corinthians, " I
have fed you with milk, and not with meat ; for
hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet
now are ye able, for ye are yet carnal ; for
whereas there is among you envying, and strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal? " (i Cor. iii.
2.) And also in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and in many places, one may see Paul asserting
that this is the cause of evil doctrines ; for that
the soul possessed by passions^ cannot behold
anything great or noble, but as if darkened by a
sort of film* suffers most grievous dimsighted-
ness.

Let us then cleanse ourselves, let us kindle the
light of knowledge, let us not sow among thorns.
What the thorns are, ye know, though we tell
you not ; for often ye have heard Christ c^ill the
cares of this present life, and the deceitfulness
of riches, by this name. (Matt. xiii. 22.) And
with reason. For as thorns are unfruitful, so are
these things ; as thorns tear those that handle
them, so dp these passions ; as thorns are readily
caught by the fire, and hateful by the husband-
man, so too are the things of the world ; as in
thorns, wild beasts, and snakes, and scorpions
hide themselves, so do they in the deceitfulness
of riches. But let us kindle the fire of the
Spirit, that we may consume the thorns, and
drive away the beasts, and make the field clear
for the husbandman ; and after cleansing it, let
us water it with the streams of the Spirit, let us
plant the fruitful olive, that most kindly of trees,
the evergreen, the light-giving, the nutritious,,
the wholesome. All these qualities hath almsgiv-
ing, which is, as it were, a seal on* those that
possess it. This plant not even death when it
comes causes to wither, but ever it stands en-
lightening the mind, feeding the sinews ' of the
soul, and rendering its strength mightier. And
if we constantly possess it, we shall be able with
confidence to behold the Bridegroom, and to
enter into the bridal chamber ; to which may we
all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.


* (fiira?^.


' Aii(ii|t.


'lit. "with."


1 rfOpo.


Homily XXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


87


HOMILY XXV.

John iii. 5. .


' Verily I say unto thcc, Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God."


[i.] Little children who go daily to their
teachers receive their lessons, and repeat ' them,
and never cease from this kind of acquisition, but
sometimes employ nights as well as days, and
this they are compelled^ to do for perishable and
transient things. Now we do not ask of you
who are come to age such toil as you require of
your children ; for not every day, but two days
only in the week do we exhort you to hearken
to our words, and only for a short portion of the
day, that your task may be an easy one. For
the same reason also we divide' to you in small
portions what is written in Scripture, that you
may be able easily to receive and lay them up in
the storehouses of your minds, and take such
pains to remember them all, as to be able exactly
to repeat them to others yourselves, unless any
one be sleepy, and dull, and more idle than a
little child.

L«t us now attend to the sequel of what has
been before said. When Nicodemus fell into
error and wrested the words of Christ to the
earthly birth, and said that it was not possible
for an old man to be born again, observe how
Christ in answer more clearly reveals the man-
ner of the Birth, which even thus had difficulty
for the carnal enquirer, yet still was able to raise
the hearer from his low opinion of it. What
saith He ? " Verily I say unto thee. Except a
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can-
not enter into the Kingdom of God." What
He declares is this : " Thou sayest that it is im-
possible, I say that it is so absolutely possible as
to be necessary, and that it is not even possible
otherwise to be saved." For necessary things
God hath made exceedingly easy also. The
earthly birth which is according to the flesh, is
of the dust, and therefore heaven* is walled
against it, for what hath earth in common with
heaven? But that other, which is of the Spirit,
easily unfolds to us the arches' above. Hear,
ye as many as are unilluminated,* shudder,
groan, fearful is the threat, fearful the sentence.^
"It is not (possible)," He saith, "for one not
born of water and the Spirit, to enter into the
Kingdom of heaven"; because he wears the


' iitoSiitatrt,

' al. [by you].

' 6ta(ait'ontv.

* lit. " things in heaven.**


^ i.e. unbaptizcd.
7 airo^aaic.


raiment of death, of cursing, of perdition, he
hath not yet received his Lord's token,* he is a
stranger and an alien, he hath not the royal
watchword. " Except," He saith, " a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven."

Yet even thus Nicodemus did not understand.
Nothing is worse than to commit spiritual things
to argument ; it was this that would not suffer
him to suppose anything sublime and great.
This is why we are called faithful, that having
left the weakness of human reasonings below,*
we may ascend to the height of faith, and com-
mit most of our blessings to her'" teaching;"
and if Nicodemus had done this, the thing would
not have been thought by him impossible. What
then doth Christ ? To lead him away from his
groveling imagination, and to show that He
speaks not of the earthly birth. He saith, " Ex-
cept a man be born of water and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven."
This He spoke, willing to draw him to the faith
by the terror of the threat, and to persuade him
not to deem the thing impossible, and taking
pains to move him from his imagination as to
the carnal birth. " I mean," saith He, "another
Birth, O Nicodemus. Why drawest thou down
the saying to earth? Why subjectest thou the
matter to the necessity of nature ? This Birth
is too high for such pangs as these ; it hath noth-
ing in common with you ; it is indeed called
' birth,' but in name only has it aught in com-
mon, in reality it is different. Remove thyself
from that which is common and familiar ; a dif-
ferent kind of childbirth bring I into the world ;
in another manner will I have men to be gener-
ated : I have come to bring a new manner of
Creation. I formed (man) of earth and water ;
but that which was formed was unprofitable, the
vessel was wrenched awry ; "^ I will no more
form them of earth and water, but ' of water '
and 'of the Spirit.'"

And if any one asks, " How 0/ water ?" \
also will ask, How of earth? How was the
clay separated into different parts ? How was
the material uniform, (it was. earth only,) and
the things made from it, various and of every
kind ? Whence are Ihe bones, and sinews, and
arteries, and veins? Whence the membranes,
and vessels of the organs, the cartilages, the


^ or, " which is below." ^ ** 4I. *' this.**

1' i.e. submit to the teaching of iaith conceminf theoi.


S8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXV.


tissues, the liver, spleen, and heart? whence the
skin, and blood, and mucus, and bile ? whence
so great powers, whence such varied colors?
These belong not to earth or clay. How does
the earth, when it receives the seeds, cause
them to shoot, while the flesh receiving them
wastes them? How does the earth nourish
what is put into it, while the flesh is nourished
by these things, and does not nourish them?
The earth, for instance, receives water, and
makes it wine ; the flesh often receives wine,
and changes it into water. Whence then is it
clear that these things are formed of earth,
when the nature of the earth is, according to
what has been said,' contrary to that of the
body? I cannot discover by reasoning, I ac-
cept it by faith only. If then things which take
place daily, and which we handle, require faith,
much more do those which are more mysterious
and more spiritual than these. For as the earth,
which is soulless and motionless, was empowered
by the will of God, and such wonders were
worked in it ; much more when the Spirit is
present with the water, do all those things so
strange and transcending reason, easily take
place.

[2.] Do not then disbelieve these things,
because thou seest them not ; thou dost not see
thy soul, and yet thou believest that thou hast
a soul, and that it is a something different
besides ' the body.

But Christ led him not in by this example,
but by another ; the instance of the soul, though
it is incorporeal. He did not adduce for that
reason, because His hearer's disposition was as
yet too dull. He sets before him another, which
has no connection with the density of solid
bodies, yet does not reach so high as to the
incorporeal natures ; • that is, the movement of
wind. He begins at first with water, which is
lighter than earth, but denser than air. And as
in the beginning earth was the subject material,^
but the whole * was of Him who molded it ;
so also now water is the subject material, and
the whole ' is of the grace of the Spirit : then,
"man became a living soul," (Gen. ii. 7) ; now
he becomes "a quickening Spirit." But great
is the difference between the two. Soul affords
not life to any other than him in whom it is ;
Spirit not only lives, but affords life to others
also. Thus, for instance, the Apostles even raised
the dead. Then, man was formed last, when
the creation had been accomplished ; now, on
the contrary, the new man is formed before the
new creation; he is born first, and then the


* Kara Ta cipij^cVa. This seems to be the best reading, and is
found in Morel. Ben. and MSS. Savile reads the passage thus:
Tb tnitt^a ; rd cipr^^cVa Ao-ytcr/it^ tt.iv tvpaVt k.t.A.

* :rapd. ' vntKi'tTO aTO^xtloVt

* TO vnv, i.e. the fabric of the human body.
' Le. the new man.


world is fashioned anew. (i Cor. xv. 45.)
And as in the beginning He formed him entire,
so He creates him entire now. Then He said,
"Let us make for him a help" (Gen. ii. 18,
LXX.), but here He said nothing of the kind.
What other help shall he need, who has received
the gift of the Spirit? What further need of
assistance has he, who belongs to* the Body of
Christ? Then He made man in the image
of God, now He hath united' him with God
Himself; then He bade him rule over the fishes
and beasts, now He hath exalted our first-fruits
above the heavens ; then He gave him a garden
for his abode,' now He hath opened heaven to
us ; then man was formed on the sixth day,
when the world* was almoiSt finished; but now
on the first, at the very beginning, at the time
when light was made before. From all which
it is plain, that the things accomplished belonged
to '" another and a better life, and to a condi-
tion " having no end.

The first creation then, that of Adam, was
from earth ; the next, that of the woman, from
his rib ; the next, that of Abel, from seed ; yet
we cannot arrive at the comprehension of '^ any
one of these, nor prove the circumstances by
argument, though they are of a most earthly
nature ; " how then shall we be able to give
account of the unseen '* generation " by Bap-
tism, which is far more exalted than these, or
to require arguments'" for that strange and
marvelous Birth?" Since even Angels stand
by while that Generation takes place, but they
could not tell the manner of that marvelous
working, they stand by only, not performing
anything, but beholding what takes place. The
Father, the Son, and the Holy. Ghost, worketh
all. Let us then beUeve the declaration of
God ; that is more trustworthy than actual see-
ing. The sight often is in error, it is impossi-
ble that God's Word should fail ; let us then
believe it ; that which called the things that
were not into existence may well be trusted
when it speaks of their nature. What then says
it ? That what is effected is a Generation. If
any ask, " How," stop his mouth with the dec-
claration of God,'* which is the strongest and a
plain proof. If any enquire, "Why is water
included?" let us also in return ask, "Where-
fore was earth employed at the beginning in the
creation of man?" for that it was possible for
God to make man without earth, is quite plain
to every one. Be not then over-curious.


' « Tf\tav ei7 TO (Tufia.


• tiatrav.


*' raTatTTnaews.
" ititLKtaBaL,
'* itaj^iiTtiTilt
" atitiv. " V0Ti\Tyf^.

'0 al. " were the first-fruits of." " ytvi>r)cT<(ti^,

'" Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " but if it is impossible to reply to
these questions, how shall it not be more impossible to speak con-
cerning the unseen and far higher Generation.'' or rather, how is it
not superfluous to demand reasons," &c.'

1' Aox«io«. " ol. " of Christ."


HOMILV XXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


89


That the need of water is absohite and indis-
pensable,' you may learn in this way. On one
occasion, when the S)jirit had flown down before
the "water was apphed, the Apostle did not stay
at this point, but, as though the water were
necessary and not superfluous, observe what he
says ; " Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we?" (Acts x. 47.)

What then is the use of the water? This too
I will tell you hereafter, when I reveal to you
the hidden mystery.- There are also other
points of mystical teaching connected with the
matter, but for the present I will mention to you
one out of many. What is this one? In Bap-
tism are fulfilled the pledges of our covenant
with God ; ' burial and death, resurrection and
life ; and these take place all at once. For when
we immerse our heads in the water, the old man
is buried as in a tomb below, and wholly sunk
forever ; ■* then as we raise them again, the new
man rises in its stead.'' As it is easy for us to
dip and to lift our heads again, so it is easy for
God to bury the old man, and to show forth the
new. And this is done thrice, that you may
learn that the power of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost fulfilleth all this. To show that
what we say is no conjecture, hear Paul saying,
" We are buried with Him by Baptism into
death " : and again, " Our old man is crucified
with Him " : and again, " We have been planted
together in the likeness of His death." (Rom.
vi. 4, 5, 6.) And not only is Baptism called a
"cross," but the "cross" is called " Baptism."
"With the Baptism," saith Christ, "that I am
baptized withal shall ye be baptized" (Mark x.
39) : and, "I have a Baptism to be baptized
with" (Luke xii. 50) (which ye know not) ; for
as we easily dip and lift our heads again, so He
also easily died and rose again when He willed,
or rather much more easily, though He tarried
the three days for the dispensation of a certain
mystery.

[3.] Let us then who have been deemed
worthy of such mysteries show forth a life worthy
of the Gift, that is, a most excellent conversa-
tion •/' and do ye who have not yet been deemed
wordiy, do all things that you may be so, that
we may be one body, that we may be brethren.
For as loiig as we are divided in this respect,
though a man be father, or son, or brother, or
aught else, he is no true kinsman, as being cut
off from that relationship which is from above.
What advantagcth it to be bound by the ties of


* avayKaia Kat aTcpatTTjTO?.

' [as it is allowed me from above] Morel.

3 Oela TfAeiTai fy auTw avfjijUo^a. . So in I^useb. //I'si. Ecc. X. 3.
Baptism is said to be (rajTi^ptoy n-dOovs dffoppijTa triijii^oAa. Sec
also Kutinus. de Constani. 9. 9.

* Mortl "having: been immersed below, is bidden wholly once
for all." [The whole p.issaf;e is important for the patristic view of
the mode of ba^nism. — P. S.] * wdAci'. * nroAtTciai',


earthly family, if we are not joined by those of
the spiritual? what profits nearness of kin on
earth, if we are to be strangers in heaven? For
the Catechumen is a stranger to the Faithful.
He hath not the sarrte Head, he hath not the
same Father, he hath not the same City, nor
Food, nor Raiment, nor Table, nor House, but
all are different ; all are on earth to the former,
to the latter all are in heaven. One has Christ
for his King ; the other, sin and the devil ; the
food " of one is Christ, of the other, that meat
which decays and perishes ; one has worms'
work for his raiment, the other the Lord of
angels ; heaven is the city of one, earth of the
other. Since then we have nothing in common,
in what, tell me, shall we hold communion?
Did we remove the same pangs,' did we come
forth from the same womb? This has nothing
to do with that most perfect relationship. Let
us then give diligence that we may become citi-
zens of the city which is above. How long do
we tarry over the border," when we ought to
reclaim our ancient country? We risk no com-
mon danger ; for if it should come to pass,
(which God forbid !) that through the sudden
arrival of death we depart hence uniniiiated,'"
though we have ten thousand virtues, our portion
will be no other than hell, and the venomous
worm, and fire unquenchable, and bonds indis-
soluble. But God grant that none of those who
hear these words experience that punishment !
And this will be, if having been deemed worthy
of the sacred mysteries, we build upon that
foundation gold, and silver, and precious stones ;
for so after our departure hence we shall be able
to appear in that place rich, when we leave not
our riches here, but transport them to inviolable
i;reasuries by the hands of the poor, when we
lend to Christ. Many are our debts there, not
of money, but of sins ; let us then lend Him our
riches, that we may receive pardon for our sins ;
for He it is that judgeth. Let .us not neglect
Him here when He hungereth, that He mdy
ever feed us there. Here let us clothe Him,_
that He leave us not bare of the safety which is
from Him. If here we give Him drink, we
shall not with the rich man say, " Send Lazarus,
that with the tip of his finger he may drop water
on my broiling " tongue." If here we receive
Him into our house, there He will prepare many
mansions for us ; if we go to Him in prison. He
too will free us from our bonds ; if we take Him
in when He is a stranger. He will not suffer us
to be strangers to the Kingdom of heaven, but
will give us a portion in the City which is above ;
if we visit Him when He is sick. He also will
quickly deliver us from our infirmities.

Let us then, as receiving great things though


T al. " the delight.'
** i.c. uubaptized.


• I.e. were we twins.


* virepoptac*


90


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVI.


we give but little, still give the little that we may
gain the great. While it is yet time, let us sow,
that we may reap. When the winter overtakes
us, when the sea is no longer navigable, we are
no longer masters of this traffic. But when shall
the winter be ? When that great and manifest
Day is at hand. Then we shall cease to sail this
great and broad sea, for such the present life re-
sembles. Now is the time of sowing, then of
harvest and of gain. If a man puts not in his seed
at seed time and sows in harvest, besides that
he effects nothing, he will be ridiculous. But if
the present is seed time, it follows that it is a


time not for gathering together, but for scat-
tering ; let us then scatter, that we may gather
in, and not seek to gather in now, lest we lose
our harvest ; for, as I said, this season summons
us to sow, and spend, and lay out, not to collect
and lay by. Let us not then give up the oppor-
tunity, but let us put in abundant seed, and
spare none of our stores, that we may receive
them again with abundant recompense, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, world without end. Amen,


HOMILY XXVI.

John iii. 6.


" That which is born of the flesh is flesh : and that
which is born of the Spirit is spirit."

[i.] Great mysteries are they, of which the
Only-begotten Son of God has counted us worthy ;
great, and such as we were not worthy of, but
such as it was meet for Him to give. For if one
reckon our desert, we were not only unworthy of
the gift, but also liable to punishment and ven-
geance ; but He, because He looked not to this,
not only delivered us from punishment, but
freely gave us a life much more bright ' than the
first, introduced us into another world, made us
another creature ; " If any man be in Christ,"
saith Paul, " he is a new creature." (2 Cor. v.
17.) What kind of "new creature"? Hear
Christ Himself declare ; " Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God." Paradise was en-
trusted to us, and we were shown unworthy to
dwell even there, yet He hath exalted us to
heaven. In the first things we were found un-
faithful, and He hath committed to us greater ;
we could not refrain from a single tree, and He
hath provided for us the delights ^ above ; we
kept not our place in Paradise, and He hath
opened to us the doors of heaven. Well said
Paul, " O the depth of the riches, both of the wis-
dom and knowledge of God !" (Rom. xi. 33.)
There is no longer a mother, or pangs, or sleep, or
coming together, and embracings of bodies ;
henceforth all the fabric^ of our nature is framed
above, of the Holy Ghost and water. The water
is employed, being made the Birth to him who is
born ; what the womb is to the embryo, the


' al. " precious.'


' KaraaKevij.


water is to the believer ; for in the water he is
fashioned and formed. At first it was said, " Let
the waters bring forth the creeping things that
have life " (Gen. i. 20, LXX.) ; but from the time
that the Lord entered the streams of Jordan, the
water no longer gives forth the " creeping thing
that hath life," but reasonable and Spirit-bearing
souls ; and what has been said of the sun, that
he is " as a bridegroom coming out of his cham-
ber " (Ps. xviii. 6), we may now rather say of
the faithful, for they send forth rays far brighter
than he. That which is fashioned in the womb
requires time, not so that in water, but all is
done in a single moment. Here our hfe is per-
ishable, and takes its origin from the decay of
other bodies ; that which is to be born comes
slowly, (for such is the nature of bodies, they
acquire perfection by time,) but it is not so with
spiritual things. And why ? Because the things
made are formed perfect from the beginning.

When Nicodemus still hearing these things
was troubled, see how Christ partly opens to him
the secret of this mystery, and makes that cleai
which was for a while obscure to him. " Thai
which is born," saith He, " of the flesh is flesh
and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.'
He leads him away from all the things of sense
and suffers him not vainly to pry into the mys-
teries revealed with his fleshly eyes ; " We speal
not," saith He, " of flesh, but of Spirit, O Nice
demus," (by this word He directs him heaveni
ward for a while,) "seek then nothing relatinif
to things of sense ; never can the Spirit appeal
to those eyes, think not that the Spirit bringet [
forth the flesh." " How then," perhaps one ma j
ask, " was the Flesh of the Lord brought forth ?
Not of the Spirit only, but of flesh ; as Paul de


IIOMILY XXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


91


clares, when he says, " Made of a woman, made
under the Law " (Gal. iv. 4) ; for the Spirit
fashioned Him not indeed out of nothing, (for
what need was there then of a womb?) but
from the flesh of a Virgin. How, I cannot ex-
plain unto you ; yet it was done, that no one
might suppose that what was born is alien to
our nature. For if even when this has taken
place there are some who disbelieve in such a
birth, into what impiety would they not have
fallen had He not partaken of the Virgin's flesh.

" That which is born ' of the Spirit is spirit."
Seest thou the dignity of the Spirit ? It appears
performing the work of God ; for above he said
of some, that, " they were begotten of God,"
(c. i. 13,) here He saith, that the Spirit beget-
teth them.

" That which is born of the Spirit is spirit. "
His meaning is of this kind ; " He that is born '^
of the Spirit is spiritual." For the Birth which
He speaks of here is not that according to
essence,^ but according to honor and grace.
Now if the Son is so born also, in what shall He
be superior to men so born? And how is He,
Only-begotten? For I too am born of God,
though not of His Essence, and if He also is not
of His Essence, how in this respect does He
differ from us ? Nay, He will then be found to
be inferior to the Spirit ; for birth of this kind is
by the grace of the Spirit. Needs He then the
help of the Spirit that He may continue a Son ?
And in what do these differ from Jewish doc-
trines ?

Christ then having said, " He that is born of
the Spirit is spirit," when He saw him again
confused, leads His discourse to an example
from sense, saying,

Ver. 7, 8. " Marvel not that I said unto thee.
Ye must be born again.* The wind bloweth
where it listeth."

For by saying, "Marvel not," He indicates
the confusion of his soul, and leads him to some-
thing lighter than body. He had already led
him away from fleshly things, by saying, " That
which is born of the Spirit is spirit " ; but when
Nicodemus knew not what " that which is born
of the Spirit is spirit " meant. He next carries
him to another figure, not bringing him to the
density of bodies, nor yet speaking of things
purely incorporeal, (for had he heard he could
not have received this,) but having found a
something between what is and what is not body,
namely, the motion of the wind. He brings him
to that next. And He saith of it,

" Thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst
not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth."

Though He saith, " it bloweth where it listeth,"
He saith it not as if the wind had any power of


■ or,
'or,


" begotten."
" begotten."


' ovtriav,

• or, " from above."


choice, but declaring that its natural motion
cannot be hindered, and is with power. For
Scripture knoweth how to speak thus of things
without life, as when it saith, " The creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly." (Rom.
viii. 20.) The expression therefore, " bloweth
where it listeth," is that of one who would show
that it cannot be restrained, that it is spread
abroad everywhere, and that none can hinder
its passing hither and thither, but that it goes
abroad with great might, and none is able to
turn aside its violence.

[2.] "And thou hearest its voice,"' (that is,
its rustle, its noise,) " but canst not tell whence
it cometh, and whither it goeth ; so is every one
that is born of the Spirit."

Here is the conclusion of the whole matter.
" If," saith He, " thou knowest not how to
explain the motion nor the path of this wind '
which thou perceivest by hearing and touch,
why art thou over-anxious about the working of
the Divine Spirit, when thou understandest not
that of the wind, though thou hearest its voice?"
The expression, " bloweth where it listeth," is
also used to establish the power of the Comforter ;
for if none can hold the wind, but it moveth
where it listeth, much less will the laws of nature,
or limits of bodily generation, or anything of the
like kind, be able to restrain the operations of
the Spirit.

That the expression, " thou hearest its voice,"
is used respecting the wind, is clear from this
circumstance ; He would not, when conversing
with an unbeliever and one unacquainted with
the operation of the Spirit, have said, "Thou
hearest its voice." As then the wind is not visi-
ble, although it utters a sound, so neither is the
birth of that which is spiritual visible to our
bodily eyes ; yet the wind is a body, although a
very subtle one ; for whatever is the object of
sense is body. If then you do not complain
because you cannot see this body, and do not
on this account disbelieve, why do you, when
you hear of " the Spirit," hesitate and demand
such exact accounts, although you act not so in
the case of a body? What then doth Nico-
demus? still he continues in his low Jewish
opinion, and that too when so clear an example
has been mentioned to him. Wherefore when
he again says doubtingly,

Ver. 9, 10. "How can these things be?"
Christ now speaks to him more chidingly ; " Art
thou a master in Israel, and knowest not these
things?"

Observe how He nowhere accuses the man
of wickedness, but only of weakness and sim-
plicity. " And what," one may ask, " has this
birth in common with Jewish matters?" Tell


e ^Y)fr,


« or, " spiriu"


92


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVL


me rather what has it that is not in common
with them ? For the first-created man, and the
woman formed from his side, and the barren
women, and the things accomplished by water,
I mean what relates to the fountain on which
Elisha made the iron tool to swim, to the Red
Sea which the Jews passed over, to the pool
which the Angel troubled, to Naaman the Syrian
who was cleansed in Jordan, all these proclaimed
beforehand, as by a figure, the Birth and the
purification which were to be. And the words
of the Prophet allude to the manner of this Birth,
as, "It shall be announced unto the Lord a gen-
eration which Cometh, and they shall announce
His righteousness unto a people that shall be
born, whom the Lord hath made " (Ps. xxii. 30;
XXX. 31, LXX.) ; and, "Thy youth shall be re-
newed as an eagle's" (Ps. ciii. 5, LXX.);
.and, " Shine, O Jerusalem ; behold, Thy King
Cometh!" (Isa. Ix. i; Zech. ix. 9); and,
" Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven."
(Ps. xxxii. I, LXX.) Isaac also was a type of
this Birth. For tell mc, Nicodeqius, how was he
bom ? was it according to the law of nature ? By
no means ; the mode of his generation was mid-
way between this of which we speak and the
natural ; the natural, because he was begotten
by cohabitation ; the other, because he was
begotten not of blood,' (but by the will of God.)
I shall show that these figures^ proclaimed before-
hand not only this birth, but also that from the
Virgin. For, because no one would easily have
believed that a virgin could bear a child, barren
[ women first did so, then such as were not only
• barren, but aged also. That a woman should be
made from a rib was indeed far more wonder-
ful than that the barren should conceive ; but
because that was of early and old time, another
figure, new and fresh, was given, that of the
barren women, to prepare the way for belief in
the Virgin's travail. To remind him then of
these things, Jesus said, " Art thou a master in
Israel, and knowest not these things?"

Ver. II. " We speak that We do know, and
testify that We have seen, and none receiveth '
Our witness."

This He added, making His words credible
by another argument, and condescending in His
speech to the other's infirmity.

[3.] And what is this that He saith, "We
speak that We do know, and testify that We
have seen"? Because with us the sight is the
most trustworthy of the senses, and if we desire
to gain a person's belief, we speak thus, that we
saw it with our eyes, not that we know it by
hearsay ; Christ therefore speaks to him rather
after the manner of men, gaining belief for His
words by this means also. And that this is so,


and that He desires to establish nothing else,
and refers not to sensual vision, is clear from
this ; after saying, " That which is born of the
flesh is flesh ; and that which is born of the
Spirit is spirit," He adds, " We speak that we
do know, and testify that we have seen." Now
this (of the Spirit) was not yet born * ; how then
saith He, " what we have seen " ? Is it not plain
that He speaks of a knowledge not otherwise
than exact ?

"And none receiveth our witness." The
expression "we know," He uses then either
concerning Himself and His Father, or concern-
ing Himself alone ; and " no man receiveth," is
the expression not of one displeased, but of one
who declares a fact ; for He said not, " What
can be more senseless than you who receive not
what is so exactly declared by us ? " but display-
ing all gentleness, both by His works and His
words, He uttered nothing like this ; mildly and
kindly He foretold what should come to pass, so
guiding us too to all gentleness, and teaching us
when we converse with any and do not persuade
them, not to be annoyed or made savage ; for
it is impossible for one out of temper to accom-
plish his purpose, he must make him to whom
he speaks still more incredulous. Wherefore we
must abstain from anger, and make our words
in everyway credible by avoiding not only wrath,
but also loud speaking' ; for loud speaking is
the fijel of passion.

Let us then bind ' the horse, that we may
subdue the rider ; let us clip the wings of our
wrath, so the evil shall no fnore rise to a height.
A keen passion is anger, keen, and skillfiil to
steal our souls ; therefore we must on all sides
guard against its entrance. It were strange that
we should be able to tame wild beasts, and yet
should neglect our own savage minds. Wrath
is a fierce fire, it devours all things ; it harms
the body, it destroys the soul, it makes a man
deformed^ and ugly to look upon ; and if it were
possible for an angry person to be visible to
himself at the time of his anger, he would need
no other admonition, for nothing is more dis-
pleasing than an angry countenance. Anger is
a kind of drunkenness, or rather it is more griev-
ous than dmnkenness, and more pitiable than
(possession of) a daemon. But if we be careful
not to be loud in speech,* we shall find this the
best path to sobriety of conduct.' And there-
fore Paul would take away clamor as well asi
anger, when he says, " Let all anger and clamor
be put away from you." (Eph. iv. 31.) Let ua
then obey this teacher of all wisdom, and whenr
we are wroth with our servants, let us consider
our own trespasses, and be ashamed at theii


' lit "of bloods," at in c. i. 13.

* Tpbirot.


B ov \afipavCTi, G. T.


* or, " begotten."

* lit. " shouting."

> lit. " tic tlie fiet of."


T or, '* unpleasing."
* ^lAoao^t'af*


llOMILY XXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


93


forbearance. For when thou art insolent, and
thy servant bears thy insults in silence, when
thou actest unseemly, he like a wise man, take
this instead of any other warning. Though he
is thy servant, he is still a man, has an immortal
soul, and has been honored with the same gifts
as thee by your common Lord. And if he who
is our equal in more important and more spiritual
things, on account of some poor and trifling
human superiority so meekly bears our injuries,
what pardon can we deserve, what excuse can
we make, who cannot, or rather will not, be as


wise through fear of God, as he is through fear
of us? Considering then all these things, and
calling to mind our own transgressions, and the
common nature of man, let us be careful at all
times to speak gently, that being humble in heart
we may find rest for our souls, both that which
now is, and that which is to come ; which may we
all attain, by the grace and lovingkindness of
cwr Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY XXVII.

John iii. 12, 13.


" If I have told yott earthl/ things, and ye believe not,
how shall ye believe, it I tell you of heavenly things?
And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He
that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man
which is in heaven."

[ I .] What I have often said I shall now repeat,
and shall not cease to say. What is that? It
is that Jesus, when about to touch on sublime
doctrines, often contains Himself by reason of
the infirmity of His hearers, and dwells not for
a continuance on subjects worthy of His great-
ness, but rather on those which partake of con-
descension. For the sublime and great, being
but once uttered, is suflficient to establish that
character, as far as we are able to hear it ; but
unless more lowly sayings, and such as are nigh
to ' the comprehension of the hearers, were con-
tinually uttered, the more sublime would not
readily take hold on a groveling listener. And
therefore of the sayings of Christ more are lowly
than sublime. But yet that this again may not
work another mischief, by detaining the disciple
here below. He does not merely set before men
His inferior sayings without first telling them
why He utters them ; as, in fact. He has done
in this place. For when He had said what He
did concerning Baptism, and the Generation by
grace which takes place on earth, being desirous
to adroit^ them to that His own mysterious and
incomprehensible Generation, He holds it in
suspense for a while, and admits them not, and
then tells them His reason for not admitting
hem. What is that? It is, the dullness and
nfirmity of His hearers. And referring to this
He added the words, " If I have told you earthly
hings, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe
f I tell you of heavenly things?" so that wher-


' al. " touch,"


' litdttvfi^,


ever He saith anything ordinary and humble,
we must attribute this to the infirmity of His
audience.

The expression " earthly things," some say is
here used of the wind ; that is, " If I have given
you an example from earthly things, and ye did
not even so believe, how shall ye be able to learn
sublimer things?" And wonder not if He here
call Baptism an " earthly" thing, for He calls it
so, either from its being performed on earth, or
so naming it in comparison with that His own
most awful Generation. For though this Gen-
eration of ours is heavenly, yet compared with
that true Generation which is from the Substance
of the Father, it is earthly.

He does not say, "Ye have not undej-stood,"
but, "Ye have not believed" ; for when a man
is ill disposed towards those things which it is
possible to apprehend by the intellect, and will
not readily receive them, he may justly be
charged with want of understanding ; but when
he receives not things which cannot be appre-
hended by reasoning, but only by faith, the
charge against him is no longer want of under-
standing, but unbelief Leading him therefore
away from enquiring by reasonings into what had
been said. He touches him more severely by
charging him with want of faith. If now we
must receive our own Generation' by faith, what
do they deserve who are busy with their reason-
ings about that of the Only-Begotten ?

But perhaps some may ask, "And if the
hearers were not to believe these sayings, where-
fore were they uttered ?" Because though " they "
believed not, those who came after would believe
and profit by them. Touching him therefore
very severely, Christ goes on to show that He


3 i.c the new Birth.


94


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVII,


knoweth not these things only, but others also,
fer more and greater than these. And this He
declared by what follows, when He said, "And
no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He
that came down from heaven, even the Son of
Man which is in heaven."

"And what manner of sequel is this?'" asks
one. The very closest, and entirely in unison
with what has gone before. For since Nicode-
mus had said, " We know that Thou art a teacher
come from God," on this very point He sets
him right, all but saying, "Think Me not a
teacher in such manner as were the many of
the prophets who were of earth, for I have come
from heaven (but) now. None of the prophets
hath ascended up thither, but I dwell there."
Seest thou how even that which appears very
exalted is utterly unworthy of his greatness?
For not in heaven only is He, but everywhere,
and He fills all things ; but yet He speaks
according to the infirmity of His hearer, desir-
ing to lead him up little by little. And in this
place He called not the flesh "Son of Man,"
but He now named, so to speak, His entire Self
from the inferior substance ; indeed this is His
wont, to call His whole Person ^ often from His
Divinity, and often from His humanity.

Ver. 14. "And as Moses Hfted up the serpent
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man
be lifted up."

This again seems to depend upon what has
gone before, and this too has a very close con-
nection with it. For after having spoken of the
very great benefaction that had come to man by
Baptism, He proceeds to mention another bene-
faction, which was the cause of this, and not
inferior to it ; namely, that by the Cross. As
also Paul arguing with the Corinthians sets down
these benefits together, when he says, "Was
Paul crucified for you ? or were ye baptized into
the name of Paul?" for these two things most
of all declare His unspeakable love, that He
both suffered for His enemies, and that having
died for His enemies. He freely gave to them by
Baptism entire remission of their sins.

[2.] But wherefore did He not say plainly,
" I am about to be crucified," instead of referring
His hearers to the ancient type ? First, that you
may learn that old things are akin to new, and
that the one are not alien to the other ; next,
that you may know that He came not unwillingly
to His Passion ; and again, besides these reasons,
that you may learn that no harm arises to Him
from the Fact," and that to many there springs
from it salvation. For, that none may say,
" And how is it possible that they who believe
on one crucified should be saved, when he him-
self is holden of death?" He leads us to the

1 i.e. how is this connected with what has gone before ?
* rb wav, ' i.e. of the Passion.


ancient story. Now if the Jews, by looking tc
the brazen image of a serpent, escaped death,
much rather will they who believe on the Cruci-
fied, with good reason enjoy a far greater benefit,
For this* takes place, not through the weakness
of the Crucified, or because the Jews are strongei
than He, but because " God loved the world,"
therefore is His living Temple fastened to the
Cross.

Ver. 15. " That whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish, but have eternal life."

Seest thou the cause of the Crucifixion, and
the salvation which is by it ? Seest thou the rela-
tionship of the type to the reality? there the
Jews escaped death, but the temporal, here be-
lievers the eternal ; there the hanging serpen!
healed the bites of serpents, here the Crucified
Jesus cured the wounds inflcted by the spiritual '
dragon ; there he who looked with his bodilj
eyes was healed, here he who beholds with the
eyes of his understanding put off all his sins :
there that which hung was brass fashioned intc
the likeness of a serpent, here it was the Lord's
Body, builded by the Spirit ; there a serpent bi(
and a serpent healed, here death destroyed and
a Death saved. But the snake which destroyed
had venom, that which saved was free from ven-
om ; and so again was it here, for the death
which slew us had sin with it, as the serpent had
venom ; but the Lord's Death was free from af
sin, as the brazen serpent from venom. For,
saith Peter, " He did no sin, neither was guik
found in His mouth." (i Pet. ii. 22.) And
this is what Paul also declares, " And having
spoiled principalities and powers. He made £
show of them openly, triumphing over them ir
it." (Col. ii. 16.) For as some noble cham
pion by lifting on high and dashing down hi;
antagonist, renders his victory more glorious, s(
Christ, in the sight of all the world, cast dowi
the adverse powers, and having healed thos-
who were smitten in the wilderness, deliverei
them from all venomous beasts" that vexc'
them, by being hung upon the Cross. Yet H
did not say, " must hang," but, " must be lifte
up" (Acts xxviii. 4) ; for He used this whic
seemed the milder term, on account of H
hearer, and because it was proper to the type.'

Ver. 16. "God," He saith, "so loved tl;
world that He gave His Only-begotten Son, thi
whosoever believeth in Him should not perisi
but have everlasting life."

What He saith, is of this kind : Marvel ni
that I am to be lifted up that ye may be save!
for this seemeth good to the Father, and ll
hath so loved you as to give His Son for slayi
and ungrateful slaves. Yet a man would not
this even for a friend, nor readily even fon


* i.e. the Crucifixion.

• fOT^TOV.


• Orjpmv.

' iyyi/s toO niirow.


Homily XXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


95


righteous man ; as Paul has declared when he
said, " Scarcely for a righteous man will one
die." (Rom. v. 7.) Now he spoke at greater
length, as speaking to believers, but here Christ
speaks concisely, because His discourse was
directed to Nicodemus, but still in a more sig-
nificant manner, for each word had much signifi-
cance. For by the expression, " so loved," and
that other, " God the world," He shows the
great strength of His love. Large and infinite
was the interval between the two. He, the im-
mortal, who is without beginning, the Lifinite
Majesty, they but dust and ashes, full of ten
thousand sins, who, ungrateful, have at all times
offended Him ; and these He " loved." Again,
the words which He added after these are alike
significant, when He saith, that " He gave His
Only-begotten Son," not a servant, not an Angel,
not an Archangel. And yet no one would show
such anxiety for his own child, as God did for
His imgrateful servants.

His Passion then He sets before him not very
openly, but rather darkly ; but the advantage of
the Passion He adds in a clearer manner,' say-
ing, "That every one that believeth in Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life." For
when He had said, " must be lifted up," and
alluded to death, lest the hearer should be made
downcast by these words, forming some mere
human opinions concerning Him, and supposing
that His death was a ceasing to be,^ observe how
He sets this right, by saying, that He that was
given was " The Son of God," and the cause of
life, of everlasting life. He who procured life for
others by death, would not Himself be continu-
ally in death ; for if they who believed on the
Crucified perish not, much less doth He perish
who is crucified. He who taketh away the
destitution of others much more is He free from
it ; He who giveth life to others, much more to
Himself doth He well forth life. Seest thou
that everywhere there is need of faith? For
He calls the Cross the fountain of hfe ; which
reason cannot easily allow, as the heathens now
by their mocking testify. But faith which goes
beyond the weakness of reasoning, may easily
receive and retain it. And whence did God " so
love the world " ? From no other source but
only from his goodness.

[3.] Let us now be abashed at His love, let
us be ashamed at the excess of His lovingkind-
ness, since He for our sakes spared not His Only-
begotten Son, yet we spare our wealth to our
own injury ; He for us gave His Own Son, but
we for Him do not so much as despise money,
nor even for ourselves. And how can these
things deserve pardon ? If we see a man sub-
mitting to sufferings and death for us, we set


' al. " clearly and openly."


> dnfirop^iat-.


him before all others, count him among our
chief friends, place in his hands all that is ours,
and deem it rather his than ours, and even so
do not think that we give him the return that he
deserves. But towards Christ we do not pre-
serve even this degree of right feeling. He laid
down His life for us, and poured forth His pre-
cious Blood for our sakes, who were neither well-
disposed nor good, while we do not pour out
even our money for our own sakes, and neglect
Him who died for us, when He is naked and a
stranger ; and who shall deliver us from the pun-
ishment that is to come ? For suppose that it
were not God that punishes, but that we punished
ourselves ; should we not give our vote against
ourselves? should we not sentence ourselves to
the very fire of hell, for allowing Him who laid
down His life for us, to pine with hunger? But
why speak I of money? had we ten thousand
lives, ought we not to lay them all down for
Him? and yet not even so could we do what
His benefits deserve. For he who confers a ben-
efit in the first instance, gives evident proof of
his kindness, but he who has received one, what-
ever return he makes, he repays as a debt, and
does not bestow as a favor ; especially when he
who did the first good turn was benefiting his
enemies. And he who repays both bestows his
gifts on a benefactor, and himself reaps their
fruit besides.^ But not even this induces us ;
more foolish are we than any, putting golden
necklaces about our servants and mules and
horses, and neglecting our Lord who goes about
naked, and passes from door to door, and ever
stands at our outlets, and stretches forth His
hands to us, but often regarding Him with un-
pitying eye ; yet these very things He under-
goeth for our sake. Gladly'' doth He hunger
that thou mayest be fed ; naked doth He go
that He may provide for thee the materials^ for
a garment of incorniption, yet not even so do ye
give up any of your own. Some of your gar-
ments are moth-eaten, others are a load to your
cofiers, and a needless trouble to their posses-
sors, while He who gave you these and all else
that you possess goeth naked.

But perhaps you do not lay them by in your
coffers, but wear them and make yourself fine
with them. And what gain you by this? Is it
that the street people may see you? xWhat
then ? They will not admire thee who wearest
such apparel, but the maa who supplies garments
to the needy ; so if you desire to be admired, by
clothing others, you will the rather get infinite
applause. Then too God as well as man shall
praise thee ; now none can praise, but all will
grudge at thee, seeing thee with a body well ar-
rayed, but having a neglected soul. So harlots


* iroAti'.

' lit. " sweetly."


oOeaiv,


96


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIII.


have adornment, and their clothes are often
more than usually expensive and splendid ; but
the adornment of the soul is with those only
who live in virtue.

These things I say continually, and I will not
cease to say them, not so much because I care
for the poor, as because I care for your souls.
For they will have some comfort, if not from you,
yet from some other quarter ; or even if they be
not comforted, but perish by hunger, the harm to
them will be no great matter. What did pov-


erty and wasting by hunger injure Lazarus ! But
none can rescue you from hell, if you obtain not
the help of the poor ; * we shall say to you what
was said to the rich man, who was continually
broiling, yet gained no comfort. God grant
that none ever hear those words, but that all
may go into the bosom of Abraham; by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY XXVIII.

John iii. 17.


" For God sent not His Son ' to condemn the world, but
to save the world." '


[ I .] Many of the more careless sort of persons,
using the lovingkindness of God to increase the
magnitude of their sins and the excess of their
disregard, speak in this way, " There is no hell,
there is no future punishment, God forgives us all
sins." To stop whose mouths a wise man says,
" Say not, His mercy is great, He will be paci-
fied for the multitude of my sins ; for mercy
and wrath come from Him, and His indignation
resteth upon sinners" (Ecclus. v. 6) : and again,
" As His mercy is great, so is His correction
also." (Ecclus. xvi. 12.) " Where then," saith
one, " is His lovingkindness, if we shall receive
for our sins according to our deserts?" That
we shall indeed receive " according to our de-
serts," hear both the Prophet and Paul declare ;
one says, " Thou shalt render to every man
according to his work" (Ps. Ixii. 12, LXX.) ;
the other, " Who will render to every man
according to his work." (Rom. ii. 6.) And
yet we may see that even so the lovingkindness
of God is great ; in dividing our existence ' into
two periods,'' the present life and that which is
to come, and making the first to be an appoint-
ment of trial, the second a place of crowning,
even in this He hath shown great lovingkind-
ness.

" How and m what way ? " Becau.se when
we had committed many and grievous sins, and
had not ceased from youth to extreme old age (
to defile our souls with ten thousand evil deeds,
for none of these sins did He demand from us
a reckoning, but granted us remission of them
by the washing' of Regeneration, and freely gave


' Jfi« rhf Koaftov, G. T.]
3 ti'a audi) 6 Koaiioi Si ait
* rk nutTcpa.


itrovi G. T.


• or, " laver.'


US Righteousness and Sanctification. "What
then," says one, " if a man who from his earliest
age has been deemed worthy of the mysteries,
after this commits ten thousand sins?" Such
an one deserves a severer punishment. For we
do not pay the same penalties for the same
sins, if we do wrong after Initiation.' And this
Paul declares, saying, " He tliat despised Moses'
law died without mercy under two or three wit-
nesses ; of how much sorer punishment, suppose
ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trod-
den under foot the Son of God, and hath
counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of
grace?" (Heb. x. 28, 29.) Such an one then
is worthy of severer punishment.' Yet even for
him God hath opened doors of repentance, and
hath granted him many means for the washing
away his transgressions, if he will. Think then
what proofs of lovingkindness these are ; by
Grace to remit sins, and not to punish him who
after grace has sinned and deserves punishment,
but to give him a season and appointed space
for his clearing.' For all these reasons Christ
said to Nicodemus, " God sent not His Son to
condemn the world, but to save die world."

For there are two Advents of Christ, that
which has been, and that which is to be ; and
the two are not for the same purpose ; the first
came to pass not that He might search into oui
actions, but that He might remit ; the object of
the second will be not to remit, but to enquire-
Therefore of the first He saith, " I came not tc
condemn the world, but to save the world'
(c. iii. 17); but of the second, "When thij


* al. " the hnnRry."

' HVffTaywyiav, • , j i. l

» Morel. " he then will be more severely punished who hi
sinned after grace."

^ npoBiatiiav airoAoytaf .


:


Homily XXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


97


Son shall have come in the glory of His Father,'
He shall set the sheep on His right hand, and
the goats on His left." (Matt. xxv. 31 and 46.)
And they shall go, these into life ; and these
into eternal punishment. Yet His former com-
ing was for judgment, according to the rule of
justice. Why? Because before His coming
there was a law of nature, and the prophets,
and moreover a written Law, and doctrine, and
ten thousand promises, and manifestations of
signs, and chastisements, and vengeances, and
many other things which might have set men
right, and it followed that for all these things
He would demand account ; but, because He
is merciful. He for a while pardons instead of
making enquiry. For had He done so, all
would at once have been hurried to perdition.
For " all," it saith, " have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God." (Rom. iii. 23.)
Seest thou the unspeakable excess of His loving-
kindness ?

Ver. 18. " He that believeth on the Son," is
not judged;^ but he that believeth not, is
judged already."

Yet if He " came not to judge the world,"
how is " he that believeth not judged already,"
if the time of "judgment " has not yet arrived?
He either means this, that the very fact of dis-
believing without repentance is a punishment,
(for to be without the light, contains in itself a
very severe punishment,) or he announces be-
forehand what shall be. For as the murderer,
though he be not as yet condemned by the de-
cision of the judge, is still condemned by the
nature of the thing, so is it with the unbeliever.
Since Adam also died on the day that he ate of
the tree ; for so ran the decree, " In the day
that ye eat of the tree, ye shall die " (Gen. ii.
17, LXX.) ; yet he lived. How then "died"
he ? By the decree ; by the very nature of the
I thing ; for he who has rendered himself liable to
/ punishment, is under its penalty, and if for a
( while not actually so, yet he is by the sentence.

Lest any one on hearing, " I came not to
judge the world," should imagine that he might
sin unpunished, and should so become more
careless, Christ stops* such disregard by saying,
" is judged already " ; and because the " judg-
ment " was future and not yet at hand. He
brings near the dread of vengeance, and de-
scribes" the punishment as already come. And
this is itself a mark of great lovingkindness, that
He not only gives His Son, but even delays the
time of judgment, that they who have sinned,
and they who believe not, may have power to
wash away their transgressions.

" He that believeth on the Son, is not judged."
He that " believeth," not he that is over-curious :


* Tn 5of /} aiiTOu, G. T.

* txi avTov, G. T.


« lit.


' condemned,
' walls off."


■ E. v.


he that " believeth," not the busybody. But
what if his life be unclean, and his deeds evil ?
It is of such as these especially that Paul de-
clares, that they are not true believers at all :
" They profess that they know God, but in
works they deny Him." (Tit. i. 16.) But
here Christ saith, that such an one is not
" judged " in this one particular ; for his works
indeed he shall suffer a severer punishment, but
having believed once, he is not chastised for
unbelief.

[2.] Seest thou how having commenced His
discourse with fearful things, He has concluded
it again with the very same? for at first He
saith, " Except a man be born of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God " : and here again, " He that believeth not
on the Son, is judged already." " Think not,"
He saith, " that the delay advantageth at all the
guilty, except he repent, for he that hath not
believed, shall be in no better state than those
who are already condemned and under punish-
ment."

Ver. 19. "And this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light."

What He saith, is of this kind : " they are
punished, because they would not leave the
darkness, and hasten to the light." And hence
He goes on to deprive them of all excuse for
the future : " Had I come," saith He, " to pun-
ish and to exact account of their deeds, they
might have been able to say, ' this is why we
started away from thee,' but now I am come to
free them from darkness, and to bring them to
the light ; who then could pity one who will not
come from darkness unto light? When they
have no charge to bring against us, but have re-
ceived ten thousand benefits, they start away
from us." And this charge He hath brought in
another place, where He saith, " They hated Me
without a cause " (John xv. 25) : and again, " If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they had
not had sin." (John xv. 22.) For he who in
the absence of light sitteth in darkness, may per-
chance receive pardon ; but one who after it is
come abides by the darkness, produces against
himself a certain proof of a perverse and con-
tentious disposition. Next, because His asser-
tion would seem incredible to most, (for none
would prefer "darkness to light,") He adds the
cause of such a feeling in them. What is that ?

Ver. 19, 20. "Because," He saith, "their
deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil,
hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved."

Yet he came not to judge or to enquire, but to
pardon and remit transgressions, and to grant
salvation through faith. How then fled thcv ' '


» Morel. " therefore they fled to their own hurt.'


98


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIII.


Had He come and sat in His Judgment seat,
what He said might have seemed reasonable ;
for he that is conscious to himself of evil deeds,
is wont to fly his judge. But, on the contrary,
they who have transgressed even run to one who
is pardoning. If therefore He came to pardon,
those would naturally most hasten to Him who
were conscious to themselves of many transgres-
sions ; and indeed this was the case with many,
for even publicans and sinners sat at meat with
Jesus. What then is this which He saith? He
saith this of those who choose always to remain
in wickedness. He indeed came, that He might
forgive men's former sins, and secure them
against those to come ; but since there are
some so relaxed,* so powerless for the toils of
virtue, that they desire to abide by wickedness
till their latest breath, and never cease from it,
He speaks in this place reflecting^ upon these.
" For since," He saith, " the profession of Chris-
tianity requires besides right doctrine a sound
conversation also, they fear to come over to us,
because they like not to show forth a righteous
life. Him that lives in heathenism none would
blame, because with gods such as he has, and
with rites as foul and ridiculous as his gods, he
shows forth actions that suit his doctrines ; but
those who belong to the True God, if they live a
careless life, have all men to call them to ac-
count, and to accuse them. So greatly do even
its enemies admire the truth." Observe, then,
how exactly He layeth down what He saith.
His expression is, not " He that hath done evil
cometh not to the light," but " he that doeth it
always, he that desireth always to roll himself in
the mire of sin, he will not subject himself to
My laws, but chooses to stay without, and to
commit fornication without fear, and to do all
other forbidden things. For if he comes to Me,
he becomes manifest as a thief in the light, and
therefore he avoids My dominion." For in-
stance, even now one may hear many heathen
say, " that they cannot come to our faith, be-
cause they cannot leave off drunkenness and
fornication, and the like disorders."

"Well," says some one, "but are there no
Christians that do evil, and heathens that live dis-
creetly?"' That there are Christians who do
evil, I know ; but whether there are heathens who
live a righteous life, I do not yet know assuredly.
For do not speak to me of those who by nature
are good and orderly, (this is not virtue,) but
tell me of the man who can endure the exceed-
ing violence of his passions and (yet) be tem-
perate.* You cannot. For if -the promise of a
Kingdom, and the threat of hell, and so much
other provision," can scarcely keep men in vir-


• lit. " flaccid."

• intaKutmtjiv.


* al. " doctrine."


tue, they will hardly go after virtue who believe
in none of these things. Or, if any pretend to
do so, they do it for show ; and he who doth
so for show, will not, when he may escape obser-
vation, refrain from indulging his evil desires.
However, that we may not seem to any to be
contentious, let us grant that there are right
livers among the heathen ; for neither doth this
go against my argument, since I spoke of that
which occurs in general, not of what happens
rarely.

And observe how in another way He deprives
them of all excuse, when He saith that, " the
light came into the world." " Did they seek it
themselves," He saith, " did they toil, did they
labor to find it ? The light itself came to them,
and not even so would they hasten to it." And
if there be some Christians who live wickedly, I
would argue that He doth not say this of those
who have been Christians from the beginnmg,
and who have inherited true religion from their
forefathers, (although even these for the most
part have been shaken from' right doctrine by
their evil life,) yet still I think that He doth
not now speak concerning these, but concern-
ing the heathen and the Jews who ought to have
come ' to the right faith. For He showeth that
no man living in error would choose to come
to the truth unless he before had planned ' for
himself a righteous life, and that none would
remain in unbelief unless he had previously
chosen always to be wicked.

Do not tell me that a man is temperate, and
does not rob; these things by themselves are
not virtue. For what advantageth it, if a man
has these things, and yet is the slave of vain-
glory, and remains in his error, from fear of the
company of his friends? This is not right living.
The slave of a reputation' is no less a sinner
than the fornicator ; nay, he worketh more and
more grievous deeds than he. But tell me of
any one that is free from all passions and from
all iniquity, and who remains among the heathen.
Thou canst not do so j for even those among
them who have boasted great things, and who
have, as they say,'" mastered avarice or gluttony,
have been, most of all men, the slaves of reputa-
tion," and this is the cause of all evils. Thus it !
is that the Jews also have continued Jews ; for j
which cause Christ rebuked them and said, j
" How can ye believe, which receive honor from \
men?" (c. v. 44.) i

" And why, pray, did He not speak on these
matters with Nathanael, to whom He testified
of the truth, nor extend His discourse to any
length?" Because even he came not with such
zeal as did Nicodemus. For Nicodemus made


" napeaaX€v9rfffav.
' al. ** shifted themselves."
I ' VBoypaifiai. al. cffiypa^ac-


** or, ** glory."

'* or, '* thou sayest."

" or, "glory."


Homily XXDJ.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


99


this his work,' and the season which others used
for rest he made a season for hearing ; but
Nathanael came at the instance of another.
Yet not even him did Jesus entirely pass by, for
to him He saith, " Hereafter ye shall see heaven
open, and the angels of God ascending and de-
scending upon the Son of Man." (c. i. 51.)
But to Nicodemus He spake not so, but con-
versed with him on the Dispensation and on
eternal life, addressing each differently and
suitably to the condition of his will. It was
sufficient for Nathanael, because he knew the
wr tings' of the prophets, and was not so timid
either, to hear only thus far ; but because Nico-
demus was as yet possessed by fear, Christ did
not indeed clearly reveal to him the whole, but
shook his mind so as to cast out fear by fear,

[declaring that he who did not believe was being
judged,^ and that unbelief proceeded from an
evil conscience. For since he made great ac-
count of honor from men, more than he did of
the punishment ; (" Many," saith the Evangelist,
" of the rulers believed on Him, but because of
the Jews they did not confess" — c. xii. 42;)
on this point Christ toucheth him, saying, " It
cannot be that he who believeth not on Me
disbelieveth for any other cause save that he
liveth an unclean life." Farther on He saith,
"I am the Light" (c. viii. 12), but here, "the
Light came into the world " ; for at the begin-
ning He spoke somewhat darkly, but afterwards
more clearly. Yet even so the man was kept
back by regard for the opinion of the many, and
therefore could not endure to speak boldly as
he ought.

Fly we then vainglory, for this is a passion
more tyrannical than any. Hence spring covet-


ousness and love of wealth, hence hatred and
wars and strifes ; for he that desires more than
he has, will never be able to stop, and he desires
from po other cause, but only from his love of
vainglory. For tell me, why do so many encircle
themselves with multitudes of eunuchs, and herds
of slaves, and much show? Not because they
need it,, but that they may make those who meet
them witnesses of this unseasonable display. If
then we cut this off, we shall slay together with
'the head the other members also of wickedness,
and there will be nothing to hinder us from
dwelling on earth as though it were heaven.
Nor doth this vice merely thrust its captives
into wickedness, but is even co-existent'' with
their virtues, and when it is unable entirely to
cast us out of these, it still causeth us much
damage in the very exercise of them, forcing us
to undergo the toil, and depriving us of the
fruit. For he that with an eye to this, fasts, and
prays, and shows mercy, has his rewa,rd. What
can be more pitiable than a loss like this, that it
should befall man to bewail* himself uselessly
and in vain, and to become an object of ridicule,
and to lose the glory from above? Since he
that aims at both cannot obtain both. It is
indeed possible to obtain both, when we desire
not both, but one only, that from heaven ; but
he cannot obtain both, who longs for both.
Wherefore if we wish to attain to glory, let us
flee from human glory, and desire that only
which Cometh from God ; so shall we obtain
both the one and the other ; which may we all
enjoy, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom,
to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXIX.

JOHN.iii. 22.


" And He came and His disciples into the land of Judaea,
and there He tarried with them (and baptized)."

[i.] Nothing can be clearer or mightier than
the truth, just as nothing is weaker than falsehood,
though it be shaded by ten thousand veils. For
even so it is easily detected, it easily melts away.
But truth stands forth unveiled for all that will
behold her beauty ; she seeks no concealment,
dreads no danger, trembles at no plots, desires
not glory from the many, is accountable to no
mortal thing, but stands above them all, is the


* i.e. his one great object*


* jcpiVeadai.


object of ten thousand secret plots, yet remain-
eth unconquerable, and guards as in a sure for-
tress these who fly to her by her own exceeding
might, who avoids secret lurking places, and
setteth what is hers before all men. And this
Christ conversing with Pilate declared, when He
said, " I ever taught openly, and in secret have
I said nothing." (c. xviii. 20.) As He spake
then, so He acted now, for, " After this," saith the
Evangelist, " He went forth and His disciples into
the land of Judaea, and there He tarried with them
and baptized." At the feasts He went up to the


3 irapv^c'ffTijKC.


* KOnTivOMt


lOO


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIX.


City to set forth in the midst of them His doc-
trines, and the help of His miracles ; but after
the feasts were over, He often went to Jordan,
because many ran together there. For He ever
chose the most crowded places, not from any
love of show or vainglory, but because He de-
sired to afford His help to the greatest number.

Yet the Evangelist farther on says, that "Jesus
baptized not, but His disciples"; whence it is
clear that this is his meaning here also. And why
did Jesus not baptize? The Baptist had said
before, " He shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit and with fire." Now he had not yet
given the Spirit, and it was therefore with good
cause that he did not baptize. But His disciples
did so, because they desired to bring many to
the saving doctrine.

" And why, when the disciples of Jesus were
baptizing, did not John cease to do so? why
did he continue to baptize, and that even until
he was led to prison? for to say,

Ver. 23. ' John also was baptizing in ^non ' ;
and to add,

Ver. 24. ' John was not yet cast into prison,'
was to declare that until that time he did not
cease to baptize. But wherefore did he baptize
until then ? For he would have made the dis-
ciples of Jesus seem more reverend had he de-
sisted when they began. Why then did he bap-
tize ? " It was that he might not excite his
disciples to even stronger rivalry, and make
them more contentious still. For if, although
he ten thousand times proclaimed Christ, yielded
to Him the chief place, and made himself so
much inferior, he still could not persuade them
to run to Him ; he would, had he added this
also, have made them yet more hostile. On this
account it was that Christ began to preach more
constantly when John was removed. And more-
over, I think that the death of John was allowed,
and that it happened very quickly, in order that
the whole attention ' of the multitude might be
shifted to Christ, and that they might no longer
be divided in their opinions concerning the
two.

Besides, even while he was baptizing, he did
not cease continually to exhort them, and to
show them the high and awful nature of Jesus.
For He baptized them, and told them no other
thing than that they must believe on Him that
came after him. Now how would a man who
acted thus by desisting have made the disciples
of Christ seem worthy of reverence ? On the
contrary, he would have been thought to do so
through envy and passion. But to continue
preaching gave a stronger proof; for he desired
not glory for himself, but sent on his hearers to
Christ, and wrought with Him not less, but


> Sta9«aiv,


rather much more than Christ's own disciples,
because his testimony was unsuspected and he
was by all men far more highly esteemed than
they. And this the Evangelist implies, when he
says, " all Judaea and the country around about
Jordan went out to him and were baptized."
(Matt. iii. 5.) Even when the disciples were
baptizing, yet many did not cease to run to
him.

If any one should enquire, " And in what was
the baptism of the disciples better than that of
John? " we will reply, " in nothing " ; both were
alike without the gift of the Spirit, both parties
alike had one reason for baptizing, and that
was, to lead the baptized to Christ. For in
order that they might not be always running
about to bring together those that should be-
lieve, as in Simon's case his brother did, and
Philip to Nathanael, they instituted baptism, in
order by it to bring all men to them easily, and
to prepare a way for the faith which was to be.
But that the baptisms had no superiority one
over the other, is shown by what follows. What
is that ?

Ver. 25. "There arose," saith the Evange-
Hst, "a question (between some) of John's disci-
ples and the Jews about purifying."

For the disciples of John being ever jealously
disposed towards Christ's disciples and Christ
Himself, when they saw them baptizing, began
to reason with those who were baptized, as
though their baptism was in a manner superior
to that of Christ's disciples ; and taking one of
the baptized, they tried to persuade him of this ;
but persuaded him not. Hear how the Evange-
list has given us to understand that it was they
who attacked him, not he who set on foot the
question. He doth not say, that " a certain Jew
questioned with them," but that, " there arose a
questioning from the disciples of John with a
certain Jew,^ concerning purification."

[2.] And observe, I pray you, the Evange-
list's inoflensiveness. He does not speak in the
way of invective, but as far as he is able softens
the charge, merely saying, that " a question
arose " ; whereas the sequel (which he has also
set down in an inoffensive manner) makes it
plain that what was said was said from jealousy.

Ver. 26. " They came," saith he, " unto John,
and said unto him. Rabbi, He that was with thee
beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness,
behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to
Him."

That is, " He whom thou didst baptize " ; for
this they imply when they say, " to whom thou.
barest witness," as though they had said, " He-
whom thou didst point out as illustrious, and

2 'lovSaiov Tit-oy. This reading is found in the Complut. and in
most of the Greek commentators: the plural in G. T., Vulgate, and
Latin writers.


Homily XXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


lOI


make remarkable, dares to do the same as thou."
Yet they do not say, " He whom thou didst
baptize " baptizeth ; (for then they would have
been obliged to make mention of the Voice that
came down from heaven, and of the descent of
the Spirit;) but what say they? "He that was
with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest
witness " ; that is, " He who held the rank of a
disciple, who was nothing more than we, this man
hath separated himself, and baptizeth." For
they thought to make him jealous,' not only by
this, but by asserting that their own reputation
was now diminishing. "All," say they, "come
to Him." Whence it is evident, that they did
not get the better of the Jew with whom they
disputed ; but they spoke these words because
they were imperfect in disposition, and were not
yet clear from a feeling of rivalry. What then
doth John ? He did not rebuke them severely,
fearing lest they should separate themselves again
from him, and work some other mischief. What
are his words ?^

Ver. 27. "A man can receive nothing, ex-
cept it be given him from above."

Marvel not, if he speak of Christ in a lowly
strain ; it was impossible to teach all at once,
and from the very beginning, men so pre-occu-
pied by passion. But he desires to strike them
for a while with awe and terror, and to show them
that they warred against none other than God
Himself, when they warred against Christ. And
here he secretly establishes that tnith, which
Gamaliel asserted, " Ye cannot overthrow it, lest
haply ye be found even to fight against God."
(Acts v. 39.) For to say, " None can receive
anything, except it be given him from heaven,"
was nothing else than declaring that they were
attempting impossibilities, and so would be
found to fight against God. " Well, but did not
Theudas and his followers ' receive ' from them-
selves ? " They did, but they straightway were
scattered and destroyed, not so what belonged
to Christ.

By this also he gently consoles them, showing
them that it was not a man, but God, who sur-
passed them in honor ; and that therefore they
must not wonder if what belonged to Him was
glorious, and if " all men came unto Him " : for
that this was the nature of divine things, and
that it was God who brought them to pass, be-
cause no man ever yet had power to do such
deeds. All human things are easily seen through,
and rotten, and quickly melt away and perish ;
these were not such, therefore not human. Ob-
serve too how when they said, " to whom thou
barest witness," he turned against themselves
that which they thought they had put forward to
lower Christ, and silences them after showing


' Morel. " but be speaks in a manner reservedly."


that Jesus' glory came not from his testimony ;
" A man cannot," he saith, " receive anything of
himself, except it be given him from heaven."
"If ye hold at all to my testimony, and believe
it to be true, know that by that testimony ye
ought to prefer not me to Him, but Him to me.
For what was it that I testified ? I call you your-
selves to witness."

Ver. 28. " Ye yourselves bear me witness that
I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent
before Him."

" If then ye hold to my testimony, (and ye
even now produce it when ye say, ' to whom
thou barest witness,') He is not only not dimin-
ished by receiving my witness, but rather is in-
creased by it ; besides, the testimony was not
mine, but God's. So that if I seem to you to
be trustworthy, I said this among other things,
that ' I am sent before Him.' " Seest thou how
he shows little by little that this Voice was di-
vine ? For what he saith is of this kind : " I
am a servant, and say the words of Him that
sent me, not flattering Christ through human
favor, but serving His Father who sent me. I
gave not the testimony as a gift,' but what I was
sent to speak, I spake. Do not then because of
this suppose that I am great, for it shows that
He is great. He is Lord of all things." This
he goes on to declare, and says,

Ver. 29. " He that hath the bride is the
bridegroom ; but the friend of the bridegroom
which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth
greatly because of the bridegroom's voice."

" But how doth he who said, * whose shoe's
latchet I am not worthy to unloose,'* now call
himself His ' friend ' ? " It is not to exalt him-
self, nor boastingly, that he saith this, but from
desire to show that he too most forwards this,
(i.e. the exaltation of Christ,) and that these
things come to pass not against his will or to his
grief, but that he desires and is eager for them,
and that it was with a special view to them that
all his actions had been performed ; and this he
has very wisely shown by the term " friend."
For on occasions like marriages, the servants of
the bridegroom are not so glad and joyful as his
" friends." It was not from any desire to prove
equality of honor, (away with the thought,) but
only excess of pleasure, and moreover from con-
descension to their weakness that he calleth
himself "friend." For his service he before de-
clared ' by saying, " I am sent before Him." On
this account, and because they thought that he
was vexed at what had taken place, he called
himself the " friend of the Bridegroom," to show
that he was not only not vexed, but that he even
greatly rejoiced. " For," saith he, " I came to
effect this, and am so far from grieving at what


» cxapi(ra/£il»'.


• al. '* implied.'^


I02


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIX*


has been done, that had it not come to pass, I
should then have been greatly grieved. Had
the bride not come to the Bridegroom, then I
should have been grieved, but not now, since my
task has been accomplished. When His servants'
are advancing, we are they who gain the honor ;
for that which we desired hath come to pass,
and the bride knoweth the Bridegroom, and ye
are witnesses of it when ye say, ' All men come
unto Him.' This I earnestly desired, I did all
to this end ; and now when I see that it has
come to pass, I am glad, and rejoice, and leap
for joy."

[3.] But what meaneth, " He which standeth
and heareth Him rejoiceth greatly, because of
the Bridegroom's voice " ? He transfers the
expression from the parable to the subject, in
hand ; for after mentioning the bridegroom and
the bride, he shows how the bride is brought
home, that is, by a " Voice " and teaching. For
thus the Church is wedded to God ; and there-
fore Paul saith, " Faith cometh by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God." (Rom. x. 17.)
" At this ' Voice,' " saith he, " I rejoice." And
not without a cause doth he put " who standeth,"
but to show that his office had ceased, that he
had given over to Him " the Bride," and must
for the future stand and hear Him ; that he was a
servant and minister; that his good hope and
his joy was now accompUshed. Therefore he
saith,

" This my joy therefore is fulfilled."

That is to say, " The work is finished which
was to be done by me, for the future I can do
nothing more." Then, to prevent increase of
jealous feeling, not then only, but for the future,
he tells them also of what ^ould come to pass,
confirming this too by what he had already said
and done.^ Therefore he continues,

Ver. 30. " He must increase, but I must de-
crease."

That is to say, " What is mine has now Come
to a stand, and has henceforth ceased, but what
is His increaseth ; for that which ye fear shall
not be now only, but much more as it advances.
And it is this especially which shows what is
mine the brighter ; for this end I came, and I
rejoice that what is His hath made so great
progress, and that those things have come to
pass on account of which all that I did was
done." Seest thou how gently and very wisely
he softened down their passion, quenched their
envy, showed them that they were undertaking
impossibilities, a method by which wickedness
is best checked? For this purpose it was or-
dained, that these things should take place while
John was yet alive and baptizing, in order that


* or, " affairs."

' So Savilc and MSS. Morel. 's reading has the same sense, but
is less clear and concise.


his disciples might have him as a witness of the
superiority of Christ, and that if they should
not believe,' they might be without excuse. For
John came not to say these words of his own
accord, nor in answer to other enquirers, but
they asked the question themselves, and heard
the answer. For if he had spoken of himself,
their belief would not have been equal to the
self-condemning * judgment which they received
when they heard him answer to their question ;
just as the Jews also, in that they sent to him
from their homes, heard what they did, and yet
would not believe, by this especially deprived
themselves of excuse.

What then are we taught by this? That a
mad desire of glory ' is the cause of all evils ;
this led them to jealousy, and when they had
ceased for a little, this roused them to it again.
Wherefore they come to Jesus, and say, " Why
do thy disciples fast not?" (Matt. ix. 14.) Let
us then, beloved, avoid this passion ; for if we
avoid this we shall escape hell. For this vice
specially kindles the fire of hell, and everywhere
extends* its rule, and tyrannically occupies every
age and every rank.' This hath turned churches
upside down, this is mischievous in sttte mat-
ters, hath subverted houses, and cities, and peo-
ples, and nations. Why marvelest thou? It
hath even gone forth into the desert, and mani-
fested even there its great power. For men
who have bidden an entire farewell to riches
and all the show of the world, who converse
with no one, who have gained the mastery over
the more imperious desires after the flesh, these
very men, made captives by vainglory, have
often lost all. By reason of this passion, one
who had labored much went away worse off" than
one who had not labored at all, but on the con-
trary had committed ten thousand sins; the
Pharisee than the Publican. However, to con-
demn the passion is easy enough, (all agree in
doing that,) but the question is, how to get the
better of it. How can we do this ? By setting
honor against honor. For as we despise thei
riches of earth when we look to the other riches,]
as we contemn this life when we think of that!
far better than this, so we shall be enabled to spit
on this world's glory, when we know of another
far more- august than it, which is glory indeed.
One is a thing vain and empty, has the name>
without the reality; but that other, which k
from heaven, is true, and has to give its praise
Angels, and Archangels, and the Lord of Arch
angels, or rather I should say that it has mer
as well. Now if thou lookest to that theater
leamest what crowns are there, transportest thy
self into the applauses which come thence, neve


» or, " obey." « Ben. " so does it everywhere extend,"

* i.e. " if they believed not." * o^iw.

* al. " vainglory."


Homily XXX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


103


will earthly things be able to hold thee, nor when
they come wilt thou deem them great, nor when
they are away seek after them. For even in
earthly palaces none of the guards who stand
around the king, neglecting to please him that
wears the diadem and sits upon the throne,
troubles himself about the voices of daws, or the
noise of flies and gnats flying and buzzing about
him; and good report from men is no better


than these. Knowing then the worthlessness of
human things,^ let us collect our all into treas-
uries that cannot be spoiled, let us seek that
glory which is abiding and immovable ; which
may we all attain, through the grace and loving-
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom,
and with whom to the Father and the Holy
Spirit be glory, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.


HOMILY XXX.


John ill. 31.


"He that cometh from above is above all ; he that is of
the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth."

[i.] A DREADFUL thing is the love of glory,
dreadful and full of many evils ; it is a thorn hard
to be extracted, a wild beast untamable and many
headed, arming itself against those that feed it ;
for as the worm eats through the wood from
which it is born, as rust wastes the iron whence
it comes forth, and moths the fleeces, so vain-
glory destroys the soul which nourishes it ; and
therefore we need great diligence to remove the
passion. Observe here how long a charm John
uses over ' the disciples affected by it, and can
scarcely pacify them. For he softens" them
with other words besides those already men-
tioned. And what are these others? " He that
Cometh from above," he saith, "is above all;
he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh
of the earth." Since you make much ado with
my testimony,^ and in this way say that I am
more worthy of credit than He, you needs must
know this, that it is impossible for One who
cometh from heaven to have His credit strength-
ened by one that inhabiteth earth.

And what means " above all," what is the ex-
pression intended to show to us ? That Christ
hath need of nothing, but is Himself sufficient
for Himself, and incomparably greater than all ;
of himself John speaks as being " of the earth,
and speaking of the earth." Not that he spake
of his own mind, but as Christ said, " If I have
told you of earthly things and ye believe not,"
so calling Baptism, not because it was an " earthly
thing," but because He compared it when He
spake with His own Ineffable Generation, so
here John said that he spake "of earth," com-
paring his own with Christ's teaching. For the


' baa (TTqSti.

• inavT\(i, lit, " foments.


s ayia koX xdru arfti^trt.


" speaking of earth " means nothing else than
this, " My things are little and low and poor
compared with His, and such as it was probable
that an earthly nature would receive. In Him
' are hid all the treasures of wisdom.' " (Col.
ii. 5.) That he speaks not of human reason-
ings is plain from this. " He that is of the earth,"
saith he, " is earthly." Yet not all in him was
earthly, but the higher parts were heavenly, for
he had a soul, and was partaker of a Spirit which
was not of earth. How then saith he that he is
" earthly " ? Seest thou not that he means only,
" I am small and of no esteem, going on the
ground and bom in the earth ; but Christ came
to us from above." Having by all these means
quenched their passion, he afterwards speaks
more openly of Christ ; for before this it was
useless to utter words which could never have
gained a place in the understanding of his hear-
ers : but when he hath pulled up the thorns, he
then boldly casts in the seed, saying,

Ver. 31, 32. "He that cometh from above
is above all. And what He hath heard He
speaketh, and what He hath seen He testifieth ;'
and no man receiveth His testimony."

Having uttered something great and sublime
concerning Him, he again brings down his dis-
course to a humbler strain. For the expression,
"what He hath heard and seen," is suited rather
to a mere man. What He knew He knew not
from having learned it by sight, or from having
heard it, but He included the whole in His
Nature, having come forth perfect from the
Bosom of His Father, and needing none to teach
Him. For, "As the Father," He saith, "know-
eth Me, even so know I the Father." (c. x. 15.)
What then means, " He speaketh that He hath
heard, and testifieth that He hath seen"? Since


al. "of men."

' '6 cwp. Kai ^K.


TOVTO /A. G. T*


104


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX.


by these senses we gain correct knowledge of
everything, and are deemed worthy of credit
when we teach on matters which our eyes have
embraced and our ears have taken in, as not in
such cases inventing or speaking falsehoods, John
desiring here to establish this point,' said, " What
He hath heard and seen" : that is, "nothing that
Cometh from Him is false, but all is tnie." Thus
we when we are making curious enquiry into
anything, often ask, "Didst thou hear it?"
"Didst thou see it?" And if this be proved,
the testimony is indubitable, and so when Christ
Himself saith, " As I hear, I judge " (c. v. 30) ;
and, " What I have heard from My Father, that
I speak "^ (c. xv. 15) ; and, "We speak ^ that
We have seen" (c. iii. 11); and whatsoever
other sayings He uttereth of the kind, are uttered
not that we might imagine that He saith what
He doth being taught of any, (it were extreme
folly to think this,) but in order that nothing of
what is said may be suspected by the shameless
Jews. For because they had not yet a right
opinion concerning Him, He continually betakes
Himself to His Father, and hence makes His
sayings credible.

[2.] And why wonderest thou if He betake
Himself to the Father, when He often resorts
to the Prophets and the Scriptures ? as when He
saith, " They are they that testify of Me." (c. v.
39.) Shall we then say that He is inferior to
the Prophets, because He draws testimonies
from them? Away with the thought. It is be-
cause of the infirmity of His hearers that He so
orders His discourse, and saith that He spake
what He spake having heard it from the Father,
not because He needed a teacher, but that they
might believe that nothing that He said was false.
John's meaning is of this kind : " I desire to
hear what He saith, for He cometh from above,
bringing thence those tidings which none but
He knoweth rightly; for 'what He hath seen
and heard,' is the expression of one who de-
clareth this."

" And no man receiveth His testimony." Yet
He had disciples, and many besides gave heed
to His words. How then saith John, " No man " ?
He saith " no man," instead of " few men," for
had he meant " no man at all," how could he
have added,

Ver. 33. " He that hath received His testi-
mony, hath set to his seal that God is true."

Here he touches his own disciples, as not
being likely for a time to be firm believers. And
that they did not even after this believe in Him,
is clear from what is said afterwards ; for John
even when dwelling in prison sent them thence
to Christ, that he might the more bind them to
Him. Yet even then they scarcely believed, to


' i.e. the credibility of Christ.
* iyviupiaa v/aik, G. T.


• nafnvpovfitVf G. T.


which Christ alluded when He said, " And blessed
is he whosoever shall not be offended in Me."
(Matt. xi. 6.) And therefore now he said, " And
no man receiveth His testimony," to make sure
his own disciples ; all but saying, " Do not, be-
cause for a time few shall believe on Him, there-
fore deem that His words are false ; for, ' He
speaketh that He hath seen.' " Moreover he saith
this to touch also the insensibility of the Jews.
A charge which the Evangelist at commencing*
brought against them, saying, " He came unto
His own, and His own received Him not." For
this is no reproach against Him, but an accusa-
tion of those who received Him not. (c. i. 11.)

" He that hath received His testimony hath set
to his seal that God is true." Here he terrifies
them also by showing that he who believeth not
on Him, disbelieveth not Him alone, but the
Father also ; wherefore he adds :

Ver. 34. " He whom God hath sent speaketh
the words of God."

Since then He speaketh His words, he that be-
heveth and he that believeth not, believeth or be-
lieveth not God. " Hath set to His seal," that is,
" hath declared." Then, to increase their dread,
he saith, "that God is true ;" thus showing, that
no man could disbelieve Christ without making
God who sent Him guilty of a falsehood. Be-
cause, since He saith nothing save what is from
the Father, but all that He saith is His, he that
heareth not Him, heareth not Him that sent
Him. See how by these words again he strikes
them with fear. As yet they thought it no great
thing not to hearken to Christ ; and therefore
he held so great a danger above the heads of
the unbelievers, that they might learn that they
hearken not to God Himself, who hearken not
to Christ. Then he proceeds with the dis-
course, descending to the measure of their in-
firmity, and saying,

" For God giveth not the Spirit by measure."

Again, as I said, he brings down his dis-
course to lower ground, varying it and making
it suitable to be received by those who heard ii
then ; otherwise he could not have raised then
and increased their fear. For had he spokei
anything great and sublime concerning Jesu:
Himself, they would not have believed, bu
might even have despised Him. Therefore h
leads up all to the Father, speaking for a whil
of Christ as of a man. But what is it that h
saith, " God giveth not the Spirit by measure "
He would show that we all have received th
operation of the Spirit, by measure, (for in th
place he means by "Spirit" the operation of th
Spirit, for this it is that is divided,) but th:
Christ hath all Its operation unmeasured an
entire. Now if His operations be unmeasurec


* or, " at the comm. of the Gospel."


Homily XXX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


105


much more His Essence. Seest thou too that the
Spirit is Infinite? How then can He who hath
received all the operation of the Spirit, who
knoweth the things of God, who saith, " We
speak that AVe have heard, and testify that We
have seen" (c. iii. 11), be rightly suspected?
He saith nothing which is not " of God," or
which is not of " the Spirit." And for a while
he uttereth nothing concerning God the Word,'
but maketh all his doctrine credible by (ref-
erence to) the Father and the Spirit. For that
there is a God they knew, and that there is a
Spirit they knew, (even though they held not
a right opinion concerning Him,) but that there is
a Son, they knew not. It is for this reason that
he ever has recourse to the Father and the
Spirit, thence confirming his words. For if any
one should take no account of this reason, and
examine his language by itself, it ^ would fall very
far short of the Dignity of Christ. Christ was
not therefore worthy of their faith, because He
had the operation of the Spirit, (for He needeth
not aid from thence,) but is Himself Self-suffi-
cient ; only for a while the Baptist speaks to
the understanding of the simpler ^ sort, desiring
to raise them up by degrees from their low
notions.

And this I say, that we may not carelessly
pass by what is contained in the Scriptures, but
may fully consider the object of the speaker,
and the infirmity of the hearers, and many other
points in them. For teachers do not say all as
they themselves would wish, but generally as the
state of their weak (hearers) requires. Where-
fore Paul saith, " I could not speak unto you as
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal ; I have fed
you with milk, and not with meat." (i Cor. iii.
I, 2.) He means, " I desired indeed to speak
unto you as unto spiritual, but could not " ; not
because he was unable, but because they were
not able so to hear. So too John desired to teach
some great things to the disciples, but they could
not yet bear to receive them, and therefore he
dwells for the most part on that which is low-
lier.

It behooves us therefore to explore all care-
fully. For the words of the Scriptures are our
spiritual weapons ; but if we know not how to
fit those weapons and to arm our scholars rightly,
they keep indeed their proper power, but can-
not help those who receive them. For let us
suppose there to be a strong corselet, and helm,
and shield, and spear ; and let one take this
armor and put the corselet upon his feet, the
helmet over his eyes instead of on his head, let
him not put the shield before his breast, but
perversely tie it to his legs : will he be able to


^ Tou 0eoO Ao-you.
' or, " he."
* ATcAcfTTeptai'.


gain any advantage from the armor? will he not
rather be harmed? It is plain to any one that
he will. Yet not on account of the weakness
of the weapons, but on account of the unskillful-
ness of the man who knows not how to use
them well. So with the Scriptures, if we con-
found their order ; they will even so retain their
proper force, yet will do us no good. Although
I am always telling you this both in private and
in public, I effect nothing, but see you all your
time nailed to the things of this life, and not so
much as dreaming* of spiritual matters. There-
fore our lives are careless, and we who strive
for truth have but little power, and are become
a laughing stock to Greeks and Jews and Here-
tics. Had ye been careless in other matters,
and exhibited in this place the same indifference
as elsewhere, not even so could your doings
have been defended ; but now in matters of
this life, every one of you, artisan and politician
alike, is keener than a sword, while in necessary
and spiritual things we are duller than any ;
making by-work business, and not deeming that
which we ought to have esteemed more pressing
than any business, to be by-work even. Know
ye not that the Scriptures were written not for
the first of mankind alone, but for our sakes
also ? Hearest thou not Paul say, that " they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come ; that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope"? (i Cor. x. 11; Rom. xv. 4.) I
know that I speak in vain, yet will I not cease
to speak, for thus I shall clear myself* before
God, though there be none to hear me. He
that speaketh to them that give heed hath this
at least to cheer his speech, the persuasion of
his hearers ; but he that speaks continually and
is not listened to, and yet ceaseth not to speak,
may be worthy of greater honor than the other,
because he fulfills the will of God, even though
none give heed unto him, to the best of his
power. Still, though our reward will be greater
owing to your disobedience, we rather desire
that it be diminished, and that your salvation
be advanced, thinking that your being well
approved of is a great reward. And we now
say this not to make our discourse painful and
burdensome to you, but to show to you the
grief which we feel by reason of your indiffer-
ence. God grant that we may be ail of us
delivered from this, that we may cling to spirit-
ual zeal and obtain the blessings of heaven,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.


* ovie ovap ^«TexoKras, al. ovSeca \6yoy ffotov/xeVous.
^ ano\oyil(TOfjLat,
^ tv6oKi|M^ja^v,


lo6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI


HOMILY XXXI.

John iii. 35, 36.


"The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things
into His hand. He that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall
not see life; but the wrath of God abidcth on him."

[i]. Great isshowTi to be in all things the gain
of humility.' Thus it is that we have brought arts
to perfection, not by learning them all at once
from our teachers ; it is thus that we have built
cities, putting them together slowly, little by
little ; it is thus that we maintain^ our life. And
marvel not if the thing has so much power in
matters pertaining to this life, when in spiritual
things one may find that great is the power of
this wisdom. For so the Jews were enabled to
be delivered from their idolatry, being led on
gently and little by little, and hearing from the
first nothing sublime concerning either doctrine
or life. So after the coming of Christ, when it
was the time for higher doctrines, the Apostles
brought over all men without at first uttering
anything sublime. And so Christ appears to
have spoken to most at the beginning, and so
John did now, speaking of Him as of some won-
derful man, and darkly introducing high matter.

For instance, when commencing he spake
thus : " A man cannot receive anything of him-
self"^ (c. iii. 27) : then after adding a high ex-
pression, and saying, " He that cometh from
heaven'' is above all," he again brings down his
discourse to what is lowly, and besides many
other things saith this, that " God giveth not the
Spirit by measure." Then he proceeds to say,
" The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all
things into His hand." And after that, know-
ing that great is the force of punishment,' and
that the many are not so much led by the prom-
ise of good things as by the threat of the terrible;
he concludes his discourse with these words ;
" He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life ; but he that believeth not the Son shall not
see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him."
Here again he refers the account of punishment
to the Father, for he saith not " the wrath of the
Son," (yet He is the Judge,) but sets over them
the Father, desiring so the more to terrify them.

" Is it then enough," saith one, " to believe
on the Son, that one may have eternal life?"
By no means. And hear Christ Himself declar-
ing this, and saying, " Not every one that saith
unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king-


' 111. " condescension." * avuj0fi', G, T.

* Staxparovfitp. _ ^ ^ al. " of the mention of punishment."

' [iw i^rj g iii, avTifi] G. T.


dom of heaven" (Matt. vii. 21) ; and the blas-
phemy against the Spirit is enough of itself tc
cast a man into hell. But why speak I of a ])or
tion of doctrine ? Though a man believe rightlj
on the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, yei
if he lead nota right life, his faith will avail nothing
towards his salvation. Therefore when He saith
" This is life eternal, that they may know Thee
the only true God" (c. xvii. 3), let us noi
suppose that the (knowledge) spoken of is suf
ficient for our salvation ; we need besides this £
most exact life and conversation. Since though
he has said here, " He that believeth on the Sor
hath eternal life," and in the same place some-
thing even stronger, (for he weaves his discourse
not of blessings only, but of their contraries also
speaking thus : " He that believeth not the Sor
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abidetl
on him " ;) yet not even from this do we asser
that faith alone is sufficient to salvation. Anc
the directions for living given in many places o
the Gospels show this. Therefore he did noi
say, "This by itself is eternal life," nor, " He
that doth but believe on the Son hath eterna
life," but by both expressions he declared this
that the thing° doth contain life, yet that if i
right conversation follow not, there will follow i
heavy punishment. And he did not say, "await
eth him," but, "abideth on him," that is, "shal
never remove from him." For that thou mayesi
not think that the " shall not see life," is a tem-
porary death, but mayest believe that the punish
ment is continual, he hath put this expression t(
show that it rests' upon him continually. Anc
this he has done, by these very words forcinj
them on" to Christ. Therefore he gave not thi
admonition to them in particular, but made i
universal, the manner which best might brin;
them over. For he did not say, " if ye believe,
and, " if ye believe not," but made his speec:
general, so that his words might be free fror
suspicion. And this he has done yet mor
strongly than Christ. For Christ saith, " Hi
that believeth not is condemned already," bu
John saith, " shall not see life, but the wrath <
God abideth on him." With good cause ; fc
it was a different thing for a man to speak «
himself and for another to speak of him. The
would have thought that Christ spake often
these things from self-love, and that he was
boaster ; but John was clear from all suspicion
And if at a later time, Christ also used strong*


> i.c. believing.


7 Ut. " siis upon.'


' lilOuP


Homily XXXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


107


expressions, it was when they had begun to con-
ceive an exalted opinion of Him.

Chap. IV. Ver. 1, 2, 3. "When therefore
Jesus ' knew how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than
John, (though Jesus Himself baptized not but
His disciples,) He left Judaea, and departed
again into Galilee."

He indeed baptized not, but they who carried
the news, desiring to excite their hearers to
envy, so reported. "Wherefore then 'departed'
He?" Not from fe'ar, but to take away- their
malice, and to soften their envy. He was indeed
able to restrain them when they came against
Him, but this He would not do continually, that
the Dispensation of the Flesh might not be dis-
believed. For had He often been seized and
escaped, this would have been suspected by
many ; therefore for the most part. He rather
orders matters after the manner of a man. And
as He desired it to be believed that He was
God, so also that, being God, He bore the flesh ;
therefore even after the Resurrection, He said
to the disciple, " Handle Me and see, for a
spirit hath not flesh and bones " (Luke xxiv.
39) ; therefore also He rebuked Peter when he
said, " Be it far from Thee, this shall not be
unto thee." (Matt. xvi. 22.) So much was
this matter an object of care to Him.

[2.] For this is no small part of the doctrines
of the Church ; it is the chief point of the salva-
tion ^vrought for us ; ' by which all has been
brought to pass, and has had success, for it was
thus that the bonds of death were loosed, sin
taken away, and the curse abolished, and ten
thousand blessings introduced into our life.
And therefore He especially desired that the
Dispensation should be believed, as having been
the root and fountain of innumerable goods to
us.

Yet while acting thus in regard of His Human-
ity,'' He did not allow His Divinity to be over-
cast. And so, after His departure He again
employed the same language as before. For
He went not away into Galilee simply,* but in
order to effect 'certain iijiportant matters, those
among the. Samaritans; nor did He dispense
these matters simply, but with the wisdom that
belonged to° Him, and so as not to leave to the
Jews any pretense even of a shameless excuse
for themselves. And to I this the Evangelist
points when he says,

Ver. 4. "And He must needs go through
' Samaria."

* Showing that He made this the bye-work of
' :he journey. Which also the Apostles did ; for
' ust as they, when persecuted by the Jews, came


^ 6 Kupto^, G. T.

' lit. " cut out."

' T^; vnip riiJL<ijv trutr.


* oticovo/iuii/ ra ayffpMiTiva.

* i.e. without an object, aTrAuif.

* or, " became."


to the Gentiles ; so also Christ, when the Jews
drove Him out, then took the Samaritans in
hand, as He did also in the case of the Syrophe-
nician woman. And this was done that all de-
fense might be cut away from the Jews, and that
they might not be able to say, " He left us, and
went to the uncircumcised." And therefore the
disciples excusing themselves said, " It was nec-
essary that the Word of God should first have
been spoken unto you ; but seeing ye judge
yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we
turn to the Gentiles." (Acts xiii. 46.) .And He
saith again Himself, " I am not come ' but unto
the lost sheep of the house of Israel " (Matt. xv.
24) ; and again, " It is not meet to take the
children's bread, and to give' it to dogs." But
when they drove Him dway, they opened a -door
to the Gentiles. Yet not so did He come to
the Gentiles expressly, but in passing." In pass-
ing then,

Ver. 5, 6. " He cometh to a city of Samaria,
which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of
ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. Now
Jacob's well was there."

Why is the Evangelist exact about the place ?
It is, that when thou hearest the woman say,
" Jacob our father gave us this well," thou niay-
est not think it strange. For this was the place
where Levi and Simeon, being angry because of
Dinah, wrought that cniel slaughter. And it
may be worth while to relate from what sources
the Samaritans were made up ; since all this
country is called Samaria. Whence then did
they receive their name? The mountain was
called " Somor " from its owner ( i Kings xvi.
24) : as also Esaias saith, " and the head of
Ephraim is Somoron" (Isa. vii. 9, LXX.), but the
inhabitants were termed not " Samaritans " but
" Israelites." Qut as time went on, they offended
God, and in the reign of Pekah, Tiglath-Pileser
came up, and took many cities, and set upon
Elah, and having slain him, gave the kingdom
to Hoshea.'" (2 Kings xv. 29.) Against him
Shalmaneser came and took other cities, and
made them subject and tributary. (2 Kings
xvii. 3.) At first he yielded, but afterwards he
revolted from the Assyrian nile, and betook
himself to the alliance of the Ethiopians." The
Assyrian learnt this, and having made war upon
them and destroyed their cities, he no longer
allowed the nation to remain there, because he
had such suspicions that they would revolt. (2
Kings xvii. 4.) But he carried them to Baby-
lon and to the Medes, and having brought
thence nations from divers places, planted them


' [OVK in,c-rHr,v] G. T. » [/3<iAA..i.l G. T.

^ Morel. " h.-tving thus hinted th;it which he wished, he again
begins, saying, Jesus therefore Cometh," &c.

t** This account does not agree with the history, (a Kings xv.
29, 30,) but there is no other reading,
^t i.e. the Egyptians.


io8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI


in Samaria, that his dominion for the future
might be sure, his own people occupying the
place. After this, God, desiring to show that
He had not given up the Jews through weak-
ness, but because of the sins of those who were
given up, sent lions against the foreigners,' who
ravaged all their nation. These things were
reported to the king, and he sent a priest to de-
liver to them the laws of God. Still not even so
did they desist wholly from their impiety, but
only by halves. But as time went on, they in
turn abandoned " their idols, and worshiped
God. And when things were in this state, the
Jews having returned, ever after entertained a
jealous feeling towards them as strangers and
enemies, and called them from the name of the
mountain, " Samaritans." From this cause also
there was no little rivalry between them. The
Samaritans did not use all the Scriptures, but
received the writings of Moses only, and made
but little account of those of the Prophets. Yet
they were eager to thrust themselves into the
noble Jewish stock, and prided themselves upon
Abraham, and called' him their forefather, as
being of Chaldaea ; and Jacob also they called
their father, as being his descendant. But the
Jews abominated them as well as all (other
nations). Wherefore they reproached Christ
with this, saying, "Thou art a Samaritan, and
hast a devil." (c. viii. 48.) And for this reason
in the parable of the man that went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, Christ makes the man who
showed pity upon him to have been " a Samari-
tan" (Luke X. 33), one who by them was deemed
mean, contemptible, and abominable. And in
the case of the ten lepers. He calls one a
" stranger " on this account, (for " he was a
Samaritan,") and He gave His charge to the
disciples in these words, " Go not into the way
of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samari-
tans enter ye not." (Matt. x. 5.)

[3.] Nor was it merely to describe the place
that the Evangelist has reminded us of Jacob,
jbut to show that the rejection of the Jews had
happened long ago. For during the time of
their forefathers these Jews possessed the land,
and not the Samaritans ; and the very posses-
sions which not being theirs, their forefathers
had gotten, they being theirs, had lost by their
sloth and transgressions. So little * is the advan-
tage of excellent ancestors, if their descendants
be not like them. Moreover, the foreigners
when they had only made trial of the lions,
straightway returned to the right worship* of
the Jews, while they, after enduring such inflic-
tions, were not even so brought to a sound
mind.


' fiap&apovt.

* lit. " started away from."

• lit. " registered."


* al. " truly little.'
' cvtrcjSci'ai'.


To this place Christ now came, ever rejectinj
a sedentary and soft " life, and exhibiting ' om
laborious and active. He useth no beast t(
carry Him, but walketh so much on a stretch
as even to be wearied with His journeying. An(
this He ever teacheth, that a man should worl
for himself, go without superfluities, and not havi
many wants. Nay, so desirous is He that wi
should be alienated from superfluities, that H(
abridgeth many even of necessary things. Where
fore He said, " Foxes have holes, and birds o
the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath no
where to lay His head." (Matt. viii. 20.) There
fore He spent most of His time in the moun
tains, and in the deserts, not by day only, bu
also by night. And this David declared whei
he said, " He shall drink of the brook in thi
way " (Ps. ex. 7) : by this showing His fnigal
way of life. This too the Evangelist shows ii
this place.

Ver. 6, 7, 8. " Jesus therefore, being weariec
with His journey, sat thus by the well ; and i
was about the sixth hour. There cometh :
woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus saitl
unto her, Give Me to drink. For His disciple
were gone away into the city to buy meat."

Hence we learn His activity in journeying
His carelessness about food, and how He treatec
it as a matter of minor importance.' And s(
the disciples were taught to use the like disposi
tion themselves ; for they took with them nc
provisions for the road. And this anothe
Evangelist declares, saying, that when He spak(
to them concerning " the leaven of the Phari
sees" (Matt. xvi. 6), they thought that it wa
because they carried no bread ; and when h(
introduces them plucking the ears of corn, anc
eating (Matt. xii. i), and when he saith tha
Jesus came to the fig-tree by reason of hunge
(Matt. xxi. 18), it is for nothing else but onl
to instruct us by all these to despise the bell}
and not to deem that its service is anxiously tl
be attended to. Observe them, for instance, i
this place neither bringing anything with then
nor because they brought not anything, carin
for this at the very beginning and early part
the day, but buying food at the time when
other people were taking their meal.'" Not lil
us, who the instant we rise from our beds atter
to this before anything else, calling cooks ar
butlers, and giving our directions with all eames
ness, applying ourselves afterwards to oth
matters, preferring temporal things to spiritus
valuing those things as necessary which we oug
to have deemed of less importance." Therefa
all things are in confusion. We ought, on ti


• fiivavaov Kat iiypov. • or " active."

' lit. " introducing." * n-apeyj-yw?.

" opiiTToiroioiii'Tat. Sec on Stat. Horn. ix. i, and note,

** ndptpyov.


Homily XXXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


109


contrary, making much account of all spiritual
things, after having accomplished these, then to
apply ourselves to the others.

And in this place it is not His laboriousness
alone that is shown, but also His freedom from
pride ; not merely by His being tired, nor by
His sitting by the way-side, but by His having
been left alone, and His disciples having been
separated ' from Him. And yet it was in His
power, if He had willed it, either not to have
sent them all away, or when they departed to
have had other ministers. But He would not ;
for so He accustomed His disciples to tread all
pride beneath their feet.

" And what marvel," saith one, " if they were
moderate in their wishes, since they were fisher-
men and tentniakers? " Yes ! Fishermen and
tentmakers they were ; but they had in a mo-
ment' mounted even to the height of heaven,
and had become more honorable than all earthly
kings, being deemed worthy to become the
companions of the Lord of the world, and to
follow Him whom all beheld with awe. And ye
know this too, that those men especially who
are of humble origin, whenever they gain dis-
tinction, are the more easily lifted up to folly,
because they are quite ignorant how to bear their
sudden ^ honor. Restraining them therefore in
their present humblemindedness. He taught them
always to be moderate,'' and never to require
any to wait upon them.

" He therefore," saith the Evangelist, " being
wearied with His journey, sat ° thus at the well." '

Seest thou that His sitting was because of
weariness? because of the heat? because of his
waiting for His disciples? He knew, indeed,
what should take place among the Samaritans,
but it was not for this that He came principally ;
yet, though He came not for this, it behooved
not to reject the woman who came to Him, when
she manifested such a desire to learn. The
Jews, when He was even coming to them, drove
Him away ; they of the Gentiles, when He was
proceeding in another direction, drew Him to
them. They envied, these believed on Him.
They were angry with, these revered and wor-
shiped Him. What then? Was He to over-
look the salvation of so many, to send away such
noble zeal ? This would have been unworthy of
His lovingkindness. Therefore He ordered all
the matter in hand with the Wisdom which be-
came Him. He sat resting His body and cooling
It by the fountain ; for it was the very middle
of the day, as the Evangelist has declared, when
he says,

" It was about the sixth hour."

He sat "thus." What meaneth "thus"?


* al. " having departed."

* adpooi/.

* al. " so great."


• trvv«trTa\BaL,

* «ico0ijTO [tKadi^tTo] G. T.


Not upon a throne, not upon a cushion, but
simply, and as He wa«,' upon the ground.

Ver. 7. " There cometh a woman of Samaria
to draw water."

[4.] Observe how he declareth that the wom-
an came forth for another purpose, in every way
silencing the shameless gainsaying of the Jews,
that none might say that He acted in opposition
to His own command, bidding (His disciples)
not to enter into any city of the Samaritans, yet
conversing with Samaritans. (Matt. x. 5.) And
therefore the Evangelist has put,

Ver. 8. " For His disciples were gone away
into the city to buy meat." *

Bringing in many reasons for His conversation
with her. What doth the woman? When she
heard, " Give Me to drink," ' she very wisely
makes the speech of Christ an occasion for a
question, and saith,

Ver. 9. " How is it that thou, being a Jew,
askest drink of me, which am a Samaritan?
For the Jews have no dealings with the Samari-
tans."

And whence did she suppose Him to be a
Jew? From His dress, perhaps, and from His
dialect. Observe, I pray you, how considerate
the woman was. If there was need of caution,
Jesus needed it, not she. For she doth not say,
"The Samaritans have no dealings with the
Jews," but, "The Jews do not admit the
Samaritans." Yet still, although free herself
from blame,'" when she supposed that another
was falling into it she would not even so hold
her peace, but corrected, as she thought, what
was done unlawfully. Perhaps some one may
ask how it was that Jesus asked drink of her,
when the law " did not permit it. If it be an-
swered that it was because He knew beforehand
that she would not give it, then for this very
reason He ought not to have asked. What then
can we say? That the rejecting such obser-
vances as these was now a matter of indifference
to Him ; for He who induced others to do them
away, would much more Himself pass them by.
" Not that which goeth in," saith He, " defileth
a man, but that which goeth out." (Matt.
XV. II.) And this conversation with the wom-
an would be no slight charge against the Jews.
For often did He draw them to Himself, both
by words and deeds, but they would not attend;
while observe how she is detained by a simple
request.'^ For He did not as -yet enter on the
prosecution of this business," nor the way,'' yet
if any came to Him He did not prevent them.
And to the disciples also He said thus, " Into


y tt>« fTv^tv. • al. '* had not yet come."

* al. being asked for water by ChrLst: for, " Give Me to drink,"
the Evangelist tells us, was what Christ said to her. What then
saith she? " How is it," &c.

'" al. " sin." " i.e. conversion.

1* i.e. custom. " i.e. of salvation.

" aU " introductioa,"


no


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI


any city of the Samaritans enter ye not." He
did not say, "And when they come to you,
reject them " ; that would have been very un-
worthy of His lovingkindness. And therefore
He answered the woman, and said,

Ver. lo. " If thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, Give Me to
drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him, and
He would have given thee living water."

First, He showeth that she is worthy to hear
and not to be overlooked, and then He revealeth
Himself For she, as soon as she had learnt
who He was, would straightway hearken and at-
tend to Him ; which none can say of the Jews,
for they, when they had learned, asked nothing
of Him, nor did they desire to be informed on
any profitable matter, but insulted and drove
Him away. But when the woman had heard
these words, observe how gently she answers :

Ver. II. "Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep ; from whence then hast
thou that living water?"

Already He hath raised her from her low
opinion of Him, and from deeming that He is
a common man. For not without a reason doth
she here call Him, " Lord " ; ' but assigning to
Him high honor. That she spake these words
to honor Him, is plain from what is said after-
wards, since she did not laugh nor mock, but
doubted for a while. And wonder not if she
did not at once perceive all, for neither did
Nicodemus. What saith he? "How can these
things be?" and again, " How can a man be
born when he is old?" and again, "Can he
enter the second time into his mother's womb,
and be born?" But this woman more rever-
ently : " Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep ; from whence then hast
thou that living water? " Christ said one thing,

(and she imagined another, hearing nothing be-
yond the words, and as yet unable to form any
lofty thought. Yet, had she spoken hastily, she
might have said, " If thou hadst had that living
water, thou wouldest not have asked of me,
but wouldest rather have provided for thyself.
Thou art but a boaster." But she said noth-
ing like this ; she answers with much gentle-
ness, both at first and afterwards. For at first
she saith, " How is it that thou, being a Jew,
askest drink of me?" she saith not, as though
speaking to an alien and an enemy, " Far be it
from me to give to thee, who art a foe and a
stranger to our nation." And afterwards again,
when she heard Him utter great words, a thing
at which enemies are most annoyed, she did not
mock nor deride'; but what saith she?

Ver. 12. "Art thou greater than our father
Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his children, and his cattle?*'

■ Kiipi^, •• S r," E. V. ' Siiavpt.


Observe how she thrusts herself into the nobU
stock of the Jews. For what she saith is some
what of this kind : "Jacob used this water, anc
had nothing better to give us." And this she
said showing that from the first answer (of Christ'
she had conceived a great and sublime thought
for by the words, " he drank thereof himself
and his children, and his cattle," she implies
nothing else, than that she had a notion of £
better Water, but that she ' never found it, noi
clearly knew it. More clearly to explain whai
she means to say, the sense of her words is this
" Thou canst not assert that Jacob gave us this
well, and used another himself; for he and his
children drank of this one, which they would
not have done if they had had another and j
better. Now of the water of this well it is no(
in thy power to give me, and thou canst noi
have another and a better, unless thou dost con-
fess that thou art greater than Jacob. Whenct
then hast thou that water which thou promisesi
that thou wilt give us?" The Jews did not con-
verse with Him thus mildly, and yet He spake
to them on the same subject, making mentior
of the like water, but they profited nothing ; and
when He made mention of Abraham, they ever
attempted to stone Him. Not so does this
woman approach Him ; but with much gentle-
ness, in the midst of the heat, at noon, she with
much patience saith and hears all, and does not
so much as think of what the Jews most proba-
bly would have asserted, that " This fellow is
mad, and beside himself: he hath tied me to
this fount and well, giving me nothing, but using
big words " ; no, she endures and perseveres
until she has found what she seeks.

[5.] If now a woman of Samaria is so earnest
to learn something profitable, if she abides by
Christ though not as )'et knowing Him, what
pardon shall we obtain, who both knowing* Him
and being not by a well, nor in a desert place
nor at noon-day, nor beneath the scorching sun
beams, but at morning-tide, and beneath a root!
like this, enjoying shade and comfort,' yet can
not endure to hear anything that is said, but an
wearied ^ by it. Not such was that woman ; s<
occupied was she by Jesus' words, that she evei
called others to hear them. The Jews, on thi
contrary, not only did not call, but even him
dered and impeded those who desired to com'
to Him,' saying, " See, have any of the rulei
believed on him? but this people, which know
eth not the Law, are cursed.'" Let us the
imitate this woman of Samaria ; let us commun
with Christ. For even now He standeth in tH
midst of us, speaking to us by the Prophets an I
Disciples; let us hear and obey. How lor|


3 al. " not even he."

* al. *' having seen,"
^ or, " coolness."

• c. vii. 49. al. " is not this people," &c.


* aTTOKfaioi'Tt^, al. anoKVOVVTti. I

' al. " to enter in."


Homily XXXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


Ill


shall we live uselessly and in vain? Because,
net to do who.t is well-pleasing to God is to live
uselessly, or rather not merely uselessly, but to
our own hurt ; for when we have spent the time
which has been given us on no good purpose,
we shall depart this life to suffer severest pun-
ishment for our unseasonable extravagance. For
it can never be that a man v.-ho has received
money to trade with, and then has eaten it up,
shall have it ' required at his hands by the man
who intrusted it to him ; and that one who has
spent such a life as ours to no purpose shall
escape punishment. It was not for this that
God brought us into this present life, and
breathed into us a soul, that we should make
use of the present time only,^ but that we should
do all our business with a regard to the life
which is to come. Things irrational only are
useful for the present life ; but we have an im-
mortal soul, that we may use every means to
prepare ourselves for that other life. For if
one enquire the use of horses and asses and
oxen, and other such-like animals, we shall tell
him that it is nothing else but only to minister


to the present life ; but this cannot be said of
us ; our best condition is that which follows on
our departure hence ; and we must do all that
we may shine there, that we may join the choir
of Angels, and stand before the King continu-
ally, through endless * ages. And therefore the
soul is immortal, and the body shall be immortal
too, that v.'ft may enjoy t!ie never-ending bless-
ings. But if, when heavenly things are proffered
thee, thou remainest nailed to earth, consider
what an insult is offered to thy Benefactor, when
He holdeth forth to thee things above, and thou,
making no great account of them choosest earth
instead. And therefore, as despised by thee,
He hath threatened thee vrith hell, that thou
mayest learn hence of what great blessings thou
deprivest thyself. God grant that nbne make
trial of that punishment, but that having been
well-pleasing to Christ, we may obtain everlast-
ing blessings, through the grace and lovingkind-
ness of our Lord Je.'ius Christ ; to whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXII.

John iv. 13, 14.


" Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh
of this water shall thirst again : but whosoever drink-
eth of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be
ii him a well of water springing up into everlasting
Life."

[i.] Scripture calls the grace of the Spirit
sometimes " Fire," sometimes " Water," showing
that these names are not descriptive of its essence,
but of its operation ; for the Spirit, being Invisi-
ble and Simple, cannot be made up of different
substances. Now the one John declares, speak-
ing thus, " He shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire" (Matt iii. 11): the
other, Christ, " Out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water." (John vii. 38.) " But this,"
saith John, " spake He of the Spirit, which they
should receive." So also conversing with the
woman, He caileth the Spirit water ; " for,
" Whospevor shall drink of the water which I
shall give him, shall never thirst." So also He
caileth the Spirit by the name of " fire," allud-
ing to the rousing and warming property of
grace, and its power of destroying transgres-


* a!. " an account."

* al. " live only for the present," tcara to tt,

* al. " bailh the same now,"


sions; but by that of "water," to declare the
cleansing wrought by it, and the great refresh-
ment which it affordeth to those minds v/hich
receive it. And with good reason ; for it makes
the willing soul like some ' garden thick with all
manner of trees fruitful and ever-flourishing,
allowing it neither to feel despondency nor the
plots of Satan, and quenches " all the fiery darts
of the wicked one.

And observe, I pray you, the wisdom of
Christ,' how gently He leads on * the woman ;
for He did not say at first, " If thou knewest
who it is that saith to thee. Give Me to drink,"
but when He had given her an occasion of call-
ing Him " a Jew," and brought her beneath the
charge of having done so, repelling the accusa-
tion He saith, " If thou knewest who it is that
saith to thee, Give Me to drink, thou wouldest
have asked of Him " ; and having compelled
her by His great promises to make mention ° of
the Patriarch, He thus alloweth the vvoman to look
through," and then when she objects, " Art thou
greater than our father Jacob ? " He saith not.


* al. " incorrupt."
^ al. " some flourishing."
" al. "as quenching easily."
' al. "ofGod."


' al. " leads up."
* or, " to remember.'
^' or, " see clearly."


112


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII


"Yea, I am greater," (for He would have
seemed but to boast, since the proof did not
as yet appear,) but by what He saith He effect-
eth this. For He said not simply, " I will give
thee water," but having first set that given by
Jacob aside. He exalteth that given by Himself,
desiring to show from the nature of the things
given, how great is the interval and difference
between the persons of the givers,' and His own
superiority to the Patriarch. " If," saith He,
" thou admirest Jacob because he gave thee this
water, what wilt thou say if I give thee Water far
better than this ? Thou hast thyself been first
to confess that I am greater than Jacob, by
arguing against Me, and asking, ' Art thou greater
than Jacob, that thou promisest to give me better
water?' 'If thou receivest that Water, certainly
thou wilt confess that I am greater." Seest thou
the upright judgment of the woman, giving her
decision from facts, both as to the Patriarch, and
as to Christ? The Jews acted not thus; when
they even saw Him casting out devils, they not
only did not call Him greater than the Patriarch,
but even said that He had a devil. Not so the
woman, she draws her opinion whence Christ
would have her, from the demonstration afforded
by His works. For by these He justifieth Him-
self, saying, " If I do not the works of My Father,
believe Me not ; but if I do, if ye believe not
Me, believe the works." (c. x. 37, 38.) And
thus the woman is brought over to the faith.

Wherefore also He, having heard, " Art thou
greater than our father Jacob," leaveth Jacob,
and speaketh concerning the water, saying,
" Whosoever shall drink of this water, shall
thirst again " ; and He maketh His comparison,
not by depreciating one, but by showing the
excellence of the other ; for He saith not, that
" this water is naught," nor " that it is inferior
and contemptible," but what even nature testi-
fies that He saith : " Whosoever shall drink of
this water shall thirst again ; but whosoever shall
drink of the Water which I shall give him, shall
never thirst." The woman before this had heard
of "living Water" (v. 10), but had not known
its meaning. Since because that water is called
I " living " which is perennial and bubbles up
unceasingly from uninterrupted springs, she
thought that this was the water meant. Where-
fore He points out this more clearly by speak-
ing thus, and establishing by a comparison the
superiority (of the water which He would give).
What then saith He? "Whosoever shall drink
of the Water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst." This and what was said next especially
showed the superiority, for material water pos-
sesses none of these qualities. And what is it
that follows? "It shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life." For


* al. " things given,'


as one that hath a well within him could nevei
be seized by thirst, so neither can he that hatl
this Water.

The woman straightway believed, showing her
self much wiser than Nicodemus, and not onlj
wiser, but more manly. For he when he hearc
ten thousand such things neither invited anj
others to this hearing, nor himself spake fort!
openly ; but she exhibited the actions of ar
Apostle, preaching the Gospel to all, and calling
them to Jesus, and drawing a whole city fortl
to Him. Nicodemus when he had heard said
" How can these things be? " And when Chris
set before him a clear illustration, that of " iht
wind," he did not even so receive the Word
But the woman not so ; at first she doubted
but afterwards receiving the Word not by anj
regular demonstration, but in the form of ar
assertion, she straightway hastened to embrace
it. For when Christ said, " It shall be in hin
a well of water springing up into everlasting
Life," immediately the woman saith,

Ver. 15. "Give me this water, that I thirs
not, neither come hither to draw."

Seest thou how little by little she is led up t(
the highest doctrines? First she thought Hin
some Jew who was transgressing the Law ; thei
when He had repelled that accusation, (for i
was necessary that the person who was to teach
her such things should not be suspected,) hav
ing heard of " living water," she supposed tha
this was spoken of material water ; afterwards
having learnt that the words were spiritual, sh(
believed that the water could remove the neces
sity caused by thirst, but knew not yet wha
this could be ; she still doubted, deeming it in
deed to be above material things, but not bein;
exactly informed. But here having gained ;
clearer insight, but not yet fully perceiving th
whole, (for she saith, " Give me this water, tha
I thirst not, neither come hither to draw,") sh;
for the time preferreth Him to Jacob. " For j
(saith she) " I need not this well if I receiv
from thee that water." Seest thou how
setteth Him before the Patriarch? This is tl
act of a fairly-judging' soul. She had showi
how great an opinion she had of Jacob, she sa
One better than he, and was not held back
her prepossession. Thus this woman was neith
of an easy temper, (she did not carelessly :
ceive what was said, how can she have done
when she enquired with so great exactness?
nor yet disobedient, nor disputatious, and tl
she showed by her petition. Yet to the Je
once He said, "Whosoever shall eat of
flesh" shall never hunger, and he that believ(
on Me shall never thirst " (c. vi. 35) ; but th
not only did not believe, but were offended


I


I


» (taTTjveit'.
• tvyvtofjiovof.


* a!. " readiness."

^ 6 ipx^fitvo^ iTfws fJLtf G. '


Homily XXXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


113


Him. The woman had no such feeling, she
remains and petitions. To the Jews He said,
" He that beUeveth on Me shall never thirst " ;
not so to the woman, but more grossly, " He
that drinketh of this Water shall never thirst."
For the promise referred to spiritual and unseen*
things. Wherefore having raised her mind by
His promises, He still lingers among expressions
relating to sense, because she could not as yet
comprehend the exact expression of spiritual
things. Since had He said, " If thou believest
in Me thou shalt not thirst," she would not have
understood His saying, not knowing who it could
be that spake to her, nor concerning what kind
of thirst He spake. Wherefore then did He
not this in the case of the Jews ? Because they
had seen many signs, while she had seen no
sign, but heard these words first. For which
reason He afterwards reveals His power by
prophecy, and does not directly introduce His
reproof,^ but what saith He ?

Ver. 16-19. "Go, call thy husband, and
come thither. The woman answered and said,
I have no husband. Jesus saith unto her. Thou
hast well said, I have no husband : for thou hast
had five husbands, and he whom thou now hast
is not thy husband : in that saidst thou truly.
The woman saith unto Him, Sir, I perceive that
Thou art a Prophet."

[2.] O how great the wisdom of the woman !
how meekly doth she receive the reproof ! " How
should she not," saith some one ? Tell me, why
should she? Did He not often reprove the
Jews also, and with greater reproofs than these ?
(for it is not the same to bring forward the hid-
den thoughts of the heart, as to make manifest
a thing that was done in secret; the first are
known to ' God alone, and none other knoweth
them but he who hath them in his heart ; the
second, all who were sharers in it know ;) but
still when reproved did not bear it patiently.
When He said, "Why seek ye to kill me?"
(c. vii. 19), they not only did not admire as the
woman did but even mocked at and insulted
Him ; yet they had a demonstration fi-om other
miracles, she had only heard this speech. Still
they not only did not admire, but even in-
sulted Him, saying, "Thou hast a demon, who
seeketh to kill thee ? " While she not only doth
not insult but admires, and is astonished at Him,
and supposes Him to be a Prophet. Yet truly
this rebuke touched the woman more than the
other touched them ; for her fault was hers
alone, theirs was a general one ; and we are not
so much stung by what is general as by what is
particular. Besides they thought they should be
gaining a great object if they could slay Christ,
but that which the woman had done was allowed


' al. " not finite.'


' or, " is the work of."


by all to be wicked ; yet was she not indignant,
but was astonished and wondered. And Christ
did this very same thing in the case of Nathan-
ael. He did not at fifst introduce the prophecy,
nor say, " I saw thee under the fig-' ree," but
when Nathanael said, "Whence knowest'thou
me ? " then He introduced this. For He de-
sired to take the beginnings of His signs and
prophecies from the very persons who came
near to Him, so that they might Be more at-
tached * by what was done, and He might escape
the suspicion of vainglory. Now this He doth
here also ; for to have charged her first of all
that) "Thou hast no husband," would have
seemed burdensome and superfluous, but to take
the reason (for speaking) from herself, and then
to set right all these points, was very consistent,
and softened the disposition of the hearer.

"And what kind of connection," saith some
one, " is there in the saying, ' Go, call thy hus-
band ' ? " The discourse was concerning a gift
and grace surpassing mortal nature : the woman
was urgent in seeking to receive it. Christ saith,
" Call thy husband," showing that he also must
share in these things ; but she, eager to receive*
(the gift), and concealing the shamefulness of
the circumstances, and supposing that she was
conversing with a man, said, " I have no hus-
band." Christ having heard this, now seasonably
introduces His rei>roof, mentioning accurately
both points ; for He enumerated all her former
husbands, and reproved her for him wl om° she
now would hide. What then did the woman?
she was not annoyed, nor did she leave Him
and fly, nor deem the thing an insult, but rather
admired Him, and persevered the more. "I
perceive," saith she, "that Thou art a Prophet."
Observe her prudence ; she did not straightway
run to Him, but still considers Him, and mar-
vels at Him. For, " I perceive," means, " Thou
appearest to me to be a Prophet." Then when
she suspected this, she asks Him nothing con-
cerning this life, not concerning bodily health,
or possessions, or wealth, but at once concern-
ing doctrines. For what saith she ?

Ver. 20. "Our fathers worshiped in this
mountain," (meaning Abraham and his family,
for thither they say that he led up his son,)
" and how say ye' that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship? "

[3.] Seest thou how much more elevated in
mind she has become? She who was anxious
that she might not be troubled for thirst, now
questions concerning doctrines. What then
doth Christ ? He doth not resolve the question,
(for to answer simply to men's words was not
His care, for it was needless,') but leads the
woman on to the greater height, and doth not


* oiKCioi/crdai.

* al. *' to be hidden."

* al. *' the thing which.'


' Kot I'll. A«^eT<, G. T.
* napi\KOv.


114


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV XXXII.


converse with her on these matters, until she has
confessed that He was a Prophet, so that after-
wards she might hear His Word with abundant
belief; for having been persuaded of this, she
could no longer doubt concerning what should
be said to her.

Let us now after this be ashamed, and blush.
A woman who had had five husbands, and who
was of Samaria, was so eager concerning doc-
trines, that neither the time of day, nor her hav-
ing come for another purpose, nor anything else;
led her away from enquiring on such matters
but we not only do not enquire concernin:
doctrines, but towards them all our disposition:
are careless and indifferent. Therefore every-
thing is neglected. For which of you when in
his house takes some Christian book' in hand,
and goes over its contents, and searches the
Scriptures? None can say that he does so, but
with most we shall find draughts and dice, but
books nowhere, except among a few. And even
these few have the same dispositions as the many ;
for they tie up their books, and keep them
always put away in cases, and all their care is
for the fineness of the parchments, and the
beauty of the letters, not for reading them. For
they have not bought them to obtain advantage
and benefit from them, but take pains about
such matters to show their wealth and pride.
Such is the excess of vainglory. I do not hear
any one glory that he knows the contents, but
that he hath a book written in letters of gold.
And what gain, tell me, is this ? The Scriptures
were not given us for this only, that we might
have them in books, but that we might engrave
them on our hearts. For this kind of possession,
the keeping the commandments merely in letter,
belongs to Jewish ambition ; but to us the Law
was not so given ^ at all, but in the fleshy tables
of our hearts.' And this I say, not to prevent
you from procuring Bibles, on the contrary, I
exhort and earnestly pray that you do this, but
I desire that from those books you convey the
letters and sense into your understanding, that
so it may be purified when it receiveth the mean-
ing of the writing.* For if the devil will not
dare to approach a house where a Gospel is
lying, much less will any evil spirit, or any sinful
nature,^ ever touch or enter a soul which bears
about with it such sentiments as it contains.
Sanctify then thy soul, sanctify thy body, by
having these ever in thy heart, and on thy tongue.
For if foul speech defiles and invites devils, it is
clear that spiritual reading sanctifies and draws
down the grace of the Spirit. The Scriptures"
are divine charms, let us then apply to ourselves


1 m/KTtov. ' al. " this Law was not given."

* i.e. on the Day of Pentecost.

* al. " the reality of the matters."

* lit. "nature of sin,"

* al, " the actioiu,** i.e. of the Gospel.


and' to the passions of our souls the remedies to
be derived from them. For if we understand
what it is that is read, we shall hear it with much
Readiness. I am always saying this, and will not
cease to say it. Is it not strange that those who
sit by the market can tell the names, and fami-
lies, and cities of charioteers, and dancers, and
the kinds of power possessed by each, and can
give exact account of the good or bad qualities
of the very horses, but that those who come
hither should know nothing of what is done here,
but should be ignorant of the number even of
the sacred Books? If 'thou pursuest those
worldly things for pleasure, I will show thee
v^hat here is greater pleasure. Which is sweeter,
tell me, which more marvelous, to see a man
wrestling with a man, or a man buffeting with a
devil, a body closing with an incorporeal power,
and him who is of thy race victorious? These
wrestlings let us look on, these, which also it is
seemly and profitable to imitate, and which
imitating, we maybe* crowned; but not those
in which emulation brings shame to him who
imitates them. If thou beholdest the one kind
of contest, thou beholdest it with devils ; the
other, with Angels and Archangels, and the Lord
of Archangels. Say now, if thou wert allowed
to sit with governors and kings, and to see and
enjoy the spectacle, wouldest thou not deem it
to be a very great honor? And here when thou
art a spectator in company with the King of
Angels, when thou seest the devil grasped by the
middle of the back,' striving much to have the
better, but powerless, dost thou not run and
pursue after such a sight as this? "And how
can this be?" saith some one. If thou keep the
Bible in thy hands ; for in it thou shall see the
lists, and the long races, and his grasps,'" and
the skill of the righteous one. For by behold-
ing these things thou shalt learn also how tc
wrestle so thyself, and shalt escape clear o^'
devils ; the performances of the heathen arei
assemblies of devils, not theaters of men
Wherefore I exhort you to abstain from thest
Satanic assemblies ; " for if it is not lawful t(
enter into an idol's house, much less to Satan'
festival. I shall not cease to say these thing
and weary you, until I see some change ; for ti
say these things, as saith Paul, " to me indeed '
not grievous, but for you it is safe." (Phil, ii
I.) Be not then offended at my exhortatior
If any one ought to be offended, it is I who ofte
speak and am not heard, not you who are alwa)


7 Morel, [let us prepare],

* al, " it were meet to be."

" Morel, *' beholdinc the devil shamed by means of the Divi
oracles, and greatly striving," Below Morel, reads, " run to su
a sight,"

'« aKafiixara, itauAov?, Aafla?, terms of the wrestling scho
(TKafifjiat the place dug out for the exercise, hence the exerc
itself. fii'avAo?, the double course, Aaeij, the gripe of the wrestl'
Thus of Job, on Stat, Horn, i, i6; of the Three Children, ib. Ha
iv. 8, &c. ^^ This clause is not found in Ben.


Homily XXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


115


hearing and always disobeying. God grant that
you be not always liable to this charge, but that
freed from this shame you be deemed worthy to
enjoy the spiritual spectacle,* and the glory


which is to come, through the grace and loving-
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXXIII.


John iv. 21, 22.


"Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe Me, the hour
Cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor
yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. Ye worship
ye know not what ; we know what we worship, for
salvation is of the Jews."

[i.] Everywhere, beloved, we have need of
faith, faith the mother of blessings, the medicine
of salvation ; and without this it is impossible to
possess any one of the great doctrines. With-
out this, men are like to those who attempt to
I cross ' the open sea without a ship, who for a
little way hold out by swimming, using both
hands and feet, but when they have advanced
farther, are quickly swamped by the waves : in
like manner they who use their own reasonings,
before they have learnt anything, suffer ship-
wreck ; as also Paul saith, " Who concerning
faith have made shipwreck." (i Tim. i. 19.)
That this be not our case, let us hold fast the
sacred anchor by which Christ bringeth over
the Samaritan woman now. For when she had
said, " How say ye ' that Jerusalem is the place
in which men ought to worship?" Christ re-
plied, " Believe Me, woman, that the hour Com-
eth, when ye shall neither in Jerusalem, nor yet
in this mountain, worship the Father." An ex-
ceedingly great* doctrine He revealed to her,
and one which He did not mention either to
Nicodemus or Nathanael. She was eager to
prove her own privileges more honorable than
those of the Jews ; and this she subtly argued
from the Fathers, but Christ met not this ques-
tion. For it was for the time distracting' to
speak on the matter, and to show why the
Fathers worshiped in the mountain, and why
the Jews at Jerusalem. Wherefore on this point
He was silent, and having taken away from both
places priority in dignity, rouses her soul by
showing that neither Jews nor Samaritans pos-
sessed anything great in comparison with that
which was to be given ; and then He introduceth
the difference. Yet even thus He declared that
the Jews were more honorable, not preferring
place to place, but giving them the precedence


* al. " of the Eternal Goods." • iroAv luc-ya.
' Sia^aXfZv, al. StaXafielVj al. Siawtpav, ' iraptKKOv,

• v/itif Ae'-yfTe, G. T.


because of their intention. As though He had
said, " About the ' place ' of worship ye have no
need henceforth to dispute, but in the ' manner '
the Jews have an advantage over you Samaritans,
for ' ye,' He saith, ' worship ye know not what ;
we know what we worship.' "

How then did the Samaritans " know not "
what they worshiped? Because they thought
that God was local and partial ; so at least they
served Him, and so they sent to the Persians,
and reported that " the God of this place is
wroth with us" (2 Kings xxvi.), in this respect
forming no higher opinion of Him than of their
idols. Wherefore they continued to serve both
Him and devils, joining things which ought
not to be joined. The Jews, on the contrary,
were free from this supposition, at least the
greater part of them, and knew that He was
God of the world. Therefore He saith, " Ye
worship ye know not what ; we know what we
worship." Do not wonder that He numbereth
Himself among Jews, for He speaketh to the
woman's opinion of Him as though He were a
Jewish Prophet, and therefore He putteth, " we
worship." For that He is of the objects of
worship is clear to every one, because to worship
belongs to the creature, but to be worshiped
to the Lord of the creature. But for a time He
speaketh as a Jew ; and the expression " we "
in this place meaneth " we Jews." Having then
exalted what was Jewish, He next maketh Him-
self credible, and persuadeth the woman to give
the greater heed to His words, by rendering
His discourse above suspicion, and showing that
He doth not exalt what belongs to them by
reason of relationship^ to those of His own tribe.
For it is clear, that one who had made these
declarations concerning the place on which the
Jews most prided themselves, and thought that
they were superior to all, and who had taken
away their high claims, would not after this'
speak to get favor of any, but with truth and
prophetic power. When therefore He had for
a while removed her from such reasonings,' say-


* al. " favor."

' al. " at this rate."

• al. '* removed (her) reasoning from such things,*


Ii6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV XXXIII.


ing, "Woman, believe Me," and what follows,
then He addeth, " for salvation is of the Jews."
What He saith is of this kind : neither, that
blessings to the world came from them, (for to
know God and condemn idols had its beginning
from them, and with you the very act of worship,
although ye do it not rightly, yet received its
origin from them,) or else, He speaketh of His
own C nning. Or rather, one would not be
wrong .n calling both these things " salvation "
which He said was " of the Jews " ; which Paul
implied when he said, "Of whom is Christ
according to the flesh, who is God over all."
(Rom. ix. 5.) Seest thou how He commendeth'
the old Covenant, and showeth that it is the
root of blessings, and that He is throughout
not opposed to the Law, since He maketh the
groundwork^ of all good things to come from
the Jews?

Ver. 23. " But the hour cometh, and now
is, when the true worshipers shall worship the
Father."

" We, O woman," He saith, " excel you in the
manner of our worship, but even this shall hence-
forth have an end. Not the places only, but
even the manner of serving God shall be changed.
And this change is at your very doors. 'For
the hour cometh, and now is.' "

[2.] For since what the Prophets said they
said long before the event, to show that here
it is not so,' He saith, "And now is." Think
not. He saith, that this is a prophecy of such
a kind as shall be accomplished after a long
time, the fulfillment is already at hand and at
your very doors, "when the true worshipers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth."
In saying " true," * He excludeth Jews as well
as Samaritans ; for although the Jews be better
than the Samaritans, yet are they far inferior to
those that shall come, as inferior as is the type
to the reality. But He speaketh of the Church,
that she ' is the " true " worship, and such as is
meet for God.

" For the Father seeketh such to worship
Him."

If then He in times past sought such as these.
He allowed to those others their way of worship,
not willingly,' but from condescension, and for
this reason,' that He might bring them in also.
Who then are " the true worshipers " ? Those
who confine not their service by place, and who
serve God in spirit; as Paul saith, "Whom I
serve in my spirit ' in the Gospel of His Son " :
and again, " I beseech you that ye present your


* ai. ■


truth."
this."


* <rvYJcpoT«r.

* viT66tatv.

* lit. " removing this.**

* The passage is read differently in the MS. in Bodl. " not will-
ing them to continue in those ancient (practices).'*

' al. ** by these means."

* al. ** in spirit, where? in," &c*


bodies a living sacrifice, acceptable unto God,
your reasonable service." (Rom. i. 9 and xii.
I .) But when he saith,

Ver. 24. " God is a Spirit " [God is spirit].

He declareth nothing else than His incorpo-
real Nature. Now the service of that which is
incorporeal must needs be of the same charac-
ter, and must be offered by that in us which is
incorporeal, to wit, the soul, and purity of mind.
Wherefore He saith, " they that worship Him,
must worship Him in spirit and in truth." For
because both Samaritans and Jews were care-
less about the soul, but took great pains about
the body, cleansing it in divers ways, it is not.
He saith, by purity of body, but by that which
is incorporeal in us, namely the mind, that the
incorporeal One is served. Sacrifice then not
sheep and calves, but dedicate thyself to the
Lord ; make thyself a holocaust, this is to offer
a living sacrifice. Ye must worship " in truth " ' ;
as former things were types, such as circum-
cision, and whole burnt offerings, and victims,
and incense, they now no longer exist, but all is
" truth." For a man must now circumcise not
his flesh, but his evil thoughts, and crucify him-
self, and remove and slay his unreasonable
desires." The woman was made dizzy by His
discourse, and fainted ■" at the sublimity of what
Hfe said, and, in her trouble, hear what she
saith :

Ver. 25, 26. "I know that Messias cometh,
which is called Christ : when He is come. He
will tell us all things. Jesus saith unto her, I
am that speak unto thee."

And whence came the Samaritans to expect
the coming of Christ, seeing that they received
Moses only?" From the writings of Moses
themselves. For even in the beginning He
revealed the Son. " Let Us make man in Oui
Image, after Our Likeness" (Gen. i. 26), wa<
said to the Son. It was He who talked witl-
Abraham in the tent. (Gen. xviii.) And Jacol
prophesying concerning Him said, "A rule:
shall not fail from Judah, nor a leader from hi
thighs, until He come for whom it is reserved,'
and He is the expectation of nations." (Gen
xviii.) And Moses himself saith, "The Lon
thy God will raise up unto you a Prophet c
your brethren like unto me, unto Him shall y
hearken." (Deut. xviii. 15.) And the circun
stances attending the serpent, and the rod (
Moses, and Isaac, and the sheep, and mar
other things they who chose might select :
proclaiming His coming.

" And why, pray," saith one, " did not Chri
lead on the woman by these means ? why d i
He instance the serpent to Nicodemus, aii


' MS. in Bodl. ** this is to worship in truth."
t'' ainjyopevtrr.

w MS. in Bodl. ** the law of Moses." '* v airiS<c«tT«i.


Il


Homily XXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


117


mention prophecy to Nathanael, but to her say
nothing of the kind? For what reason, and
why ? " Because they were men, and were
versed in these things, she a poor ignorant
woman unpracticed in the Scriptures. Where-
fore He doth not speak to her from them, but
draweth her on by the " water " and by prophecy,
and bringeth her to make mention of Christ,
and then revealeth Himself; which had He at
first told the woman when she had not ques-
tioned Him, He would have seemed to her to
trifle and talk idly, while as it is by bringing her
little by little to mention Him, at a fitting time
He revealed Himself. To the Jews, who con-
tinually said, " How long dost Thou make us to
doubt? tell us if Thou art the Christ" (c. x. 24),
to them ' He gave no clear answer, but to this
woman He said plainly, that He is. For the
woman was more fair-minded than the Jews ;
!,they did not enquire to learn, but always to
ji mock at Him, for had they desired to learn, the
I teaching which was by His words, and by the
Scriptures, and by His miracles would have been
sufficient. The woman, on the contrary, said
what she said from an impartial judgment and a
simple mind, as is plain from what she did after-
wards ; for she both heard and believed, and
netted ^ others also, and in every circumstance
we may observe the carefulness and faith of the
woman.

Ver. 27. "And upon this came His disciples,"
(very seasonably did they come when the teach-
ing was finished,) " and marveled that He
talked with the woman, yet no man said. What
seekest Thou ? or. Why talkest Thou with her? "
[3.] At what did they marvel? At His want
of pride and exceeding humility, that looked
upon as He was. He endured with such lowli-
ness of heart to talk with a woman poor, and a
Samaritan. Still in their amazement they did
not ask Him the reason, so well were they taught
to keep the station of disciples, so much did
they fear and reverence Him. For although
they did not as yet hold the right opinion con-
cerning Him, still they gave heed unto Him as
to some marvelous one, and paid Him much
respect. Yet they frequently are seen to act
confidently; as when John lay upon His bosom,
when they came to Him and said, " Who is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?" (Matt,
xviii. i), when the sons of Zebedee entreated
Him to set one of them on His right hand, and
the other on His left. Why then did they not
here question Him? Because since all those
instances related to themselves, they had need
to enquire into them, while what here took place
was of no such great importance to them. And
indeed John did that a long time after towards


»»1. "thu."


* iaay^vtva*.


the very end, when He enjoyed greater confi-
dence, and was bold in the love of Christ ; for
he it was,' he saith, "whom Jesus loved." What
could equal such blessedness?

But, beloved, let us not stop at this, the call-
ing the Apostle blessed, but let us do all things
that we also may be of the blessed, let us imitate
the Evangelist, and see what it was that caused
such great love. What then was it? He left
his father, his ship, and his net, and followed
Jesus. Yet this he did in common with his
brother, and Peter, and Andrew, and the rest
of the Apostles. What then was the special*
thing which caused this great love? Shall we
discover it? He saith nothing of this kind about
himself, but only that he was beloved ; as to the
righteous acts for which he was beloved he has
modestly been silent. That Jesus loved him
with an especial love was clear to every one ;
yet John doth not appear conversing with or
questioning Jesus privately, as Peter often did,
and Philip, and Judas, and Thomas, except only
when he desired to show kindness and compli-
ance to his fellow Apostle ; for when the chief*
of the Apostles by beckoning constrained him,
then he asked. For these two had great love
each for the other. Thus, for instance, they are
seen going up together into the Temple and
speaking in common to the people. Yet Peter
in many places' is moved, and speaks more
warmly than John. And at the end he hears
Christ say, " Peter,' lovest thou Me more than
these?" (c. xxi. 15.) Now it is clear that he
who loved " more than these " was also beloved.
But this in his case was shown by loving Jesus,
in the case of the other by being beloved by
Jesus.*

What then was it which caused this especial
love ? To my thinking, it was that the man dis- j'
played great gentleness and meekness, for which
reason he doth not appear in many places
speaking openly. And how great a thing this
is, is plain also from the case of Moses. It was
this which made him such and so great as he
was. There is nothing equal to lowliness of
mind. For which cause Jesus with this began
the Beatitudes, and when about to lay as it were
the foundation and base of a mighty building.
He placed first lowliness of mind. Without this
a man cannot possibly be saved ; though he fast,
though he pray, though he give alms, if it be
with a proud spirit, these' things are abomi-
nable, if humility be not there ; while if it be,
all these things are amiable and lovely, and are


' MS. in Bodleian, *' for. saith the Evangelist, Peter looks on
the disciple."

• cfatpcTOf. * Kopui^atoc.

• al. "all places." ' ^ifjLutv 'liuva, G. T.

' i.e. St. Peter loved his Lord, and therefore we irt/^r that he
was loved of Him; of St. John Scripture speaks expressly, as
being " the Disciple whom Jesus loved.'

• al. " all."


ii8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


ilone with safety. Let us then be modest,' be-
loved, let us be modest ; success is easy, if we
be sober-minded. For after all what is it, O
man, that exciteth thee to pride? Seest thou
not the poverty of thy nature ? the unsteadiness^
of thy will? Consider thine end, consider the
multitude of thy sins. But perhaps because thou
I doest many righteous deeds thou art proud. By
I that very pride thou shalt undo them all. Where-
fore it behoveth not so much him that has
sinned' as him that doeth righteousness to take
pains to be humble. Why so? Because the
sinner is constrained by conscience, while the
other, except he be very sober, soon caught up
as by a blast of wind is lifted on high, and made
to vanish like the Pharisee. Dost thou give to
the poor? What thou givest is not thine, but
thy Master's, common to thee and thy fellow-
servants. For which cause thou oughtest espe-
cially to be humbled, in the calamities of those
who are thy kindred foreseeing thine own, and
taking knowledge of thine own nature in their
cases. We ourselves perhaps are sprung from
such ancestors ; and if wealth has shifted to you,
it is probable that it will leave you again. And


after all, what is wealth ? A vain ' shadow, dis-
solving smoke, a flower of the grass, or rather
something meaner than a flower. Why then art
thou high-minded over grass ? Doth not wealth
fall to thieves, and effeminates, and harlots, and
tomb-breakers? Doth this puff" thee up, that
thou hast such as these to share in thy posses-
sion? or dost thou desire honor? Towards
gaining honor nothing is more serviceable than
almsgiving. For the honors arising from wealth
and power are compulsory, and attended with
hatred, but these others are from the free will
and real feeling of the honorers ; and therefore
those who pay them can never give them up.
Now if men show such reverence for the merci-
ful, and invoke all blessings upon them, consider
what return, what recompense they shall receive
from the merciful God. Let us then seek this
wealth which endureth forever, and never de-
serts* us, that, becoming great here and glori-
ous there, we may obtain everlasting blessings,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy Spirit be glory, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXIV.

John iv. 28, 29.


" The woman then left her water pot, and went her way
into the city, and saith to the men, Come, see a Man
which told me all things that ever I did; is not this
the Christ?"

[i.] We require much fervor and uproused
zeal, for without these it is impossible to obtain
the blessings promised to us. And to show this,
Christ at one time saith, " Except a man take *
up his cross and follow Me, he is not worthy of
Me " (Matt. x. 38) ; at another, " I am come
to send fire upon the earth, and what will I if
it be already kindled? " (Luke xii. 49) ; by both
these desiring to represent to us a disciple full
of heat and fire, and prepared for every danger.
Such an one was this woman. For so kindled
was she by His words, that she left her water
pot and the purpose for which she came, ran
into the city, and drew all the people to Jesus.
" Come," she saith, " see a Man which told me
all things that ever I did."

Observe her zeal and wisdom. She came to

[ draw water, and when she had lighted upon the

true Well, she after that despised the material

one ; teaching us even by this trifling instance


* &? ov Kaii^aret JC.T.A. G. T.


* al. " that sinneth."


when we are listening to spiritual matters to
overlook the things of this life, and make no
account of them. For what the Apostles did,
that, after her ability, did this woman also.' They
when they were called, left their nets ; she of
her own accord, without the command of any,
leaves her water pot, and winged by joy' per-
forms the office of Evangelists. And she calls
not one or two, as did Andrew and Philip, but
having aroused a whole city and people, so
brought them to Him.

Observe too how pnidently she speaks ; she
said not, " Come and see the Christ," but with
the same condescension' by which Christ had
netted her she draws the men to Him ; " Come," I
she saith, " see a Man who told me all that ever
I did." She was not ashamed to say that He
"told me all that ever I did." Yet she might
have spoken otherwise, " Come, see one that
prophesieth " ; but when the soul is inflamed
with holy fire, it looks then to nothing earthly,
neither to glory nor to shame, but belongs to
one thing alone, the flame which occupieth it.


* SpanerevovTa.

T Ben. " in a higher degree,'


^ al. " by grace."

8 i.e. to their infirmity.


Homily XXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


tl^


"Is not this the Christ?" Observe again
here the great wisdom of the woman ; she
neither declared the fact plainly, nor was she
silent, for she desired not to bring them in by
her own assertion, but to make them to share in
this opinion by hearing Him ; which rendered
her words more readily acceptable to them. Yet
He had not told all her life to her, only from
what had been said she was persuaded (that He
was informed) as to the rest. Nor did she say,
" Come, believe," but, "Come, see " ; a gentler'
expression than the other, and one which more
attracted them. Seest thou the wisdom of the
woman ? She knew, she knew certainly that hav-
ing but tasted that Well, they would be affected
in the same manner as herself. Yet any one of
the grosser sort would have concealed the reproof
which Jesus had given; but she parades her
own life, and brings it forward before all men,
so as to attract and capture all.

Ver. 31. "In the mean time His disciples
asked'' Him, saying. Master, eat." "Asked,"
here is "besought," in their native language ; for
seeing Him wearied with the journey, and the
oppressive heat, they entreated Him ; for their
request concerning food proceeded not from
hastiness, but from loving affection for their
Teacher? What then saith Christ?

Ver. 32, 33. " I have meat to eat that ye know
not of. Therefore " (saith the Evangelist) " said
the disciples one to another, Hath any man
brought Him aught to eat?"

Why now wonderest thou that the woman
when she heard of "water," still imagined mere
water to be meant, when even the disciples are
in the same case, and as yet suppose nothing
spiritual, but are perplexed ? though they still
show their accustomed modesty and reverence
toward their Master, conversing one with the
other, but not daring to put any question to
Him. And this they do in other places, desiring
to ask Him, but not asking. What then saith
Christ?

Ver. 34. " My meat is to do the will of Him
that sent Me, and to finish His work."

He here calleth the salvation of men " meat,"
showing what an earnest desire He hath of pro-
viding for us ;' for as we long for food, so He
that we may be saved. And hear how in all
places He revealeth not all off-hand, but first
throweth the hearer into perplexity, in order
that having begun to seek the meaning of what
has been said, and then being perplexed and in
difficulty, he may when what he sought appears,
receive it the more readily, and be made more
attentive to listening. For wherefore said He
not at once, " My meat is to do the will of My


' al. ** more fearful."

* rfpiuTutf. E.V. prayed; Ben. andMS. in Bodl. ^pairwc ei^auda
wafitKii\ovv icTTi, Tji iyx<iipi(tt ainiiv ipuvjj.

* MS. in Bodl. " our salvation."


Father?" (though not even this would have
been clear, yet clearer than the other.) But
what saith He? "I have meat to eat that ye
know not of"; for He desireth, as I said, first
to make them more attentive through their
uncertainty, and by dark sayings like these to
accustom them to listen to His words. But
what is " the will of the Father " ? He next
speaketh of this, and explaineth.

Ver. 35. " Say ye not, that there are yet four
months, and then cometh harvest? Behold, I
say unto you. Lift up your eyes, and look upon
the fields, for they are white already to harvest."

[2.] Behold, He again by familiar words
leadeth them up to the consideration of greater
matters; for when He spoke of "meat," He
signified nothing else than the salvation of the
men who should come to Him ; and again, the
" field " and the " harvest " signify the very same
thing, the multitude of souls prepared for the
reception of the preaching ; and the " eyes " of
which He speaketh are those both of the
mind and of the body ; (for they now beheld
the crowd of Samaritans advancing ;) and the
readiness of their will He calleth, "fields already
white." For as the ears of corn, when they
have become white, and are ready for reaping,
so these. He saith, are prepared and fitted for
salvation.

And wherefore instead of calling them " fields "
and " harvest," did He not plainly say, that "the
men were coming to believe and were ready to
receive the Word, having been instructed by the
Prophets, and now bringing forth fruit " ? What
mean these figures used by Him ? for this He doth
not here only, but through all the Gospel ; and
the Prophets also employ the same method, say-
ing many things in a metaphorical manner. What
then may be the cause of this? for the grace of
the Spirit did not ordain it to be so without a
reason, but why and wherefore? On two ac-
counts ; one, that the discourse may be more
vivid, and bring what is said more clearly before
our eyes. For the mind when it has laid hold
on a familiar image of the matters in hand, is
more aroused, and beholding them as it were in
a picture, is occupied by them to a greater de-
gree. This is one reason ; the other is, that the
statement may be sweetened, and that the mem-
ory of what is said may be more lasting. For
assertion does not subdue and bring in an ordi-
nary hearer so much as narration by objects,
and the representation of experience.* Which
one may here see most wisely effected by the
parable.

Ver. 36. "And he that reapeth receiveth
wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal."

For the fruit of an earthly harvest profiteth


* i.e. given by means of things which are objects of experience.
viroYpa^TI ireipac, al. jreipa.


I20


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIVj


not to life eternal, but to this which is for a time ;
but the spiritual fruit to that which hath neither
age nor death. Seest thou that the expressions
are of sense, but the thoughts spiritual, and that
by the very words themselves He divideth things
earthly from heavenly? For when in discoursing
of water He made this the peculiar property of
the heavenly Water, that " he who drinketh it
shall never thirst," so He doth here also when
He saith, " that this fruit is gathered unto eternal
life."

" That both he that soweth and he that reapeth
may rejoice together."

Who is " he that soweth " ? Who " he that
reapeth"? The Prophets are they that sowed,
but they reaped not, but the Apostles. "Yet
not on this account are they deprived of the
pleasure and recompense of their labors, but
they rejoice and are glad with us, although they
reap not with us. For harvest is not such work
as sowing. I therefore have kept you for that
in which the toil is less and the pleasure greater,
and not for sowing because in that there is mucb
hardship and toil. In harvest the return is large,
the labor not so great; nay there is much fa-
cility." ' By these arguments He here desireth
to prove, .that " the wish of the Prophets is, that
all men should come to Me." This also the
Law was engaged in effecting ; and for this they
sowed, that they might produce this fruit.* He
showeth moreover that He sent them also, and
that there was a very intimate connection between
the New Covenant and the Old, and all this He
effecteth at once by this parable. He maketh
mention also of a proverbial expression generally
circulated.

Ver. 37. " Herein," He saith, " is that saying
true, One soweth and another reapeth."

These words the many used whenever one
party had supplied toil and another had reaped
the fruits ; and He saith, " that the proverb is in
this instance especially true, for the Prophets
labored, and ye reap the fruits of their labors."
He said not " the rewards," (for neither did
their great labor go unrewarded,) but " the
fruits." This also Daniel did, for he too makes
mention of a proverb, " Wickedness proceedeth
from the wicked " ; and David in his lamenting
makes mention of a similar proverb.' Therefore
He said beforehand, " that both he that soweth
and he that reapeth may rejoice together." For
since He was about to declare, that " one hath
sowed and another reapeth," lest anyone should
deem that the Prophets were deprived of their
reward. He asserteth something strange and


* euKoXi'a. al. paffTiii^. * al. " by this.*'

3 There is DO authority for a different reading, but it seems to be
rightly conjectured by Savile and Ben. that the names '* Daniel "
and David" should be trao^posed. The proverb is that used by
David, X Sam. xxiv. 13, and the other passage alluded to may be
l>aii. xii. ID, '* the wicked shall do wickedly." MS. in Bodl. reads,
•vofM uc fiafivkuvoi Sox *i ivoiiMV «Aiifi^cA<fra.


paradoxical, such as never chanceth in sensual
things, but is peculiar to spiritual only. For in
things of sense, if it chance that one sow and
another reap, they do not "rejoice together,"
but those who sowed are sad, as having labored
for others, and those who reap alone rejoice.
But here it is not so, but those who reap not
what they sowed rejoice alike with those who
reap ; whence it is clear that they too share the
reward.

Ver. 38. " I sent you to reap that whereon ye
bestowed no labor ; other men labored, and ye
are entered into their labors."

By this He the more encourageth them ; for
when it seemed a very hard matter to go through
all the world and preach the Gospel, He showeth
them that it is even most* easy. The very
difficult work was that other, which required
great labor, the putting in the seed, and intro-
ducing the uninitiated soul to the knowledge of
God. But wherefore uttereth He these sayings?
It is that when He sendeth them to preach they
may not be confounded, as though sent on a
difficult task. " For that of the Prophets," He
saith, " was the more difficult, and the fact wit-
i^esseth to My word, that ye are come to what
is easy ; because as in harvest time the fruits are
collected with ease, and in one moment the
floor is filled with sheaves, which await ' not the
revolutions of the seasons, and winter, and spring,
and rain, so it is now. The facts proclaim it
aloud." While He was in the midst of saying
these things, the Samaritans came forth, and the
fruit was at once gathered together. On this
account ' He said, " Lift up your eyes, and look
on the fields, that they are white." Thus He
spake, and the fact was clear, and the words
seen (true) by the event. For saith St. John,

Ver. 39. " Many of the Samaritans of that cit)
believed on Him for the saying of the womar
which testified. He told me all that ever I did.'

They perceived' that the woman would nO|
from favor have admired One who had rebukec j
her sins, nor to gratify another have parade(j
her own course of life.

[3.] Let us then also imitate this woman, an I
in the case of our own sins not be ashamed c i
men, but fear, as is meet, God who now beholc
eth what is done, and who hereafter punishet
those who do not now rej>ent. At present we d I
the opposite of this, for we fear not Him whJ
shall judge us, but shudder at those who do nii
in anything hurt us, and tremble at the shanj
which comes from them. Therefore in the ve j
thing which we fear, in this do we incur punis j
ment. For he who now regards only the rl
proach of men, but when God seeth is nj

* al. '* more." • al. " awaits." |

•« MS. in Bodl. " alluding to these."

' MS. in Bodl. "as soon as they heard the woman ttiey
Uevcd, for they," &c.


HoMiLV XXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


121


ashamed to do anything unseemly, and who will
not repent and be converted, in that day will be
made an example, not only before one or two,
but in the sight of the whole world. For that a
vast assembly is seated there to behold righteous
actions as well as those which are not such, let
the parable of the sheep and the goats teach
thee, as also the blessed Paul when He saith,
" For we must all appear before the judgment-
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
thuigs done in his body, according to that he
hath done, whether it be good or bad " (2 Cor.
V. 10), and again, " Who will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness." (i Cor. iv. 5.) Hast
thou done or imagined any evil thing, and dost
thou hide it from man? yet from God thou
hidest it not. But for this thou careth nothing ;
the eyes of men, these are thy fear. Think then
that thou wilt not be able to escap>e the sight even
of men in that day ' ; for all things as in a
picture shall then be set before our very eyes,
so that each shall be self-condemned. This is
clear even from the instance of Dives, for the
poor man whom he had neglected, Lazarus I
mean, he saw standing before his eyes, and the
finger which he had often loathed, he intreats
may become a comfort to him then. I exhort
you therefore, that although no one see what we
do, yet that each of us enter into his own con-
science, and set reason for his judge, and bring
forward his transgressions, and if he desire them
not to be exposed to public view then in that
fearful day, let him now heal his wounds, let him
apply to them the medicines of repentance.
For it is in the power, yea, it is in the power of
one full of ten thousand wounds to go hence
whole. For " if ye forgive," He saith, " your
sins are forgiven unto you." ^ (Matt. vi. 14, not
verbally quoted.) For as sins buried' in Baptism
appear no more, so these * also shall disappear, if
we be willing to repent. And repentance is the
not doing the same again ; for he that again puts
his hand to the same, is like the dog that returneth
to his own vomit, and like him in the proverb who
cards wool into the fire," and draws water into a
cask full of holes. It behooves therefore to de-
part both in action and in thought from what we
have dared to do, and haying departed, to apply to
the wounds the remedies which are the contra-
ries of our sins. For instance : hast thou- been
grasping and covetous? Abstain from rapine,
and apply almsgiving to the wound. Hast thou
been a fornicator ? Abstain from fornication, and
apply chastity to the wound. Hast thou spoken


' MS, in Bodleian reads here, *' and be more careful than thy
(present) self."

' MS. in Bodl. reads, " My Heavenly Father will also forgive
you, but if ye forgive not, neither will He forgive you."

* i.e. sins done after Baptism.

• Eis nvft (aii'oyTt. Plat. Leg^. vi. p. 750. " Aed like,'* &c. is
not in the text of Savile.


ill of thy brother, and injured him ? Cease find-
ing fault,* and apply kindness. Let us thus act
with respect to each point in which we have
offended, and let us not carelessly pass by our
sins, for there awaiteth us hereafter, there
awaiteth us a season of account. Wherefore
also Paul said, " The Lord is at hand : be care-
ful for nothing." (Phil. iv. 5, 6.) But we per-
haps must add the contrary of this, " The Lord
is at hand, be careful." For they might well
hear, " Be careful for nothing," living as they did
in affliction, and labors, and trials ; but they who
live by rapine, or in luxury, and who shall give
a grievous reckoning, would in reason hear not
this, but that other, " The Lord is at hand, be
careful." Since no long time now remains until
the consummation, but the world is hastening to
its end ; this the wars declare, this the afflictions,
this the earthquakes, this the love which hath
waxed cold. For as the body when in its last
gasp and near to death, draws to itself ten thou-
sand sufferings ; and as when a house is about to
fall, many portions are wont to fall beforehand
from the roof and walls ; so is the end of the
world nigh and at the very doors, and therefore
ten thousand woes are everywhere scattered
abroad. If the Lord was then "at hand," much
more is He now " at hand." If three hundred '
years ago, when those words were used, Paul
called that season " the fullness of time," much
more would he have called the present so. But
perhaps for this very reason some disbelieve, yet
they ought on this account to believe the more.
For whence knowest thou, O man, that the end
is not " at hand," and the words shortly to be
accomplished ? For as we speak of the end of
the year not as being the last day, but also the
last month, though it has thirty days ; so if of so
many years I call even four hundred years " the
end," I shall not be wrong ; and so at that time
Paul spoke of the end by anticipation. Let us
then set ourselves in order, let us delight in the
fear of God ; for if we live here without fear of
Him, His coming will surprise us suddenly,
when we are neither careful, nor looking for
Him. As Christ declared when He said, " For
as in the days of Noah, and as in the days of
Lot, so shall it be at the end of this world."
(Matt. xxiv. 37, not verbally quoted.) This
also Paul declared when he said, " For when
they shall say. Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child." (i Thess. v. 3.) What
means, "as travail upon a woman with child"?
Often have pregnant women when sporting, or
at their meals, or in the bath or market-place,
and foreseeing nothing of what was coming, been
seized in a moment by their pains. Now since


' at. '* speaking evil."
' ^. " four huixlied."


tii


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXV.


our case is like theirs, let us ever be prepared,
for we shall not always hear these things, we
shall not always have power to do them. " In
the grave," saith David, " who shall give Thee
thanks ? " ' (Ps. vi. 5.) Let us then repent here,
that so we may find God merciful unto us in the


day that is to come, and be enabled to enjoy
abundant forgiveness ; which may we all obtain,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and do-
minion now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


HOMILY XXXV.

John iv. 40-43.


" So when the Samaritans were come unto Him, they be-
sought Him that He would tarry with them : and
He abode there two days. And many more believed
because of His own Word; and said unto the
woman. Now we believe, not because of thy saying :
for we have heard Hira ourselves, and know that
This is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.
Now after two days He departed thence, and went
into Galilee."

Nothing is worse than envy and malice,
nothing more mischievous than vainglory ; it is
wont to mar ten thousand good things. So the
Jews, who excelled the Samaritans in knowledge,
and had been always familiar with^ the Prophets,
were shown from this cause inferior to them.
For these believed even on the testimony of the
woman, and without having seen any sign, came
forth beseeching Christ to tarry' with them ; but
the Jews, when they had beheld His wonders,
not only did not detain Him among them, but
even drove Him away, and used every means to
cast Him forth from their land, although His very
Coming* had been for their sake. The Jews ex-
pelled Him, but these even entreated Him to
tarry with them. Was it not then rather fitting,
tell me, that He should receive those who asked
and besought Him, than that He should wait
upon those who plotted against and repulsed
Him, while to those who loved and desired to
retain Him He gave not Himself ? Surely this
would not have been worthy of His tender care ;°
He therefore both accepted' them, and tarried
with them two days. They desired to keep Him
among them continually, (for this the Evangelist
has shown by saying, that " they besought Him
that He would tarry with them,") but this He
endured not, but stayed with them only two
days ; and in these many more believed on Him.
Yet there was no likelihood that these would
have believed, since they had seen no sign, and
had hostile feelings towards the Jews ; but still,
inasmuch as they gave in sincerity their judg-
ment on His words, this stood not in their way.


* OT, " confess to Thee."

* lit. **broueht up with.'*

' al. "tobe.^'


* Ben. " that coming.'

• aL " elected."


but they received a notion which surmounted
their hindrances, and vied with each other to
reverence Him the more. For, saith the Evan-
gelist, " they said to the woman. Now we believe,
not because of thy saying : for we have heard
Him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the
Christ, the Saviour of the world." The scholars
overshot their instructress. With good reason
might they condemn the Jews, both by their be-
lieving on, and their receiving Him. The Jews,
for whose sake He had contrived' the whole
scheme,' continually were for stoning Him," but
these, when He was not even intending to come
to them, drew Him to themselves. And they
even with signs, remain uncorrected ; these
without signs, manifested great faith respecting
Him, and glory in this very thing that they be-
lieve without them ; while the others ceased not
asking'" for signs and tempting Him.

Such need is there everywhere of an honesi
soul ; and if truth lay hold on such an one, shf
easily masters it ; or if she masters it not, this i;
owing not to any weakness of truth, but to wan
of candor" in the soul itself Since the sun too
when he encounters clear eyes, easily enlighten
them ; if he enlightens them not, it is the faull
of their infirmity, not of his weakness. I

Hear then what these say ; " We know tha
this is of a truth the Christ, the Saviour of th^
world." Seest thou how they at once undei
stood that He should draw the world to Hii«
that He came to order aright'^ our common sai
vation, that He intended not to confine His cai
to the Jews, but to sow His Word everywhere
The Jews did not so, but going about to estal
lish their own righteousness, submitted not then
selves to the righteousness of God ; while thes
confess that all are deserving of punishment, dl
daring with the Apostle, that " all have sinna
and come short of the glory of God ; being ju
tified freely by His grace." (Rom. iii. 23, 341


' al. " instituted."

• i.e. of Redemption, irainty t

* a], " them," i.e. the Prophets,
" al. " seeking." ** ayyian


naiTCLV Ti)V npayfjiartiay (rvvtCTijaaTO.
Prophets.

ayvutiioaviniv, *' ciri ttop9wv*t


Homily XXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


123


For by saying that He was " the Saviour of the
world," they showed that it was of a lost world,'
and He not simply a Saviour, but one of the
very mightiest. For many had come to " save,"
both Prophets and Angels'; but this, saith one,
is the True Saviour, who affordeth the true sal-
vation, not that which is but for a time. This
proceeded from pure faith. And in both ways
are they admirable ; because they believed, and
because they did so without signs, (whom Christ
also calleth " blessed," saying, " Blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed,") (c.
XX. 29,) and because they did so sincerely.
Though they had heard the woman say doubt-
fully, " Is not this the Christ ? " they did not
also say, "we too suspect," or, "we think, "^
but, " we know," and not merely, " we know,"
but, " we know that this is of a truth the Saviour
of the world." They acknowledged Christ not
as one of the many,* but as the " Saviour " in-
deed. Yet whom had they seen saved ? They
had but heard His words, and yet they spake as
they would have spoken had they beheld many
and great marvels. And why do not the Evan-
gelists tell us these words, and that He dis-
coursed admirably? That thou mayest learn
that they pass by many important matters, and
yet have declared the whole to us by the event.
For He persuaded an entire people and a whole
city by His words. When His hearers are not
persuaded, then the writers are constrained to
mention what was said, lest any one from the
insensibility of the hearers should give a judg-
ment against Him who addressed them.

" Now after two days He departed thence
and went into Galilee."

Ver. 44. " For Jesus Himself testified that a
Prophet hath no honor in his own country."

Wherefore is this added? Because He de-
parted not unto Capernaum, but into Galilee,
and thence to Cana. For that thou mayest not
enquire why He tarried not with His own peo-
ple, but tarried with the Samaritans, the Evan-
gelist puts the cause,' saying that they gave no
heed unto Him ; on this account He went not
thither, that their condemnation might not be
the greater. For I suppose that in this place
He speaketh of Capernaum as " His country."
Now, to show that there He received no honor,
hear Him say, "And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down
to hell." (Matt. xi. 23.) He calleth it " His
own country," because there He set forth the
Word of the Dispensation, and more especially
dwelt upon it. " What then," saith some one.


* MS. in Bodl. reads, " and why say I of a lost world? of a
world which was in evils great exceedingly."

' or, '■ messengers."

* al. " suppose."

* i.e. who had wrought deliverances.

* MS. in Bodl. " and this is, that ' a prophet hath no honor in
his own country.' "


" do we not see many admired among their kin-
dred ? " In the first place such judgments must
not be formed from rare instances ; and again,
if some have been honored in their own, they
would have been much more honored in a
strange country, for familiarity is wont to make
men easily despised.

Ver. 45. "Then when He was come into Gal-
ilee, the Galilaeans received Him, having seen
all the things that He did at Jerusalem at the
feast, for they also came unto the feast."

Seest thou that these men so ill spoken of are
found most to come to Him? For one said,
" Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth ? " (c. i. 46) , and another, " Search and
look, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet." (c.
vii. 52.) These things they said insulting Him,
because He was supposed by the many to be of
Nazareth, and they also reproached Him with
being a Samaritan ; " Thou art a Samaritan,"
said one, " and hast a devil." (c. viii. 48.) Yet
behold, both Samaritans and Galilaeans believe,
to the shame of the Jews, and Samaritans are
found better than Galilaeans, for the first re-
ceived Him through the words of the woman,
the second when they had seen the miracles
which He did.

Ver. 46. " So Jesus came again into Cana of
Galilee, where He made the water wine."

The Evangelist reminds the hearer of the
miracle to exalt the praise of the Samaritans.
The men of Cana received Him by reason of
the miracles which He had done in Jerusalem
and in that place ; but not so the Samaritans,
they received Him through His teaching alone.

That He came then " to Cana," the Evange-
list has said, but he has not added the cause why
He came.' Into Galilee He had come because
of the envy of the Jews ; but wherefore to Cana ?
At first He came, being invited to a marriage ;
but wherefore now? Methinks to confirm by
His presence the faith which had been implanted
by His miracle, and to draw them to Him the
more by coming to them self-invited, by leaving
His own country, and by preferring them.

" And there was a certain nobleman whose
son was sick at Capernaum."

Ver. 47. "When he heard that Jesus was
come out of Judaea into Galilee, he went unto
Him and besought Him that He would come
down and heal his son."

This person certainly was of royal race, or
possessed some dignity from his office, to which
the title " noble " was attached. Some indeed
think that this is the man mentioned by Matthew
(Matt. viii. 5), but he is shown to be a different
person, not only from his dignity, but also from
his faith. That other, even when Christ was


* MS. in Bodl. reads, " and why, saith some one, went He again
to Cana? "


124


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXV,


willing to go to him, entreats Him to tarry ; this
one, when He had made no such offer, draws
Him to his house. The one saith, " I am not
worthy that Thou shouldest come under my
roof" ; but this other even urges' Him, saying,
" Come down ere my son die." In that instance
He came down from the mountain, and entered
into Capernaum; but here, as He came from
Samaria, and went not into Capernaum but into
Cana, this person met Him. The servant of the
other was possessed by the palsy, this one's son
by a fever.

"And he came and besought Him that He
would heal his son: for he was at the point of
death." What saith Christ ?

Ver. 48. " Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe."

Yet the very coming and beseeching Him was
a mark of faith. And besides, after this the
Evangelist witnesses to him,' declaring that when
Jesus said, " Go, thy son liveth," he believed His
word, and went. What then is that which He
saith here ? Either He useth the words as ap-
proving of the Samaritans because they believed
without signs ; or, to touch Capernaum which
was thought to be His own city, and of which
this person was. Moreover, another man in
Luke, who says, " Lord, I believe," said besides,
"help Thou mine unbelief."* And so if this
ruler also believed, yet he believed not entirely
or soundly, as is clear from his enquiring " at
what hour the fever left him," since he desired
to know whether it did so of its own accord, or
at the bidding of Christ. When therefore he
knew that it was " yesterday at the seventh
hour," then " himself believed and his whole
house." Seest thou that he believed when his
servants, not when Christ spake? Therefore
He rebuketh the state of mind with which be
had come to Him, and spoken as he did, (thus
too He the- more drew him on to belief^)
because that before the miracle he had not
believed strongly. That he came and entreated
was nothing wonderful, for parents in their great
affection are also wont to resort not only to phy-
sicians in whom they have confidence, but also
to talk with those in whom they have 'no confi-
dence, desiring to omit nothing whatever.' In-
deed, that he came without any strong purpose'
appears from this, that when Christ was come
into Galilee, then he saw Him, whereas if he
had firmly believed in Him, he would not, when
his child was on the point of death, have hesi-
tated to go into Judasa. Or if he was afraid,
this is not to be endured either.'

Observe how the very words show the weak-


' al. " brmgs on."

* al. " witnesses it." ' Oavt^d^utit.

* Mark ix. 24 [not found in St. Luke].

> MS. in Bodl. adds, ** of things belonging to carefulness.*'

* (K nixpifryov, ^ i.c. in a true believer.


ness of the man ; when he ought, after Christ had
rebuked his state of mind, to have imagined soipe-
thing great concerning Him, even if he did not sc
before, listen how he drags along the ground.

Ver. 49. " Sir," he saith, " come down ere
my child die."

As though He could notraise him after death,
as though He knew not what state the child was
in. It is for this that Christ rebuketh him and
toucheth his conscience, to show that His mira-
cles were wrought principally for the sake of the
soul. For here He healeth the father, sick in
mind, no less than the son, in order to persuade
us to give heed to Him, not by reason of His
miracles, but of His teaching. For miracles are
not for the faithful, but for the unbelieving and
the grosser sort.

[3.] At that time then, owing to his emotion,
the nobleman gave no great heed to the
words, or to those only which related to his son,'
yet he would afterwards recollect what had been
said, and draw from thence the greatest advan-
tage. As indeed was the case.

But what can be the reason why in the case
of the centurion He by a free offer undertook
to come, while here though invited, He goeth
not? Because in the former case faith had been
perfected, and therefore He undertook to go,
that we might learn the rightmindedness of the
man; but here the nobleman was imperfect.
When therefore he continually' urged Him, say-
ing, "Come down," and knew not yet clearly
that even when absent He could heal. He show-
eth that even this was possible unto Him in
order that this man might gain from Jesus not
going, that knowledge which the centurion had
of himself.'" And so when He saith, " Except
ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe,"
His meaning is, "Ye have not yet the right faith,
but still feel towards Me as towards a Prophet."
Therefore to reveal Himself and to show thai
he ought to have believed even without miracles
He said what He said also to Philip, " Believesi
thou " that the Father is in Me and I in the
Father?'^ Or if not, believe Me for the ver)
works' sake." (c. xiv. 10, 11.)

Ver. 51-53. " And as he was now going down
his servants met him, and told him, saying, Th)
son liveth. Then enquired he of them the hou
when he began to amend. And they said untc
him. Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever lef
him. So the father knew that it was at the sami
hour in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy soi
liveth ; and himself believed, and his whol
house."


" Morel. *' and regarded only what was taking place concernin
his son."

" atfut KaX KaTM.

" MS. in Bodl. reads, " He said this as (He said) to the disc]
pies, ' Believe,' " &c.

^ iyai iv Ttf IlaTpt icat o UoTT^p ci' c^Oi. G. T. and Bea. j.


Homily XXXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


>25


Seest thou how evident the miracle was ?
Not simply nor in a common way was the child
freed from danger, but all at once, so that what
took place was seen to be the consequence not
of nature, but the working' of Christ. For
when he had reached the very gates of death,
as bis father showed by saying, "Come down
ere my child die " ; he was all at once freed
from the disease. A fact which roused the ser-
vants also, for they perhaps came to meet their
master, not only to bring him the good news,
but also deeming that the coming of Jesus was
now superfluous, (for they knew that their master
was gone there,) and so they met him even in
the way. The man released from his fear,
thenceforth escaped'' into faith, being desirous
to show that what had been done was the result
of his journey, and thenceforth he is ambitious
of appearing not to have exerted himself to no
purpose ; so he ascertained all things exactly,
and " himself beheved and his whole house."
For the evidence was after this unquestionable.
For they who had not been present nor had
heard Christ speak nor known the time, when
they had heard from their master that such and
such was the time, had incontrovertible demon-
stration of His power. Wherefore they also
believed.

What now are we taught by these things?
Not to wait for' miracles, nor to seek pledges
of the Power of God. I see many persons even


now become more pious,* when during the suf-
ferings of a child or the sickness of a wife they
enjoy any comfort, yet they ought even if they
obtain it not, to persist just the same in giving
thanks, in glorifying God. Because it is the
part of right-minded servants, and of those who
feel such affection' and love as they ought for
their Master, not only when pardoned, but also
when scourged, to run to Him. For these also
are effects of the tender care of God ; " Whom
the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth,"
it says, " every son whom He receiveth." (Heb.
xii. 6.) When therefore a man serves Him only
in the season of ease, he gives proofs of no great
loVe, and loves not Christ purely. And why
speak I of health, or abundant riches, or poverty,
or disease? Shouldest thou hear of the fiery
pit or of any other dreadful thing, not even so
must thou cease from speaking good of thy
Master, but suffer and do all things because of
thy love for Him. For this is the part of right-
minded servants and of an unswerving soul ; and
he who- is disposed after this sort will easily en-
dure the present, and obtain good' things to
come, and enjoy much confidence in the pres-
ence of God ; which may it be that we all
obtain through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever,
and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXVI.


John iv. 54; v. r.


"This is again- the second miracle that Jesus did, when
He was come out of Judaea into Galilee. After this
there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem."

[ I .] As in gold mines one skillful in what relates
to them would not endure to overlook even the
smallest vein as producing much wealth, so in
the holy Scriptures it is impossible without loss
to pass by one jot or one tittle, we must search
into all. For they all are uttered by the Holy
Spirit, and nothing useless* is written in them.

Consider, for instance, what the Evangelist in
this place saith, "This is again the second
miracle that Jesus did, when He was come out
of Judaea into Galilee." Even the word " sec-
ond " he has added not without cause, but to
exalt yet more the praise ' of the Samaritans, by


* tvtpyeiai,

• lii. " been aroused."


« lit. " distracting."
• lit. " wander,"


showing that even when a second miracle had
been wrought, they who beheld it had not yet
reached as high as those who had not seen one.

"After this there was a feast of the Jews."
What "feast"? Methinks that of Pentecost.
" And Jesus went up to Jerusalem." Contin-
ually at the feasts He frequenteth the City,
partly that He might appear to feast with them,
partly that He might attract the multitude that
was free from guile ; for during these days '" es-
pecially, the more simply disposed ran together
more than at other times.

Ver. 2, 3. " Now there is at Jerusalem a sheep
pool," called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda,
having five porches. In these lay a great multi-
tude of impotent folk,'^ of halt, blind, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water."


• evAa/Searcpout. * al. ** are stanch."

• al. "from." '• al. "feasts."

*' npofiaTiKt] KO^vfiBijUpa [f'lri T^ ir, G. T.J.
t^ [atrOevovvTtav^ G. T. and Ben*


• al. " all.'


126


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVI.


What manner of cure is this ? What mystery
doth it signify to us ? For these things are not
written carelessly, or without a purpose, but as
by a figure and type they show in outline ' things
to come, in order that what was exceedingly
strange might not by coming unexpectedly harm
among the many the power of faith.^ What then
is it that they show in outline ? A Baptism was
about to be given, possessing much power, and
the greatest of gifts, a Baptism purging all sins,
and making men alive instead of dead. These
things then are foreshown as in a picture by the
pool, and by many other circumstances. And
first is given a water which purges the stains of
our bodies, and those defilements which are not,
but seem to be, as those from touching the dead,'*
those from leprosy, and other similar causes ;
under the old covenant one may see many
things done by water on this account. However,
let us now proceed to the matter in hand.

First then, as I before said, He causeth de-
filements of our bodies, and afterwards infirm-
ities of different kinds, to be done away by water.
Because God, desiring to bring us nearer to faith
in * baptism, no longer healeth defilements only,
but diseases also. For those figures which came
nearer [in time] to the reality, both as regarded
Baptism, and the Passion, and the rest, were
, plainer than the more ancient ; ^ and as the guards

inear the person of the prince are more splendid
than those before,^ so was it with the types.
And " an Angel came down and troubled the
water," and endued it with a healing power, that
the Jews might learn that much more could the
Lord of Angels heal the diseases' of the soul.
Yet as here it was not simply the nature of the
water that healed, (for then this would have
always taken place,) but water joined to the
operation ' of the Angel ; so in our case, it is
not merely the water that worketh, but when it
hath received the grace of the Spirit, then it put-
teth away ' all our sins. Around this pool " lay
a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water " ;
but then infirmity was a hindrance to him who
desired to be healed, now each hath power to
approach, for now it is not an Angel that trou-
bleth, it is the Lord of Angels who worketh all.
The sick man cannot now say, " I have no man " ;
he cannot say, " While I am coming another
steppeth down before me " ; though the whole
world should come, the grace is not spent, the
power is not exhausted, but remaineth equally
great as it was before. Just as the sun's beams


* viToypa^ti, al. npovn.

' al. '* harm the faith of the hearers."

^ an'o KT)5etac, Num. v. * lit. *' faith of," al. " the gift of."

* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. "have more power to lead by the
hand than the archetypes."

* al. " afar." ' al. " hindrances.**

* iri Tji iptpyti^f al. " at the coining down."

* Av«u


give light every day, yet are not exhausted, nor
is their light made less by giving so abundant a
supply ; so, and much more, the power of the
Spirit is in no way lessened by the numbers of
those who enjoy it. And this miracle was done
in order that men, learning that it is possible by
water to heal the diseases of the body, and
being exercised in this for a long time, might
more easily believe that it can also heal the dis-
eases of the soul.

But why did Jesus, leaving the rest, come to
one who was of thirty-eight years standing ? And
why did He ask him, " Wilt thou be made
whole?" Not that He might learn, that was
needless; but that He might show'" the man's
perseverance, and that we might know that it was
on this account that He left the others and came
to him. What then saith he? "Yea Lord," he
saith, but " I have no man when the water is
troubled to put me into the pool, but while I
am coming another steppeth down before me."

It was that we might learn these circumstances
that Jesus asked, "Wilt thou be made whole?"
and said not, "Wilt thou that I heal thee?"
(for as yet the man had formed no exalted no-
tions concerning Him,) but " Wilt thou be made
whole?" Astonishing was the perseverance of
the paralytic, he was of thirty and eight years
standing, and each year hoping to be freed from
his disease, he continued in attendance," and
withdrew not. Had he not been very persever-
ing, would not the future,'^ if not the past, have
been sufficient to lead him from the spot ? Con-
sider, I pray you, how watchful it was likely that
the other sick men there would be since the
time when the water was troubled was uncertain.
The lame and halt indeed might observe it, but
how did the blind see ? Perhaps they learnt it
from the clamor which arose.

[2.] Let us be ashamed then, beloved, let us
be ashamed, and groan over our excessive sloth.
"Thirty and eight years " had that man been
waiting without obtaining what he desired, and
withdrew not. And he had failed not through
any carelessness of his own, but through being
oppressed and suffering violence from others,
and not even thus did he grow dull ; " while we
if we have persisted for ten days to pray for any-
thing and have not obtained it, are too slothfu'
afterwards to employ the same zeal. And or
men we wait for so long a time, warring and en
during hardships and performing servile minis-
trations, and often at last failing in our expecta
tion, but on our " Master, from whom we an
sure to obtain a recompense greater than ou
labors, (for, saith the Apostle, " Hope maketl


'0 al. " teach."
*' al. *' lay in wait."
'- i.e. the manifest hopelessness of his being able to ^o dow<
first into the pool.
" irap«(i. " al. " the land.*'


Homily XXXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


127


not ashamed " — Rom. v. 5,) on Him we endure
not to wait with becoming diUgence. What
chastisement doth this deserve ! For even
though we could receive nothing from Him,
ought we not to deem the very conversing with
Him continually the cause of ten thousand
blessings ? " But continual prayer is a laborious
thing." And what that belongs to virtue is not
laborious ? " In truth," says some one, " this
very point is full of great difficulty, that pleasure
is annexed to vice, and labor to virtue." And
many, I think, make this a question. What then
can be the reason?^ God gave us at the begin-
ning a life free from care and exempt from labor.
We used not the gift aright, but were perverted
by doing nothing,'' and were banished from Para-
dise. On which account He made our life for
the future one of toil, assigning as it were His
reasons for this to mankind, and saying, " I
allowed you at the beginning to lead a life of
enjoyment,'' but ye were rendered worse by lib-
erty, wherefore I commanded that henceforth
labor and sweat be laid upon you." ^ And when
even this labor did not restrain us. He next gave
us a law containing many commandments, im-
posing it on us like bits and curbs placed upon
an unruly horse to restrain his prancings, just as
horse breakers do. This is why life is laborious,
because not to labor is wont to be our ruin. For
our nature cannot bear to be doing nothing, but
easily turns aside to wickedness. Let us sup-
pose that the man who is temperate, and he who
rightly performs the other virtues, has no need
of labor, but that they do all things in their sleep,
still how should we have employed our ease?
Would it not have been for pride and boastful-
ness? "But wherefore," saith some one, " has
great pleasure been attached to vice, great labor
and toil to virtue? " Why, what thanks wouldest
, thou have had, and for what wouldest thou have
received a reward, if the matter had not been
one of difficulty? Even now I can show you
many who naturally hate intercourse with women,
and avoid conversation with them as impure ;
shall we then call these chaste, shall we crown
these, tell me, and proclaim them victors? By
no means. Chastity is self-restraint, and the
mastering pleasures which fight, just as in war
the trophies are most honorable when the contest
is violent, not when no one raises a hand against
us. Many are by their very nature passion-
less ; shall we call these good tempered ? Not
at all. And so the Lord after naming three man-
ners of the eunuch state, leaveth two of them
uncrowned, and admitteth one into the kingdom


' al. " worth."

' Morel, and MS. in Bodl. "but hear also the explanation, for
this we will now say for love of you. What then," &c.

^ ap-yta?. • Tpv<t>ay.

"Morel, and MS. in Bodl. " therefore I have done that which
remained to do, I have encompassed (tfr clothed) you with labors
ud toils,"


of heaven. (Matt. xix. 12.) "But what need,"
saith one, "was there of wickedness?" I say
this too. " What is it then which made wicked-
ness to be?" What but our willful negligence?
" But," saith one, " there ought to be only good
men." Well, what is proper to the good man?
Is it to watch and be sober, or to sleep and
snore ? " And why," saith one, " seemed ' it
not good that a man should act rightly without
laboring? " Thou speakest words which become
the cattle or gluttons, or who make their belly
their god. For to prove that these are the words
of folly, answer me this. Suppose there were a
king and a general, and while the king was asleep
or drunk, the general should endure hardship
and erect a trophy, whose would you count the
victory to be? who would enjoy the pleasure of,
what was done ? Seest thou that the soul is more
especially disposed towards those things for which
she hath labored ? and therefore God hath joined
labors to virtue, wishing to make us attached to
her. For this cause we admire virtue, even
although we act not rightly ourselves, while we
condemn vice even though it be very pleasant.
And if thou sayest, " Why do we not admire
those who are good by nature more than those
who are so by choice?" we reply, Because it
is just to prefer him that laboreth to him that
laboreth not. For why is it that we labor ? It
is because thou didst not bear with moderation
the not laboring. Nay more, if one enquire
exactly, in other ways also sloth is wont to undo
us, and to cause us much trouble. Let us, if
you will, shut a man up, only feeding and pam-
pering him, not allowing him to walk nor con-
ducting him forth to work, but let him enjoy
table and bed, and be in luxury continually ;
what could be more wretched than such a life ?
" But," saith one, " to work is one thing, to labor
is another." ' Yea, but it was in man's power
then * to work without labor. " And is this,"
saith he, " possible? " Yea, it is possible ; God
even desired it, but thou enduredst it not. There-
fore He placed thee to work in the garden, mark-
ing out employment, but joining with it no labor.
For had man labored at the beginning, God
would not afterwards have put labor by way of
punishment. For it is jjossible to work and not
to be wearied, as do the angels. To prove that
they work, hear what David saith ; " Ye that
excel in strength, ye that do His word." (Ps.
ciii. 20, LXX.) Want of strength causeth much
labor now, but then it was not so. For "he that
hath entered into His rest, hath ceased," saith
one, " from his works, as God from His " (Heb.
iv. 10) : not meaning here idleness, but the
ceasing from labor. For God worketh even now,


* al. '• thoughtcst thou."

' Some MSS. read, " was it then meet to work without toil?
yea," &c.

' i.e. during the abode in Paradise*


128


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVU,.


as Christ saith, "My Father worketh hitherto,
and I work." (c. v. 1 7.) Wherefore I exhort
you that, laying aside all carelessness, you be
zealous for virtue. For the pleasure of wicked-
ness is short, but the pain lasting ; of virtue, on
the contrary, the joy grows not old, the labor is
but for a season. Virtue even before the crowns
are distributed animates* her workman, and
feeds him with hopes ; vice even before the time
of vengeance punishes him who works for her,
wringing and terrifying his conscience, and mak-
ing it apt to imagine all (evils). Are not these
things worse than any labors, than any toils?
And if these things were not so, if there were


pleasure, what could be more worthless than that
pleasure ? for as soon as it appears it flies away,
withering and escaping before it has been
grasped, whether you speak of the pleasure of
beauty, or that of luxury, or that of wealth, for
they cease not daily to decay. But when there
is besides (for this pleasure) punishment and
vengeance, what can be more miserable than
those who go after it? Knowing then this, let
us endure all for virtue, so shall we enjoy true
pleasure, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXVII.


John v. 6, 7.


•'Jesus saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The
impotent man answered Him, Yea, Sir, but I have
no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into
the pool."

[ I .] Great is the profit of the divine Scriptures,
and all-sufficient is the aid which comes from
them. And Paul declared this when he said,
" Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written aforetime for our admonition upon whom
the ends of the world are come, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope." (Rom. xv. 4, and 1 Cor. x. 11.)
For the divine oracles are a treasury of all
manner of medicines, so that whether it be
needful to quench pride, to lull desire to sleep,
to tread under foot the love of money, to
despise pain, to inspire confidence, to gain pa-
tience, from them one may find abundant re-
source. For what man of those who struggle
with long poverty or who are nailed to ' a griev-
ous disease, will not, when he reads the pas-
sage before us, receive much comfort? Since
this man who had been paralytic for thirty and
eight years, and who saw each year others de-
livered, and himself bound by his disease, not
even so fell back and despaired, though in truth
not merely despondency for the past, but also
hopelessness for the future, was sufficient to over-
strain * him. Hear now what he says, and learn
the greatness of his sufferings.* For when Christ
had said, " Wilt thou be made whole ? " " Yea,
Lord," he saith, " but I have no man, when the
water is troubled, to put me into the pool." What
can be more pitiable than these words? What
more sad than these circumstances ? Seest thou


' or, ** releases."
« al. •■ held by."


• or, " throw him down.*

* lit. *' the tragedy.**


a heart* crushed throtigh long sickness? Seest
thou all violence subdued? He uttered no
blasphemous- word, nor such as we hear the
many use in reverses, he cursed not his day, he.
was not angry at the question, nor did he say,
" Art Thou come to make a mock and a jest of
us, that Thou asketh whether I desire. to be
made whole?" but replied gently, and with
great mildness, " Yea, Lord " ; yet he knew not
who it was that asked him, nor that He would
heal him, but still he mildly relates all the cir-
cumstances and asks nothing further, as though
he were speaking to a physician, and desired
merely to tell the story of his sufferings. Per-
haps he hoped that Christ might be so far use-
ful to him as to put him into the water, and
desired to attract Him by these words. What
then saith Jesus?
Ver. 8. "Rise, take up thy bed, and walk."''
Now some suppose that this is the man io
Matthew who was "lying on a bed" (Matt, ix,
2 ) ; but it is not so, as is clear in many ways,
First, from his wanting persons to stand forwjurd
for him. That man had many to care for and to
carry him, this man not a single one ; whereforir
he said, " I have no man." Secondly, from th«
manner of answering ; the other uttered no word
but this man relates his whole case. Thirdly
from the season and the time ; this man wa "
healed at a feast, and on the Sabbath, that othe
on a different day. The places too were differ
ent ; one was cured in a house, the other by th
p)ool. The manner also of the cure was altered
there Christ said, " Thy sins be forgiven thee.


•. al. " endurance.'*

* al. " and go to thine house.*


Homily XXXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


129


but here He braced ' the body first, and then
cared for the soul. In that case there was re-
mission of sins, (for He saith, "Thy sins be for-
given thee,") but in this, warning and threats to
strengthen the man for the future ; " Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." (Ver.
14.) The charges also of the Jews are different ;
here they object to Jesus, His working on the
Sabbath, there they charge Him with blasphemy.

Consider now, I pray you, the exceeding wis-
dom of God. He raised not up the man at
once, but first maketh him familiar by question-
ing, making way for the coming faith ; nor doth
He only raise, but biddeth him " take up his
bed," so as to confirm the miracle that had been
wrought, and that none might suppose what was
done to be illusion or a piece of acting. For he
would not, unless his limbs had been firmly and
thoroughly com|)acted, have been able to carry
his bed. And this Christ often doth, effectually
silencing those who would fain be insolent. So
in the case of the loaves, that no one might
assert that the men had been merely ' satisfied,
and that what was done was an illusion, He
caused that there should be many relics of the
loaves. So to the leper that was cleansed He
said, " Go, show thyself to the priest " (Matt,
viii. 4) ; at once providing most certain proof of
the cleansing, and stopping the shameless mouths
of those who asserted that He was legislating in
opposition to God. This also He did in Uke
manner in the case of the wine ; for He did not
merely show it to them, but also caused it to be
borne to the governor of the feast, in order that
one who knew nothing of what had been done,
by his confession might bear to Him unsuspected
testimony ; wherefore the Evangelist saith, that
the ruler of the feast " knew not whence it was,"
thus showing the impartiality of his testimony.
And in another place, when He raised the dead,
He said, " Give ye him to eat " ; " supplying
this proof of a real resurrection, and by these
means persuading even the foolish that He was
no deceiver, no dealer in illusions,'' but that He
had come for the salvation of the common
nature of mankind.

[2.] But why did not Jesus require faith of
this man, as He did in the case of others, say-
ing, " Believest thou that I am able to do this?"^
It was because the man did not yet clearly know
who He was ; and it is not before, but after the
working of miracles that He is seen so doing.
For persons who had beheld His power exerted
on others would reasonably have this said to
them, while of those who had not yet learned
who He was, but who were to know afterwards


' t<T<i>iy^€. * i.e. not by real eating, airXu;.

' The reference seems to be to Luke viii. 55.
* "JiarTaffco»coTro?.

5 Morel, and MSS. read, *' as He did in the case of the blind
men, (Matt. ix. 28,) saying, ' Believe ye,' " &c.


by means of signs, it is after the miracles that
faith is required. And therefore Matthew doth
not introduce Christ as having said this at the
beginning of His miracles, but when He had
healed many, to the two blind men only.

Observe however in this way the faith of the
paralytic. When he had heard,* " Take up thy
bed and walk," he did not mock, nor say, " What
can this mean? An Angel cometh down and
troubleth the water, and healeth only one, and
dost Thou, a man, by a bare command and
word hope to be able to do greater things than
Angels? This is mere vanity, boasting, mock-
ery." But he neither said nor imagined any-
thing like this, but at once he heard and arose,
and becoming whole, was not disobedient to
Him that gave the command ; ^ for immediately
he was made whole, and " took up his bed, and
walked." What followed was even far more ad-
mirable. That he believed at first, when no one
troubled him, was not so marvelous, but that
afterwards, when the Jews were full of madness
and pressed upon him on all sides, accusing * and
besieging him and saying, " It is not lawful for
thee to take up thy bed," that then he gave no
heed to ° their madness, but most boldly in the
midst of the assembly '" proclaimed his Benefac-
tor and silenced their shameless tongues, this, I
say, was an act of great courage. For when
the Jews arose against him, and said in a re-
proachful and insolent manner to him,

Ver. 10. " It is the Sabbath day, it is not law-
ful for thee to carry thy bed " ; hear what he
saith :

Ver. n. " He that made me whole, the Same
said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk."

All but saying, " Ye are silly and mad who bid
me not to take Him for my Teacher who has
delivered me from a long and grievous malady,
and not to obey whatever He may command.""
Had he chosen to act in an unfair manner, he
might have spoke differently, as thus, " I do not
this of my own will, but at the bidding of
another ; if this be a matter of blame, blame
him who gave the order, and I will set down the
bed." And he might have concealed the cure,
for he well knew that they were vexed not so
much at the breaking of the Sabbath, as at the
curing of his infirmity. Yet he neither con-
cealed this, nor said that, nor asked for pardon,
but with loud voice confessed and proclaimed
the benefit. Thus did the paralytic ; but con-
sider how unfairly they acted. For they said


* Morel, and MS. in Bodl. read, " for having heard that with
authority, and as one commanding, He said to him, ' Arise,' " &c.

^ Morel, and MS. " who had commanded, ' Arise,' " &c.

* Morel, and MS. "accusing, as the Evangelist shows by what
follows, saying, * And on the same day was the Sabbath. The
Jews tlierefore said unto him that was cured. It is the .Sabbath day,
It is not lawful,* '* &c.

* al. •* not only disregarded,"

>» lit. " theater." " see p. 132.


I30


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVII.


not, " Who is it that hath made thee whole ? " on
this point they were silent, but kept on bringing
forward the seeming transgression.

Ver. 12, 13. "Whatman is that which said
unto thee. Take up thy bed and walk ? And he
that was healed wist not who it was ; for Jesus
had conveyed Himself away,' a multitude being
in that place."

And why did Jesus conceal Himself? First,
that while He was absent, the testimony of the
man might be unsuspected, for he who now felt
himself whole was a credible witness of the bene-
fit. And in the next place, that He might not
cause the fury of the Jews to be yet more in-
flamed, for the very sight of one whom they
envy is wont to kindle not a small spark in
malicious persons. On this account He retired,
and left the deed by itself to plead its cause
among them, that He might not say anything in
person respecting Himself, but that they might
do so who had been healed, and with them also
the accusers. Even these last for a while testify
to the miracle, for they said not, " Wherefore
hast thou commanded these things to be done
on the Sabbath day?" but, " Wherefore doest
thou these things on the Sabbath day?" not be-
ing displeased at the transgression, but envious
at the restoration of the paralytic. Yet in re-
spect of human labor, what the paralytic did was
rather a work, for the other ^ was a saying and a
word. Here then He commandeth another to
break the Sabbath, but elsewhere He doth the
same Himself, mixing clay and anointing a
man's eyes (c. 9) ; yet He doth these things not
transgressing, but going beyond the Law. And
on this we shall hereafter speak. For He doth
not, when accused by the Jews respecting the
Sabbath, always defend Himself in the same
terms, and this we must carefully observe.

[3.] But let us consider awhile how great an
evil is envy, how it disables the eyes of the soul
to the endangering his salvation who is possessed
by it. For as madmen often thrust their swords
against their own bodies, so also malicious per-
sons looking only to one thing, the injury' of
him they envy, care not for their own salvation.
Men like these are worse than wild beasts ; they
when wanting food, or having first been provoked
by us, arm themselves against us ; but these men
when they have received kindness, have often re-
paid their benefactors as though they had wronged
them. Worse than wild beasts are they, like
the devils, or perhaps worse than even those ;
for they against us indeed have unceasing hostil-
ity, but do not plot against those of their own
nature, (and so by this Jesus silenced the Jews
when the/ said that He cast out devils by Beel-
zebub,) but these men neither respect their com-


1 i(iKKtytv e^fvtviTtyt G. T. and Mor.
* i.e. that which Jesus did.


» al.


mon nature, nor spare their own selves. For be-
fore they vex those whom they envy they vex
their own souls, filling them with all manner of
trouble and despondency, fruitlessly and in vain.
For wherefore grievest thou, O man, at the pros-
perity of thy neighbor? We ought to grieve at
the ills we suffer, not because we see others in
good repute. Wherefore this sin is stripped of all
excuse. The fornicator may allege his lust, the
thief his poverty, the man-slayer his passion,
frigid excuses and unreasonable, still they have
these to allege. But what reason, tell me, wilt
thou name? None other at all, but that of
intense wickedness. If we are commanded to
love our enemies, what punishment shall we suf-
fer if we hate our very friends ? And if he who
loveth those that love him will be in no better a
state than the heathen, what excuse, what palli-
ation shall he have who injures those that have
done him no wrong? Hear Paul, what he saith,
"Though I give my body to be burned, and
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing" (i
Cor. xiii. 3) ; now it is clear to every one that
where envy and malice are, there charity is not.
This feeling is worse than fornication and adul-
tery, for these go no farther than him who doeth
them, but the tyranny of envy hath overturned
entire Churches, and hath destroyed the whole
world. Envy is the mother of murder. Through
this Cain slew Abel his brother ; through this
Esau (would have slain) Jacob, and his brethren
Joseph, through this the devil all mankind.
Thou indeed now killest not, but thou dost many
things worse than murder, desiring that thy
brother may act unseemly, laying snares for him
on all sides, paralyzing his labors on the side of
virtue, grieving that he pleaseth the Master of
the world. Yet thou warrest not with thy
brother, but with Him whom he serves. Him thou
insultest when thou preferest thy glory to His.
And what is in truth worst of all, is that this sin
seems to be an unimportant one, while in ftict
it is more grievous than any other ; for though
thou showest mercy and watchest and fastest,
thou art more accursed than any if thou enviesti
thy brother. As is clear from this circumstance
also. A man of the Corinthians was once guilt)
of adultery, yet he was charged with his sin anc
soon restored to righteousness ; Cain enviec
Abel ; but he was not healed, and although Go(
Himself continually charmed * the wound, hi
became more pained and wave-tossed, and wa
hurried on to murder. Thus this passion i
worse than that other, and doth not easily pei
mit itself to be cured except we give heed. I^
us then by all means tear it up by the root!
considering this, that as we offend God when w
waste with envy at other men's blessings, s


* eiTffSofTo?.


Homily XXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


131


when we rejoice with them we are well pleasing
to Him, and render ourselves partakers of the
good things laid up for the righteous. Therefore
Paul exhorteth us to " Rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep " (Rom.
xii. 15), that on either hand we may reap great
profit.

Considering then that even when we labor
not, by rejoicing with him that laboreth, we be-


come sharers of his crown, let us cast aside all
envy, and implant charity in our souls, that by
applauding those of our brethren who are well
pleasing unto God, we may obtain both present
and future good things, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, world with-
out end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXVIII


John v. 14.


"Afterward Jesus findeth him in the Temple, and said
unto him, Behold, thou art made whole; sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee."

[i.] A FEARFUL thing is sin, fearful, and the ruin
of the soul, and the mischief oftentimes through
its excess has overflowed and attacked men's
bodies also. For since for the most part when
the soul is diseased we feel no pain, but if the
body receive though but a little hurt, we use
every exertion to free it from its infirmity, be-
cause we are sensible of the infirmity,' therefore
God oftentimes punisheth the body for the trans-
gressions of the soul, so that by means of the
scourging of the inferior part, the better part
also may receive some healing. Thus too among
the Corinthians Paul restored the adulterer,
checking the disease of the soul by the destruc-
tion of the flesh, and having applied the knife to
the body, so repressed the evil (i Cor. v. 5) ;
like some excellent physician employing external
cautery for dropsy or spleen, when they refuse
to yield to internal remedies. This also Christ
did in the case of the paralytic ; as He showed
when He said, " Behold, thou art made whole ;
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee."

Now what do we learn from this ? First, that
his disease had been produced by his sins ; sec-
ondly, that the accounts of hell fire are to be
believed ; thirdly, that the punishment is long,
nay endless. Where now are those who say, " I
murdered in an hour, I committed adultery in a
litde moment of time, and am I eternally pun-
ished?" For behold this man had not sinned for
so many years as he suffered, for he had spent a
/whole lifetime in the length of his punishment ;
(and sins are not judged by time, but by the
^nature of the transgressions. Besides this, we


* Sav. omits " because we are sensible of the iniirmity.'


may see^ another thing, that though we have
suffered severely for former sins, if we afterwards
fall into the same, we shall suffer much more
severely. And with good reason ; for he who is
not made better even by punishment, is after-
wards led as insensible and a despiser to still
heavier chastisement. The fault should of itself
be sufficient to check and to render more sober
the man who once has slipped, but when not even
the addition of punishment effects this, he natu-
rally requires more bitter torments.' Now if
even in this world when after punishment* we fall
into the same sins, we are chastised yet more
severely then before, ought we not when after
sinning we have not been punished at all, to be
then * very exceedingly afraid and to tremble, as
being about to endure something irreparable?
"And wherefore," saith some one, "are not
all thus punished? for we see many bad men
well in body, vigorous, and enjoying great
prosperity." But let us not be confident, let us
mourn for them in this case most of all, since
their having suffered nothing here, helps them
on " to a severer vengeance hereafter.' As Paul
declares when he saith, " But now that we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world " (i
Cor. xi. 32) ; for the punishments here are for
warning, there for vengeance.

" What then," saith one, " do all diseases pro-
ceed from sin?" Not all, but most of them;
and some proceed from different kinds of loose
living,' since gluttony, intemperance, and sloth.


2 al. " learn."

' Ben. and MS. in Bod!, read the passage thus: '* For the
chastisement was of itself sufficient . . . but when not being
sobered by the application of punishment, he again dares the same
things, such an one will reasonably suffer some penalty, calling this
as he does upon his own self."

* al. " have been punished here." ___ ^ al. " a_t this."

6 c^oSioi/ yiyytrai. So Euseb. //. £, viii. lo, «<fr. T^c iit ritv ^miji*
tiao&ov. ^ lit. " there."

8 al. " from loose living," padvjut'at.


132


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII.


produce such like sufferings. But the one rule
we have to observe, is to bear every stroke thank-
fully ; for they are sent because of our sins, as
in the Kings we see one attacked by gout (i
Kings XV. 23) ; they are sent also to make us
approved, as the Lord saith to Job, " Thinkest
thou that I have spoken to thee, save that thou
mightest appear righteous?" (Job xl. 8, LXX.)

But why is it that in the case of these para-
lytics Christ bringeth forward their sins? For
He saith also to him in Matthew who lay on a
bed, " Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee" (Matt. ix. 2) : and to this man, "Behold,
thou art made whole ; sin no more." ' I know
that some slander this paralytic, asserting that
he was an accuser of Christ, and that therefore
this speech was addressed to him ; what then
shall we say of the other in Matthew, who heard
nearly the same words ? For Christ saith to him
also, " Thy sins be forgiven thee." Whence it
is clear, that neither was this man thus addressed
on the account which they allege. And this we
may see more clearly from what follows : ^ for,
saith the Evangehst, "Afterward Jesus findeth
him in the Temple," which is an indication of
his great piety; for he departed not into the
market places and walks, nor gave himself up to
luxury and ease, but remained in the Temple,
although about to sustain so violent an attack
and to be harassed by all there.' Yet none of
these things persuaded him to depart from the
Temple. Moreover Christ having found him,
even after he had conversed with the Jews,
implied nothing of the kind. For had He
desired to charge him with this. He would have
said to him, " Art thou again attempting the
same sins as before, art thou not made better by
thy cure?" Yet He said nothing of the kind,
but merely secureth him for the future.

[2.] Why then, when He had cured the halt
and maimed, did He not in any instance make
mention of the like ? Methinks that the diseases
of these (the paralytic) arose from acts of sin,
those of the others from natural infirmity. Or
if this be not so, then by means of these men,
and by the words spoken to them, He hath
spoken to the rest also. For since this disease
is more grievous than any other, by the greater
He correcteth also the less. And as when He
had healed a certain other He charged him to
give glory to God, addressing this exhortation
not to him only but through him to all, so He
addresseth to these, and by these to all the rest
of mankind, that exhortation and advice which
was given to them by word of mouth. Besides
this we may also say, that Jesus perceived great
endurance in his soul, and addressed the exhorta-
tion to him as to one who was able to receive


• See


>ee p. 129,
i\. from ;


another reason.


' al. *' chased thence by all,"


His command, keeping him to health both by
the benefit, and by the fear of future ills.

And observe the absence of boasting. He
said not, " Behold, I have made thee whole,"
but, " Thou art made whole ; sin no more." And
again, not, "lest I punish thee," but, "lest a worse
thing come unto thee " ; putting both expressions
not personally,* and showing that the cure was
rather of grace than of merit. For He declared
not to him that he was delivered after suffering
the deserved amount of punishment, but that
through lovingkindness he was made whole.
Had this not been the case. He would have
said, " Behold, thou hast suffered a sufficient
punishment for thy sins, be thou steadfast for the
future." But now He spake not so, but how?
" Behold, thou art made whole ; sin no more."
Let us continually repeat these words to our-
selves, and if after having been chastised we
have been delivered, let each say to himself,
" Behold, thou art made whole ; sin no more."
But if we suffer not punishment though continu-
ing in the same courses, let us use for our charm
that word of the Apostle, "The goodness of
God leadeth [us] to repentance, but after [our]
hardness and impenitent heart, [we] treasure up
unto [ourselves] wrath." (Rom. ii. 4, 5.)

And not only by strengthening * the sick man's
body, but also in another way, did He afford him
a strong proof of His Divinity ; for by saying,
" Sin no more," He showed that He knew all
the transgressions that had formerly been com-
mitted by him ; and by this He would gain his
belief as to the future.

Ver. 15. "The man departed, and told the
Jews that it was Jesus that had made him whole."

Again observe him continuing in the same
right feeling. He saith not, "This is he who
said, Take up thy bed," but when they con-
tinually advanced this seeming charge, he con-
tinually puts forward the defense, again declaring
his Healer, and seeking to attract and attach
others to Him. For he was not so unfeeling asj
after such a benefit and charge to betray his
Benefactor, and to speak as he did with an evi
intention. Had he been a wild beast, had h<
been something unlike a man and of stone, thi
benefit and the fear would have been enough t<
restrain him, since, having the threat lodge<
within, he would have dreaded lest, he shouli
suffer " a worse thing," having already receivei
the greatest pledges " of the power of his Physi
cian. Besides, had he wished to slander Hin
he would have said nothing about his own cur(
but would have mentioned and urged again:
Him the breach of the Sabbath. But this
not the case, surely it is not ; the words
words of great boldness and candor ; he p)


* aTrpoffuJiTbif, i.e. not referring to Himself.

* tr<f>iy(at. " al. '* proofs.'


FfoMILY XXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


133


cairns his Benefactor no less than the blind man
did. For what said he? "He made clay, and
anointed mine eyes" (c. ix. 6) ; and so this man
of whom we now speak, " It is Jesus who made
me whole."

Ver. 16. "Therefore did the Jews persecute
Jesus, and sought to slay Him, because He had
done these things on the Sabbath day." What
then saith Christ?

Ver. 17. "My Father worketh hitherto, and
I work."

When there was need to make excuse for the
Disciples, He brought forward David their fellow-
servant, saying, " Have ye not read what David
did when he was an hungered?" (Matt. xii. 2.)
But when excuse was to be made for Himself,
He betook Himself to the Father, showing in
two ways His Equality, by calling God His
Father peculiarly,^ and by doing the same things
which He did. " And wherefore did He not
mention what took place at Jericho^?" Because
He wished to raise them up from earth that they
might no longer attend to Him as to a man, but
as to God, and as to one who ought to legislate :
since had He not been The Very Son and of the
same Essence, the defense would have been
worse than the charge. For if a viceroy who
had altered a royal law should, when charged
with so doing, excuse himself in this manner,
and say, " Yea, for the king also has annulled
laws," he would not be able to escape, but would
thus increase the weight of the charge. But in
this instance, since the dignity is equal,-., the
defense is made perfect on most secure grountls.
"From the charges," saith He, "from which fe-
absolve God, absolve Me also." And therefore
He said first, " My Father," that He might per-
suade them even against their will to allow to
Him the same, through reverence of His clearly
asserted Sonship.

If any one say, "And how doth the Father
'work,' who ceased on the seventh day from all
His works? " let him learn the manner in which
He "worketh." What then is the manner of
His working? He careth for. He holdeth' to-
, gether all that hath been made. Therefore when
thou beholdest the sun rising and the moon run-
ning in her path, the lakes, and fountains, and
rivers, and rains, the course of nature in the
seeds and in our own bodies and those of irra-
tional beings, and all the rest by means of which
this universe is made up, then learn the cease-
less working of the Father. " For He maketh
His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust."
(Matt. v. 45.) And again ; " If God so clothe


' Jericho was taken on the seventh day by command of God.
Josh. yi. 4, 15.

* lit. " weTdeth." auYKporet. Sav. conjectures ffuy(c(>aTer, but
the word is not uncommon for holding togetner a system.


the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-
morrow is cast into the fire*" (Matt. vi. 30) ;
and speaking of the birds He said, " Your Heav-
enly Father feedeth them."

[3.] In that place" then He did all on the
Sabbath day by words only, and added noth-
ing more, but refuted their charges by what was
done in the Temple and from their own prac-
tice. But here where He commanded a work
to be done, the taking up a bed, (a thing of no
gregtimportance as regarded the miracle," though
by it He showed one point, a manifest violation
of the .Sabbath,) He leads up His discourse to
something greater, desiring the more to awe
them by reference to the dignity of the P"ather,
and to lead them up to higher thought. There-
fore when His discourse is concerning the Sab-
bath, He maketh not His defense as man only,
or as God only, but sometimes in oneway, some-
times in the other; because He desired to per-
suade them both of the condescension of the
Dispensation, and the Dignity of His Godhead.
Therefore He now defendeth Himself as God,
since had He always conversed with them merely
as a man, they would have continued in the
same low condition. Wherefore that this may
not be. He bringeth forward the Father. Yet
the creation itself " worketh " on the Sabbath,
(for the sun runneth, rivers flow, fountains
bubble, women bear,) but that thou mayest
learn that He is not of creation. He said not,
" Yea, I work, for creation worketh," but, " Yea,
I work, for My Father worketh."

Ver. 18. "Therefore the Jews sought the more
to- kill Him, because He not only had broken
the Sabbath, but said also that God was His
Father, making Himself equal with God."

And this he asserted not by words merely, but
by deeds, for not in speech alone, but also yet
oftener by actions He declared it. Why so? ,
Because they might object to His words and 'n^'
charge Hiar with arrogance, but when they saw
the truth of His actions proved by results, and
His power proclaimed by works, after that they
could say nothing against Him.

But they who will not receive these words in
a right mind assert, that " Christ made not Him-
self equal to God, but that the Jews suspected
this." Come then let us go over what has been
said from the beginning. Tell me, did the Jews
persecute Him, or did they not? It is clear to
every one that they did. Did they persecute
Him for this or for something else ? It is again
allowed thafit was for this. Did He then break
the Sabbath, or did He not? Against the fact
that He did, no one can have anything to say.
Did He call God His Father, or did He not call
Him so ? This too is tnie. Then the rest also


* eis fcAi/Sai'Df, G. T.

s Matt. xii.


* vpdytxa.


134


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII.


follows by the same consequence ; for as to call
God His P"ather, to break the Sabbath, and to
be persecuted by the Jews for the former and
more especially for the latter . reason, belonged
not to a false imagination, but to actual fact, so
to make Himself ecjual to Clod was a declaration
of the same meaning.'

And this one may see more clearly from what
He had before said, for " My Father worketh,
and I work," is the expression of One declaring
Himself equal to God. For in these words He
has marked^ no difference. He said not, " He
worketh, and I minister," but, " As He worketh,
so work I " ; and hath declared absolute Equality.
But if He had not wished to establish this, and
the Jews had supposed so without reason. He
would not have allowed their minds to be de-
ceived, but would have corrected this. Besides,
the Evangelist would not have been silent on
the subject, but would have plainly said that
the Jews supposed so, but that Jesus did
not make Himself equal to God. As in
another place he doth this very thing, when he
perceiveth that something was said in one way,
and understood in another ; as, " Destroy this
Temple," said Christ, " and in three days I will
raise It up" (c. ii. 19) ; speaking of His Flesh.
But the Jews, not understanding this, and sup-
posing that the words were spoken of the Jewish
Temple, said, " Forty and six years was this
temple in building, and wilt Thou rear it up
in three days?" Since then He said one thing,
and they imagined another, (for He spake of His
Flesh, and they thought that the words were
spoken of their Temple,) the Evangelist remark-
ing on this, or rather correcting their imagina-
tion, goes on to say, " But He spake of the
Temple of His Body." So that here also, if
Christ had not made Himself equal with God,
had not wished to estabhsh this, and yet the
Jews had imagined that He did, the writer would
here also have corrected their supposition, and
would have said, " The Jews thought that He
made Himself equal to God, but indeed He
spake not of equality." And this is done not
in this place only, nor by this Evangelist only,
but again elsewhere another Evangelist is seen
to do the same. For when Christ warned His
disciples, saying, " Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees " (Matt. xvi. 6), and
they reasoned among themselves, saying, " It
is because we have taken no bread," and
He spake of one thing, calling their doctrine
"leaven," but the disciples imagined another,
supposing that the words were said of bread ;
it is not now the Evangelist who setteth them


_ * T)j« (xuT^? 'ycw/ATjT aTroffrao-t?, i.e. in saying that He was making
Himself " equal to the Father," the Evangelist asserts a truth which
had before been signified by His breaking the Sabbath, and saying
that God was His Father.
* al. " given."


right, but Christ Himself, speaking thus, " How
is it that ye do not understand, that I spake not
to you concerning bread?" But here there is
nothing of the kind.

" But," saith some one, " to remove this very
thought Christ has added,

Ver. 19. "'The Son can do nothing of Him-
self.' "

Man ! He doth the contrary. He saith this
not to take away, but to confirm,^ His Equality.
But attend carefully, for this is no common
question. The expression "of Himself" is
found in many places of Scripture, with refer-
ence both to Christ and to the Holy Ghost, and
we must learn the force of the expression, that
we may not fall into the greatest errors ; for if
one take it separately by itself in the way in
which it is obvious to take it, consider how great
an absurdity wHl follow. He said not that He
could do some things of Himself and that others
He could not, but universally,

[4.] " The Son can do nothing of Himself."

I ask then my opponent, " Can the Son do
nothing of Himself, tell me ? " If he reply,
"that He can do nothing," we will say, that He
hath done of Himself the very greatest of all
goods. As Paul cries aloud, saying, "Who
being in the form of God, thought it not rob-
bery to be equal with God, but made Himself
of no reputation, and took upon Him the form
of a servant." (Phil. ii. 6, 7.) And again, Christ
Himself in another place saith, "I have power
to lay down My life, and I have power to take
it again " : and, " No man taketh it from Me, but
I lay it down of Myself." (c. x. 18.) Seest
thou that He hath power over life and death,
and that He wrought of Himself so mighty a
Dispensation? And why speak I concerning
Christ, when even we, than whom nothing can
be meaner, do many things of ourselves ? 0(
ourselves we choose vice, of ourselves we gc
after virtue, and if we do it not of ourselves
and not having power, we shall neither suffer hel
if we do wrong, nor enjoy the Kingdom if we dc
right.

What then meaneth, "Can do nothing of Him
self"? That He can do nothing in oppositioi
to the Father, nothing alien from, nothing strangi
to Him,'' which is especially the assertion of On-
declaring an Equality and entire agreement.

But wherefore said He not, that " He doetj
nothing contrary," instead of, " He cannot do "
It was that from this again He might show th
invariableness and exactness of the Equality, fc
the expression imputes not weakness to Hin
but even shows ' His great power ; since i
another place Paul saith of the Father, " Thi
by two immutable things in which it was impoi


' lit. " to clench."

* i.e. nofhine by Himself.


» al. " testifies.'


Homily XXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


135


sible for God to lie " (Heb. vi. 18) : and again,
"If we deny Him — He abideth faithful," for
" He cannot deny Himself." (2 Tim. ii. 1 2, 13.)
And in truth this expression, " impossible," is not
declaratory of weakness, but power, power un-
speakable. For what He saith is of this kind,
that " that Essence admitteth not such things as
these." For just as when we also say, " it is
impossible for God to do wrong," we do not
impute to Him any weakness, but confess in
Him an unutterable power; so when He also
saith, " I can of Mine own Self do nothing "
(v. 30), His meaning is, that "it is impossible,
nature admits not,' that I should do anything
contrary to the Father." And that you may
learn that this is really what is said, let us, going
over what follows, see whether Christ agreeth
with what is said by us, or among you. Thou
sayest, that the expression does away with His
Power and His proper Authority, and shows His
might to be but weak ; but I say, that this proves
His Equality, His unvarying Likeness,'^ (to the
Father,) and the fact that all is done as it were
by one WilP and Power and Might. Let us
then enquire of Christ Himself, and see by what
He next saith whether He interpreteth these
words according to thy supposition or according
to ours. What then saith He ?

" For what things soever the Father ■* doeth,
these also doeth the Son likewise."

Seest thou how He hath taken away your
assertion by the root, and confirmed what is
said by us? since, if Christ doeth nothing of
Himself, neither will the Father do anything of
Himself, if so be that Christ doeth all things in
like manner to Him.' If this be not the case,
another strange conclusion will follow. For He
said not, that " whatsoever things He saw the
Father do. He did," but, " except He see the
Father doing anything, He doeth it not " ; ex-
tending His words to all time ; now He will,
according to you, be continually learning the
same things. Seest thou how exalted is the
idea, and that the very humility of the expres-
sion compelleth even the most shameless and
unwilling to avoid groveling thoughts, and such
as are unsuited to His dignity? For who so
wretched and miserable as to assert, that the
Son learneth day by day what He must do?
and how can that be true, " Thou art the same,
and Thy years shall not fail"? (Ps. cii. 27),
or that other, " All things were made by Him,
and without Him was not anything made " (c. i.
3) ; if the Father doeth certain things, and the
Son seeth and imitateth Him? Seest thou that
: I from what was asserted above, and from what
i was said afterwards, proof is given of His inde-


' TO airapaAAaKTOv.

» Morel, and MS. in Bodl., " ihat the
may remain."


» yvtiifjij}^.

* 'EKtlyoVt G. T.
'likewise ' (to o^oi'wf)


pendent Power? and if He bringeth forward
some expressions in lowly manner, marvel not,
for since they persecuted Him when they had
heard His exalted sayings, and deemed Him to
be an enemy of God, sinking '' a little in expres-
sion alone. He again leadeth His discourse up
to the sublimer doctrines, then in turn to the
lower, varying His teaching that it might be
easy of acceptance even to the indisposed.'
Observe, after saying, " My Father workelh, and
I work"; and after declaring Himself equal
with God, He addeth, " 'I"he Son can do noth-
ing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
do." Then again in a higher strain, " What
things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth
the Son likewise." Then in a lower,

Ver. 20. " The Father loveth the Son, and
showeth Him all things that Himself doeth ;
and He will show Him greater works than
these."

Seest thou how great is the humility of this?
And with reason ; for what I said before, what I
shall not cease to say, I will now repeat, that
when He uttereth anything low or humbly. He
putteth it in excess, that the very poverty of the
expression may persuade even the indisposed to
receive the notions with pious understanding.
Since, if it be not so, see how absurd a thing is
asserted, making the trial from the words them-
selves. For when He saith, " And shall show
Him greater works than these," He will be
found not to have yet learned many things,
which cannot be said even of the Apostles ; for
they when they had once received the grace of
the Spirit, in a moment both knew and were
able to do all things which it was needful that
they should know and have power to do, while
Christ will be found to have not yet learned
many things which He needed to know. And
what can be more absurd than this ?

What then is His meaning ? It was because
He had strengthened the paralytic, and was
about to raise the dead, that He thus spake, all
but saying, " Wonder ye that I have strength-
ened the paralyzed ? Ye shall see greater things
than these." But He spake not thus, but pro-
ceeded somehow in a humbler strain, in order
that He might soothe' their madness. And that
thou mayest learn that " shall show " is not used
absolutely, listen again to what followeth.

Ver. 21. " For as the Fatl}er raiseth up the
dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will."

Yet " can do nothing of Himself " is opposed
to " whom He will " : since if He quickeneth
" whom He will," He can do something " of
Himself," (for to " will " implies power,) but if
He " can do nothing of Himself," then He can-


^ Ka0v^«ls.


^ ayvuiJLOVi,


• »1. " heal."


136


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII.


not " quicken whom He will." For the expres-
sion, " as the Father raiseth up," showeth un-
varying resemblance in Power, and " whom He
will," Equality of Authority. Seest thou there-
fore that "cannot do anything of Himself" is
the expression of One not taking away His
(own) authority, but declaring the unvarying re-
semblance of His Power and Will (to those of
the Father) ? In this sense also understand the
words, " shall show to Him " ; for in another
place He saith, " I will raise him up at the last
Day." (c. vi. 40.) And again, to show that
He doth it not by receiving an inward power ^
from above. He saith, " I am the Resurrection
and the Life." (c. xi. 25.) Then that thou
mayest not assert that He raiseth what dead
He will and quickeneth them, but that He doth
not other things in such manner, He anticipateth
and preventeth every objection of the kind by
saying, "What things soever He doeth, these
also doeth the Son likewise," thus declaring that
He doeth all things which the Father doeth, and
as the Father doeth them ; whether thou speak-
est of the raising of the dead, or the fashioning ^
of bodies, or the remission of sins, or any other
matter whatever. He worketh in like manner to
Him who begat Him.

[5.] But men careless of their salvation give
heed to none of these things ; so great an evil is
it to be in love with precedence. This has been
the mother of heresies, this has confirmed the
impiety of the heathen.^ For God desired that
His invisible things should be understood by the
creation of this world (Rom. i. 20), but they hav-
ing left these and refused to come by this mode
of teaching, cut out for themselves another way,
and so were cast out from the true.* And
the Jews believed not because they received
honor from one another, and sought not the
honor which is from God. But let us, beloved,
avoid this disease exceedingly and with all
earnestness ; for though we have ten thousand
good qualities, this plague of vainglory is suffi-
cient to bring them all to nought, (c. v. 44.)
If therefore we desire praise, let us seek the
praise which is from God, for the praise of men
of what kind soever it be, as soon as it has ap-
peared has perished, or if it perish not, brings
to us no profit, and often proceeds from a cor-
rupt judgment. And what is there to be admired
in the honor which is from men ? which young
dancers enjoy, and abandoned women, and
covetous and rapacious men? But he who is
approved of God, is approved not with these,
but with those holy men the Prophets and Apos-


3 UinXaviy,


' lit. " Greeks."

^ T^c ouaT}9 sub. o^ov.


ties, who have shown forth an angelic life. If
we feel any desire to lead multitudes about with
us or be looked at by them, let us consider the
matter apart by itself, and we shall find that it
is utterly worthless. In fine, if thou art fond of
crowds, draw to thyself the host of angels, and
become terrible to the devils, then shalt thou
care nothing for mortal things, but shalt tread
all that is splendid underfoot as mire and clay ;
and shalt clearly see that nothing so fits a soul
for shame as the passion for glory ; for it can-
not, it cannot be, that the man who desires this
should live the crucified life, as on the other
hand it is not possible that the man who hath
trojfden this underfoot should not tread down
most other passions ; for he who masters this
will get the better of envy and covetousness, and'
all the grievous maladies. " And how," saith
some one, "shall we get the better of it?" If
we look to the other glory which is from heaven,
and from which this kind strives to cast us out.
For that heavenly glory both makes us honored
here, and passes with us into the life which is to
come, and delivers us from all fleshly slavery
which we now most miserably serve, giving up
ourselves entirely to earth and the things of
earth. For if you go into the forum, if you
enter into a house, into the streets, into the sol-
diers' quarters, into inns, taverns, ships, islands,
palaces, courts of justice, council chambers, you
shall everywhere find anxiety for things present
and belonging to this life, and each man labor-
ing for these things, whether gone or coming,
traveling or staying at home, voyaging, tilling
lands, in the fields, in the cities, in a word, all.
What hope then of salvation have we, when in-
habiting God's earth we care not for the things
of God, when bidden to be aliens from earthly
things we are aliens from heaven and citizens of
earth ? What can be worse than this insensibil-
ity, when hearing each day of the Judgment and
of the Kingdom, we imitate the men in the daya
of Noah, and those of Sodom, waiting to leamo
all by actual experience ? Yet for this purpose
were all those things written, that if any one be-
lieve not that which is to come, he may, from
what has already been, get certain proof of what
shall be. Considering therefore these things^
both the past and the future, let us at least take
breath a little from this hard slavery, and mak<
some account of our souls also,' that we may ob
tain both present and future blessings ; througl
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesu
Christ, to whom, with the Father and the Hoi;
Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and world with
out end. Amen.


B i.e. as well as of earthly things.


Homily XXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


137


I


HOMILY XXXIX.

John v. 23, 24.


" For My Father judgeth no man, but hath committed
all judgment to the Son; that all men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father."

[i.] Beloved, we need great diligence in all
things, for we shall render account of and under-
go a strict enquiry both of words and works.
Our interests stop not with what now is, but a cer-
tain other condition of life shall receive us after
this, and we shall be brought before a fearful
tribunal. " For we must appear before the
Judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according
to that he hath done, whether it be good or
bad." (2 Cor. v. 10.) Let us ever bear in
mind this tribunal, that we may thus be enabled
at all times to continue in virtue ; for as he who
has cast out from his soul that day, rushes like
a horse that has burst his bridle to precipices,
(for " his ways are always defiled " ' — Ps. x. 5,)
and then assigning the reason the Psalmist hath
added, " He putteth Thy judgments far away
out of his sight " ;) so he that always retains
this fear will walk soberly. " Remember," saith
one, " thy last things, and thou shalt never do
amiss." (Ecclus. vii. 40.) For He who now
hath remitted our sins, will then sin in judg-
ment ; He who hath died for our sake will then
appear again to judge all mankind.^ " Unto
them that look for Him," saith the Apostle,
"shall He appear the second time without sin
unto salvation." (Heb. ix. 28.) Wherefore in
this place also He saith, " My Father judgeth no
man, but hath committed all judgment unto the
Son ; that all men should honor the Son, even
as they honor the Father."

" Shall we then," saith some one, " also call
Him Father?" Away with the thought. He
useth the word " Son " that we may honor Him
still remaining a Son, as we honor the Father ;
but he who calleth Him " Father " doth not
honor the Son as the Father, but has confounded
the whole. Moreover as men are not so much
brought to by being benefited as by being pun-
i ished, on this account He hath spoken thus
terribly,^ that even fear may draw them to honor
Him. And when He saith " all," His meaning
is this, that He hath power to punish and to
honor, and doeth either as He will.^ The ex-
pression " hath given," is used that thou mayest


_^ al. " since men being benefited are not so sensible of it. He
saith ' hath given all judgment to ' Him, in order that," &c.
* al. " to punish and honor all whomsoever He will."


not suppose Him not to have been Begotten,
and so think that there are two P'athers. For
all that the Father is, this the Son is also," Be-
gotten, and remaining a Son. And that thou
mayest learn that " hath given " is the same as
" hath begotten," hear this very thing declared
by another place. " As," saith Christ, " the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given
to the Son to have life in Himself." (Ver. 26.)
"What then? Did he first beget and then give
Him life? For he who giveth, giveth to some-
thing which is. Was He then begotten without
life?" Not even the devils could imagine this,
for it is very foolish as well as impious. At
then " hath given life " is " hath begotten Him
who is Life," so, " hath given judgment " is ,'
" hath begotten Him who shall be Judge."

That thou mayest not when thou hearest that
He hath the Father for His cause imagine any
difference" of essence or inferiority of honor.
He Cometh to judge thee, by this proving His
Equality.' For He who hath authority to pun-
ish and to honor whom He will, hath the same
Power with the Father. Since, if this be not
the case, if having been begotten He afterwards
received the honor, how came it that He was
afterwards [thus] honored, by what mode of
advancement reached He so far as to receive
and be appointed to this dignity ? Are ye not
ashamed thus impudently to apply to that Pure'
Nature which admitteth of no addition these
carnal and mean imaginations ?

" Why then," saith some one, " doth Christ
so speak?" That His words may be readily
received, and to clear the way for sublime say-
ings ; therefore He mixeth these with those,
and those with these. And observe how (He
doth it) ; for it is good to see this from the
beginning. He said, " My Father worketh, and
I work " (c. V. 17, &c.) : declaring by this their
Equality and Equal honor. But they " sought
to kill Him." What doth He then? He lower-
eth His form of speech indeed, and putteth the
same meaning when He saith, "The Son can
do nothing of Himself." Then again He raiseth
His discourse to high matters, saying, " What
things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth
the Son hkewise." Then He returneth to what
is lower, " For the Father loveth the Son, and
showeth Him all things that Himself doeth ;


' al. " all things which belong to the Father, belong also to the
Son."

• napaWayTqv, ' al. " high Birth." ■ aKrjpaTif.


138


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIX


and He will show Him greater things than
these." Then He riseth higher, " For as the
Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth
them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He
will." After this again He joineth the high and
the low together, " For neither doth the Father
judge any one, but hath given all judgment to
the Son"; then riseth again, "That all men
should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father." Seest thou how He varieth the dis-
course, weaving it both of high and low words
and expressions, in order that it might be accept-
able to the men of that time, and that those
who should come after might receive no injury,
gaining from the higher part a right opinion of
the rest ? For if this be not the case, if these
sayings were not uttered through condescension,
wherefore were the high expressions added?
Because one who is entitled to utter great words
concerning himself, hath, when he saith any-
thing mean and low, this reasonable excuse,
that he doth it for some prudential purpose ; '
but if one who ought to speak meanly of him-
self saith anything great, on what account doth he
utter words which surpass his nature ? This is
not for any purpose at all, but an act of extreme
impiety.''

[2.] We are therefore able to assign a reason
for the lowly expressions, a reason sufficient,
and becoming to God, namely, His condescen-
sion. His teaching us to be moderate, and the
salvation which is thus wrought for us. To de-
clare which He said Himself in another place,
"These things I say that ye might be saved."
For when He left His own witness, and betook
Himself to that of John, (a thing unworthy of His
greatness,) He putteth the reason of such lowh
ness of language, and saith, " These things I say
that ye might be saved." And ye who assert
that He hath not the same authority and power
with Him who begat Him, what can ye say when
ye hear Him utter words by which He declareth
His Authority and Power and Glory equal in
respect of the Father? Wherefore, if He be as
ye assert very inferior, doth He claim the same
honor? Nor doth He stop even here, but goeth
on to say,

" He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not
the Father which hath sent Him." Seest thou
how the honor of the Son is connected with that
of the Father? "What of that?" saith one.
" We see the same in the case of the Apostles ;
' He,' saith Christ, ' who receiveth you receiv-
eth Me.' " (Matt. x. 40.) But in that place He
speaketh so, because He maketh the concerns
of His servants His own ; here, because the
Essence and the Glory is One (with that of
the Father). Therefore' it is not said of the


' OlKOVOfltav TtCOf.

' al. ■' folly."


• al. " Besides.'


Apostles " that they may honor," but rightly He
saith, " He that honoreth not the Son honoreth
not the Father." For where there are two kings
if one is insulted the other is insulted also, and
especially when he that is insulted is a son
He is insulted even when one of his soldiers if
maltreated ; not in the same way as in this case
but as it were in the person of another,* whik
here it is as it were in his own. Wherefore He
beforehand said, "That they should honor the
Son even as they honor the Father," in ordei
that when He should say, " He that honoretl
not the Son honoreth not the Father," thoi
mightest understand that the honor is the same
For He saith not merely, " he that honoreth no
the Son," but " he that honoreth Him not so a:
I have said " " honoreth not the Father."

" And how," saith one, " can he that sendetl
and he that is sent be of the same essence ? '
Again, thou bringest down the argument t(
carnal things, and perceivest not that all thi
has been said for no other purpose, but that w(
might know Him to be The Cause,' and not fal
into die error" of Sabellius, and that in thi
manner the infirmity of the Jews might bi
healed, so that He might not be deemed ai
enemy of God;' for they said, "This man i
not of God" (c. ix. 16), "This man hath no
come from God." Now to remove this suspi
cion, high sayings did not contribute so mucl
as the lowly, and therefore continually and every
where He said that He had been " sent " ; no
that thou mightest suppose that expression t
be ' any lessening of His greatness, but in orde
to stop their mouths. And for this cause als'
He constantly betaketh Himself to the Fathei
interposing moreover mention of His own hig
Parentage.' For had He said all in proportio
to His dignity, the Jews would not have receive
His words, since because of a few such expre:
sions they persecuted and oftentimes stone
Him; and if looking wholly to them He hai
used none but low expressions, many in afti
times might have been harmed. Wherefore E
mingleth and blendeth '" His teaching, both
these lowly sayings stopping, as I said, tl
mouths of the Jews, and also by expressio
suited to His dignity banishing " from men
sense any mean notion of what He had sai
and proving that such a notion did not in a:
wise apply to Him at all.

The expression "having been sent" denote
change of place — but God is everywhere pn
ent. Wherefore then saith He that He


• fita fjitaiTov. " TOf aiTtov, " yoaov.
' For from their extreme senselessness He was counted am«

them an enemy of God. Morel.

• al. *' not that He might by this show any lessening," &c

• al. *' absolute power."'

1^ Kipi/a, generally of mixing wine with water*
*i al. " cori«cting."


Homily XXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


139


'sent"? He speaketh in an earthly' way,^
declaring His unanimity with the Father. At
least He shapeth His succeeding words with a
desire to effect this.

Ver. 24. " Verily, verily, I say unto you, He
that heareth My word, and believeth on Him
that sent Me, hath everlasting life."

Seest thou how continually He putteth the
iame thing to cure that feeling of suspicion, both
in this place and in what follows by fear and by
promises of blessings removing their jealousy of
Him, and then again condescending greatly in
words ? For He said not, " he that heareth My
ivords, and believeth on Me," since they would
have certainly deemed that to be pride, and a
superfluous pomp of words; because, if after a
very long time, and ten thousand miracles, they
suspected this when He spake after this manner,
much more would they have done so then. It
kvas on this account that at that later period^
they said to Him, " Abraham is dead, and the
prophets are dead, how sayest Thou,* If a man
keep My saying, he shall never taste of death?"
(c. viii. 52.) In order therefore that they may
not here also become furious, see what He saith,
" He that heareth My word, and believeth on
Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life." This
had no small effect in making His discourse
acceptable, when they learned that those who
hear Him believe in the Father also ; for after
having received this with readiness, they would
more easily receive the rest. So that the very
speaking in a humble manner contributed and
led the way to higher things ; for after saying,
" hath everlasting life," He addeth,
I " And Cometh not into judgment, but is passed
from death unto life."

By these two things He maketh His discourse
icceptable ; first, because it is the Father who
IS believed on, and then, because the believer
:njoyeth many blessings. And the "cometh not
nto judgment " meaneth, " is not punished," for
He speaketh not of death " here," but of death
;ternal, as also of the other " life " which is
leathless.

Ver. 25. " Verily, verily, I say unto you, the
lOur cometh, and now is, when the dead shall
lear the voice of the Son of God : and they that
>ave heard shall live."

Having said the words. He speaketh also of
he proof by deeds." For when He had said,
' As the Father raiseth up the dead and quick-
:neth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom
ie will," that the thing may not seem to be
nere boasting and pride. He affordeth proofs


' Morel, reads: " for this reason He doth not decline to use a
lore earthly expression, declaring," &c.

* Tore. * (Tit Xiyei^, G. T.

* Morel, reads: "He spake those great things in words, after-
ards He desireth to prove them by works also."

* »1. " truth."


by works, saying, " The hour cometh " ; then,
that thou mayest not deem that the time is long,
He addeth, " and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
have heard shall live." Seest thou here His
absolute and unutterable authority? For as it
shall be in the Resurrection, even so. He saith,
it shall be " now." Then too when we hear His
voice commanding us we are raised ; for, saith
the Apostle, " at the command of God the dead
shall arise."' "And whence," perhaps some
one will ask, " is it clear that the words are noi
mere boast?" From what He hath added, "and
now is " ; because had His promises referred
only to some future time. His discourse would
have been suspected by them, but now He sup-
plieth them with a proof: "While I," saith He,
" am tarrying among you, this thing shall come
to pass " ; and He would not, had He not pos-
sessed the power, have promised for that time,
lest through the promise He should incur the
greater ridicule. Then too He addeth an argu-
ment demonstrative of His assertions, saying,

Ver. 26. "For as the Father hath life in Him-
self, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself."

[3.] Seest thou that this declareth a perfect
likeness save in one* point, which is the One
being a Father, and the Other a Son ? for the
expression " hath given," merely introduceth
this distinction, but declareth that all the rest is
equal and exactly alike. Whence it is clear that
the Son doeth all things with as much authority
and power as the Father, and that He is not
empowered from some other source, for He
" hath life " so as the Father hath. And on this
account, what comes after is straightway added,
that from this we may understand the other also.
What is this then ? It is,

Ver. 27. "Hath given Him authority to exe-
cute judgment also."

And wherefore doth He continually' dwell
upon "resurrection" and "judgment"? For
He saith, " As the Father raiseth up the dead
and quickeneth them, even so the Son quicken-
eth whom He will " : and again, " the Father
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judg-
ment to the Son " : and again, " As the Father
hath life in Himself so hath He given to the
Son to have hfe in Himself" ; and again, "They
that have heard [the Voice of the Son of God]
shall live " ; and here again, " Hath given to
Him authority to execute judgment." Wherefore
doth He dwell on these things continually?
I mean, on "judgment," and "life," and "resur-
rection " ? It is because these subjects are able
most of any to attract even the obstinate hearer.


' 1 Thcss. iv. 16 [not verbally quoted] .

' TO an-apdAAaxroi' Kal iyt fi.oi/if rr}v blVL^opav t/A^aifoy*


avto Kon tarw.


I40


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIX.


For the man who is persuaded that he shall both
rise again and shall give account to Christ ' of
his transgressions, even though he have seen no
other sign, yet having admitted this, will surely
run to Him to propitiate his Judge.

"That He is the Son of Man (v. 28), mar-
vel not at this."

Paul of Samosata rendereth it not so ; but
how? " Hath given Him authority to execute
judgment, 'because' He is the Son of Man."^
Now the passage thus read is inconsequent, for
He did not receive judgment "because" He was
man, (since then what hindered all men from
being judges,) but because He is the Son of
that Ineffable Essence, therefore is He Judge.
So we must read, " That He is the Son of Man,
marvel not at this." For when what He said
seemed to the hearers inconsistent, and they
deemed Him nothing more than mere man,
while His words were greater than suited man,
yea, or even angel, and were proper to God only,
to solve this objection He addeth,

Ver. 28, 29. "Marvel not [that He is the
Son of Man,^] for the hour is coming in the
which they* that are in the tombs shall hear His
voice and shall go forth, they that have done
good to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil to the resurrection of judgment."

And wherefore said He not, " Marvel not that
He is the Son of Man, for He is also the Son of
God," but rather mentioned the "resurrection"?
He did indeed put this above, by saying, " shall
hear the Voice of the Son of God." And if
here He is silent on the matter, wonder not ; for
after mentioning a work which was proper to
God, He then permitteth His hearers to collect
from it that He was God, and the Son of God.
For had this been continually asserted by Him-
self, it would at that time have offended them,
but when proved by the argument of miracles,
it rendered His doctrine less burdensome. So
they who put together syllogisms, when having
laid down their premises" they have fairly*
proved the point in question, frequently do not
draw the conclusion themselves, but to render
their hearers more fairly disposed, and to make
their victory more evident, cause the opponent
himself to give the verdict, so that the by-stand-
ers may the rather agree with them when their
opponents decide in their favor. When there-
fore He mentioned the resurrection of Lazarus,
He spake not of the Judgment (for it was not
for this that Lazarus arose) ; but when He spake
generally He also added, that " they that have
done good shall go forth unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the resur-
rection of judgment." Thus also John led on


' TOVTCfl.

* As in our Auth. Version,

• toOto, G. T.


* ffal-Te?, G. T.
*• Ta y-ipT}'


his hearers by speaking of the Judgment, and
that " he that believeth not on the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of (jod abideth on
him " (c. iii. 36) : so too Himself led on Nico-
demus : " He that believeth on the Son," He
said to him, " is not judged, but he that believeth
not is judged already " (c. iii. 18) ; and so here
He mentioneth the Judgment-seat' and the
punishment which shall follow upon evil deeds.
For because He had said above, " He that hear-
eth My words and believeth on Him that sent
Me," " is not judged," lest any one should im-
agine that this alone is sufficient for salvation,
He addeth also the result of man's life,' declar-
ing that " they which have done good shall come
forth unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil unto the resurrection of judg-
ment." Since then He had said that all the
world should render account to Him, and that
all at His Voice should rise again, a thing new and
strange and even now disbelieved by many who
seem to have believed, not to say by the Jews at
that time, hear how He goeth to prove it, again
condescending to the infirmity of His hearers.

Ver. 30. " I can of Mine own self do nothing ;
as I hear I judge, and My judgment is just, be-
cause I seek not Mine own will, but the will of
Him" which sent Me."

Although He had but lately given no trifling
proof of the Resurrection by bracing^" the para-
lytic ; on which account also He had not spoken
of the Resurrection before He had done what
fell little short of resurrection. And the Judg-
ment He hinted at after He had braced the
body, by saying, " Behold, thou art made whole,
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee " ;
yet still He proclaimed beforehand the resurrec-
tion of Lazarus and of the world. And when
He had spoken of these two, that of Lazarus
which should come to pass almost immediately,
and that of the inhabited world which should
be long after. He confirmeth the first by the
paralytic and by the nearness of the time j
saying, " The hour cometh and now is " ; th(
other by the raising of Lazarus, by what hac
already come to pass bringing before their sigh
what had not yet done so. And this we ma;
observe Him do everywhere, putting (forth) twi
or three predictions, and always confirmmg th
future by the past.

[4.] Yet after saying and doing so much
since they still were very weak" He is not cor
tent, but by other expressions calms their dispi
tatious temper,'- saying, " I can of Myself
nothing ; as I hear I judge, and My judgmer
is just, because I seek not Mine own will, bv
the will of Him which sent Me." For since H


' iiKatrrrifiiov.
" Ta €K Tot) piov.
' Toit UoTpbc, G. T.


" al. " even thus too gross.'
'* al. " shamclessness."


Homily XXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


141


appeared to make some assertions strange and
varying ft'om those of the Prophets, (for they
said that it is God who judgeth all the earth,
that is, the human race ; and this truth David
everywhere loudly proclaimed, " He shall judge
the people in righteousness," and, " God is a
righteous Judge, strong and patient" (Ps. xcvi.
10, and vii. 11, LXX.); as did all the Prophets
and Moses ; but Christ said, " The Father judg-
eth no man, but hath committed all judgment
to the Son " : ' an expression which was suffi-
cient to perplex a Jew who heard it, and to make
him in turn suspect Christ of being an enemy
of God,) He here gready condescendeth in His
speech, and as far as their infirmity requireth,
in order to pluck up by the roots this pernicious
opinion, and saith, " I can of Myself do noth-
ing " ; that is, " nothing strange, or unlike,^ or
what the Father desireth not will ye see done
or hear said by Me." And having before de-
clared that He was " the Son of Man," and be-
cause they' supposed Him to be a man at that
time, so also He putteth [His expressions] here.
As then when He said above, " We speak that
we have heard, and testify that we have seen " ;
and when John said, " What He hath seen He
testifieth, and no man receiveth His testimony "
(c. iii. 32) ; both expressions are used respect-
ing exact knowledge, not concerning hearing
and seeing merely ; so in this place when He
speaketh of " hearing," He declareth nothing
else than that it is impossible for Him to desire
anything, save what the F"ather desireth. Still
He said not so plainly, (for they would not as
yet have at once received it on hearing it thus
asserted;) and how? in a manner very conde-
scending and befitting a mere man, " As I hear
I judge." Again He useth these words in this
place, not with reference to " instruction," (for
He said not, "as I am taught," but "as I
hear";) nor as though He needed to listen,
(for not only did He not require to be taught,
but He needed not even to listen ;) but it was
to declare the Unanimity and Identity of [His
ind the Father's] decision, as though He had
>aid, " So I judge, as if it were the Father Him-
self that judged." Then He addeth, "and I
tnow that My judgment is just, because I seek
lot Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me." What sayest Thou? Hast Thou a will
lifferent from that of the Father? Yet in an-
)ther place He saith, " As I and Thou are One,"
'speaking of will and unanimity,) " grant to
hcse also that they may be one in Us " (c. xvii.
' I ; not verbally quoted) ; that is, " in faith
oncerning Us." Seest thou that the words
vhich seem most humble are those which con-
lal a high meaning? For what He implieth

' ^1. " I am [He] who judge." * iraprf^\ayi^ivov.

'■ So Morel, ana MS. in Bodl. Savile reads, *' having shown
liat ihey," &c.


is of this kind : not that the will of the Father
is one, and His own another ; but that, "as one
will in one mind, so is Mine own will and My
Father's."

And marvel not that He hath asserted so close
a conjunction ; for with reference to the Spirit
also Paul hath used this illustration : " What man
knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him? even so the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God." Thus
Christ's meaning is no other than this : " I have
not a will different and apart from that of the
Father,* but if He desireth anything, then I
also ; if I, then He also. As therefore none
could object to the Father judging, so neither
may any to Me, for the sentence of Each ' is
given from the same Mind." And if He utter-
eth these words rather as a man, marvel not,
seeing that they still deemed Him to be mere
man. Therefore in passages like these it is nec-
essary not merely to enquire into the meaning .
of the words, but also to take into account the
suspicion of the hearers, and listen to what is
said as being addressed to that suspicion. Other-
wise many difficulties will follow. Consider for
instance. He saith, "I seek not Mine own will" :
according to this then His will is different (from
that of the Father), is imperfect, nay, not merely
imperfect, but even unprofitable. " For if it be
saving, if it agree with that of the Father, where-
fore dost Thou not seek it ? " Mortals might with
reason say so because they have many wills con-
trary to what seemeth good to the Father, but
Thou, wherefore sayest Thou this, who art in
all things like the Father? for this none would
say is the language even of a "man " made per-
fect and crucified. For if Paul so blended him-
self with the will of God as to say, " I live, yet
no longer I, but Christ liveth in me " (Gal. ii.
20), how saith the Lord of all, "I seek not
Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me," as though that will were different ? What
then is His meaning? He applieth' His dis-
course as if the case were that of a mere man,
and suiteth His language to the suspicion of
His hearers. For when He had, by what had
gone before, given proof of His sayings, speak-
ing partly as God, partly as a mere man. He
again as a man endeavoreth to establish' the
same, and saith, " My judgment is just." And
whence is this seen ? " Because I seek not
Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me." " For as in the case of men, he that is
free from selfishness cannot be justly charged
with having given an unfair decision, so neither
will ye now be able to accuse Me. He that
desireth to establish his own, may perhaps by


* According to Savile's conjectural reading, n-apd to toiJ H.
place of irapa ToO II. for which there is also MS. authority.
^ al. " each sentence." ' al. " brings forward."

" exepaaf, * KaraaKtvaiti.


X42


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIX.


many be suspected of corrupting justice with
this intent ; but he that looketh not to his own,
what reason can he have for not deciding justly ?
Apply now this reasoning to My case. Had I
said that I was not sent by the Father, had I not
referred to Him the glory of what was done,
some of you might perhaps have suspected that
desiring to gain honor for Myself, I said the
thing that is not ; but if I impute and refer
what is done to another, wherefore and whence
can ye have cause to suspect My words?"
Seest thou how He confirmed His discourse,
and asserted that " His judgment was just " by
an argument which any common man might
have used in defending himself? Seest thou
how what I have often said is clearly visible ?
What is that? It is that the exceeding humility
of the expressions most persuadeth men of sense
not to receive the words off hand' and then fall
down [into low thoughts], but rather to take
pains that they reach to the height of their
meaning ; this humility too with much ease then
raiseth up those who were once groveling on the
ground.

Now bearing all this in mind, let us not, I
exhort you, carelessly pass by Christ's words,
but enquire closely into them all, everywhere
considering the reason of what has been said ;
and let us not deem that ignorance and sim-
plicity will be sufficient to excuse us, for He hath
bidden us not merely to be " harmless," but
" wise." (Matt. x. i6.) Let us therefore prac-
tice wisdom with simplicity, both as to doctrines,
and the right actions ^ of our lives ; let us judge
ourselves here, that we be not condemned with
the world hereafter ; ' let us act towards our
fellow-servants as we desire our Master to act
towards us: for (we say), "Forgive us our
debts, as we forgive our debtors." (Matt. vi. 1 2.)
I know that the smitten soul endureth not
meekly, but if we consider that by so doing we
do a kindness not to him who hath grieved us
but to ourselves, we shall soon let go the venom
of our wrath ; for he who forgave not the hun-
dred pence to him who had transgressed against
him, wronged not his fellow-servant but himself,
by rendering himself liable for the ten thousand
talents of which he had before received forgive-
ness. (Matt, xviii. 30-34.) When therefore
we forgive not others, we forgive not ourselves.
And so let us not merely say to God, " remem-
ber not our offenses " ; but let each also say to
himself, " let us not remember the offenses of
our fellow-servants done against us." For thou
first givest judgment on thine own sins, and God
judgeth after ; * thou proposest the law concern-
ing remission and punishment, thou declarest
thy decision on these matters, and therefore


^ tK irpoYCipou.
* KaTopdftiiaTiav,


' rirt.
* circroi.


whether God shall or shall not remember, rests
with thee. For which cause Paul biddeth us
" forgive, if any one hath cause of complaint
against any " (Col. iii. 13), and not simply for-
give, but so that not even any remnants be left
behind. Since Christ not only did not publish
our transgressions, but did not put us the trans-
gressors in mind of them, nor say, " in such and
such things hast thou offended," but remitted
and blotted out the handwriting, not reckoning
our offenses, as Paul hath also declared. (Col.
ii. 14.) Let us too do this ; let us wipe away all
[trespasses against us] from our minds ; and if
any good thing hath been done to us by him
that hath grieved us, let us only reckon that ; but
if anything grievous and hard to bear, let us cast
it forth and blot it out, so that not even a vestige
of it remain. And if no good has been done
us by him, so much the greater recompense and
higher credit will be ours if we forgive. Others
by watching, by making the earth their bed, by
ten thousand hardships, wipe away their sins,
but thou by an easier way, I mean by not re-
membering wrongs, mayest cause all thy tres-
passes to disappear. Why then thrustest thou
the sword against thyself, as do mad and frantic
men, and banishest thyself from the life which
is to come, when thou oughtest to use every
means to attain unto it? For if this present life
be so desirable, what can one say of that other
from which pain, and grief, and mourning, have
fled away? There it needs not to fear death,
nor imagine any end to those good things.
Blessed, thrice blessed, yea, and this many times
over, are they who enjoy that blessed rest, while
they are miserable, thrice miserable, yea, ten
thousand times miserable, who have cast them-
selves forth from that blessedness. " And what,"
saith some one, " is it that maketh us to enjoy
that life?" Hear the Judge Himself convers-
ing with a certain young man on this matter.
When the young man said, " What shall I do tc
inherit eternal life?" (Matt. xix. 16) Christ
after repeating to him the other commandments
ended with the love of his neighbor. Perhap;
like that rich man some of my hearers will say
" that we also have kept these, for we neithe:
have robbed, nor killed, nor committed adul
tery " ; yet assuredly thou wilt not be able to sa;
this, that thou hast loved thy neighbor as thoi
oughtest to have loved him. For if a man hatl
envied or spoken evil of another, if he hath no
helped him when injured, or not imparted t
him of his substance, then neither hath he lovC'
him. Now Christ hath commanded not onl
this, but something besides. What then is this
" Sell," he saith, " that thou hast, and give t
the poor ; and come, follow Me " (Matt. xix. 21'
terming the imitating Him in our actions " fo
lowing " Him. What learn we hence ? First, ths


Homily XL.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


143


he who hath not all these things cannot attain
unto the chief places in " that " rest. For after
the young man had said, " All these things have
I done," Christ, as though some great thing
were wanting to his being perfectly approved,
replied, " If thou wilt be perfect, sell that thou
hast, and give to the poor : and come, follow
Me." First then we may learn this ; secondly,
that Christ rebuked the man for his vain boast ;
for one who lived in such superfluity, and re-
garded not others living in poverty, how could
he love his neighbor? So that neither in this
matter did he speak truly. But let us do both
the one and the other of these things ; let us be
eager to empt out our substance, and to pur-
chase heaven. Since if for worldly honor men
have often expended their whole possessions, an
honor which was to stay here below, and even
here not to stay by us long, (for many even
much before their deaths have been stripped of
their supremacy, and others because of it have
often lost their lives, and yet, although aware of
this, they expend all for its sake ;) if now they
do so much for this kind of honor, what can be
more wretched than we if for the sake of that
honor which abideth and which cannot be taken
from us we will not give up even a little, nor


supply to others those things which in a short
time while yet here we shall leave ? What mad-
ness must it be, when it is in our power volun-
tarily to give to others, and so to take with us
those things of which we shall even against our
will be deprived, to refuse to do so? Yet if a
man were being led to death, and it were pro-
posed to him to give up all his goods and so go
free, we should think a favor was conferred upon
him ; and shall we, who are being led on the
way to the pit, shall we, when it is allowed us to
give up half and be free, prefer to be punished,
and uselessly to retain what is not ours even to
the losing what is so ? What excuse shall we
have, what claim for pardon, who, when so easy
a road has been cut for us unto life, rush down
precipices, and travel along an unprofitable path,
depriving ourselves of all things both here and
hereafter, when we might enjoy both in security?
If then we did not so before, let us at least stop
now ; and coming to ourselves, let us rightiy dis-
pose of things present, that we may easily re-
ceive those which are to come, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XL.


John v. 31, 32.


" If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is not true ; there
is another that beareth witness of Me, and I know
that the witness which he witnesseth of Me is true."


[i.] If any one unpracticed in the art under-
take to work a mine, he will get no gold, but con-
founding all aimlessly and together, will undergo
1 labor unprofitable and pernicious : so also they
ivho understand not the method ' of Holy Scrip-
aire, nor search out its peculiarities ^ and laws,
but go over all its points carelessly and in one
manner, will mix the gold with earth, and never
liscover the treasure which is laid up in it. I
ay this now because the passage before us con-
aineth much gold, not indeed manifest to view,
)ut covered over with much obscurity, and there-
ore by digging and purifying we must arrive at
he legitimate sense. For who would not at
l)nce be troubled at hearing Christ say, " If I
.estify of Myself, My witness is not true " ; inas-
nuch as He often appeareth to have testified
)f Himself? For instance, conversing with the
Samaritan woman He said, " I Am that speak unto


' lit'


consequence.


ifiiw^aTa.


thee " : and in like manner to the blind man, "It
is He that talketh with thee " (c. ix. 37) ; and re-
buking the Jews, " Ye say,' thou blasphemest, be-
cause I said I am the Son of God." (c. x. 36.)
And in many other places besides He doth this.
If now all these assertions be false, what hope of
salvation shall we have? And where shall we
find truth when Truth Itself declareth, " My
witness is not true " ? Nor doth this appear to
be the only contradiction ; there is another not
less than this. He saith farther on, " Though I
bear witness of Myself, yet My witness is true "
(c. viii. 14) ; which then, tell me, am I to receive,
and which deem a falsehood ? If we take them
out thus [from the context] simply as they are
said, without carefully considering the person to
whom nor the cause for which they are said, nor
any other like circumstances, they will both be
falsehoods. For if His witness be "not true,"
then this assertion is not true either, not merely
the second, but the first also. What then is the
meaning ? We need great watchfulness, or rather
the grace of God, that we rest not in the mere


* Savile readst '* and to the Jews, How say ye,' ' &c.


144


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XL.


words ; for thus the heretics err, because they
enquire not into the object of the speaker nor
the disposition of the hearers. If we add not
these and other points besides, as times and
places and the opinions of the listeners, many
absurd consequences will follow.

What then is the meaning?' The Jews were
about to object to Him, " If thou bearest witness '
concerning thyself, thy witness is not true " (c.
viii. 13): therefore He spake these words in an-
ticipation ; as though He had said, " Ye will
surely say to Me, we believe thee not ; for no
one that witnesseth of himself is readily " held
trustworthy among men." So that the " is not
true " must not be read absolutely, but with ref-
erence to * their suspicions, as though He had
said, " to you it is not true " ; and so He uttered
the words not looking to His own dignity, but
to their secret thoughts. When He saith, " My
witness is not true," He rebuketh their opinion
of Him, and the objection about to be urged by
them against Him ; but when He saith, " Though
I bear witness of Myself, My witness is true "
(c. viii. 14), He declareth the very nature of the
thing itself, namely, that as God they ought to
deem Him trustworthy even when speaking of
Himself For since He had spoken of the res-
urrection of the dead, and of the judgment, and
that he that believeth on Him is not judged, but
cometh unto life, and that He shall sit to require
account of all men, and that He hath the same
Authority and Power with the Father ; and since
He was about again otherwise to prove these
things. He necessarily put their objection first.
"I told you," He saith, "that 'as the Father
raiseth the dead and quickeneth them, so the
Son quickeneth whom He will ' ; I told you that
' the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed
all judgment unto the Son ' ; I told you that men
must ' honor the Son as they honor the Father ' ;
I told you that ' he that honoreth not the Son
honoreth not the Father ' ; I told you that ' he
that heareth My words and believeth them shall
not see death, but hath passed from death unto
life ' (v. 24 ; not exactly quoted) ; that My voice
shall raise the dead, some now, some hereafter ;
that I shall demand account from all men of their
transgressions, that I shall judge righteously, and
recompense those who have walked uprightly."
Now since all these were assertions, since the
things asserted were important, and since no clear
proof of them had as yet been afforded to the
Jews but one rather ' indistinct. He putteth their
objection first when He is about to proceed ' to
establish His assertions, speaking somewhat in
this way if not in these very words : ' " Perhaps

* al. " let us see then with what intent these words were said."

* ai/ u-o-PTvptU, G. T. *' al. "ever."

* al. with tite addition " to their," &c.

* al. •* in every wiy ." * bpitav, al. xi^petF. [saith."
' Morel, reads, " iUI but conclusively refuting them by what He


ye will say, thou assertest all this, but thou art
not a credible witness, since thou testifiest of
thyself" First then checking their disputatious
spirit by setting forth what they would say, and
showing that He knew the secrets of their hearts,
and giving this first proof of His power, after
stating the objection He supplieth other proofs
clear and indisputable, producing three witnesses
to what He said, namely, the works wrought by
Him, the witness of the Father, and the preach-
ing of John. And He putteth first the less im-
portant witness of John. For after saying,
"There is another that beareth witness of Me,
and I know that his witness is true," He addeth,

Ver. 33. "Ye sent unto John, and he bare
witness unto the truth."

Yet if Thy witness be not true, how sayest
Thou, " I know that the testimony of John is
true, and that he hath borne witness to the
truth " ? and seest thou (O man) how clear it
hence is, that the expression, " My witness is
not true," was addressed to their secret thoughts?

[2.] "What then," saith some one, " if John
bare witness partially." ' That the Jews might
not assert this, see how He removeth this suspi-
cion. For He said not, " John testified of Me,"
but, "Ye first sent to John, and ye would not
have sent had ye not deemed him trustworthy."
Nay, what is more, they had sent not to ask him
about Christ, but about himself, and the man
whom they deemed trustworthy in what related
to himself they would much more deem so in
what related to another. For it is, so to speak,
the nature of us all not to give so much credit
to those who speak of themselves as to those
who speak of others ; yet him they deemed so
trustworthy as not to require even concerning
himself any other testimony. For they whc
were sent said not, " What sayest thou concern-
ing Christ ?" but, "Who art thou? What say-
est thou of thyself ? " So great admiration fel
they for the man. Now to all this Christ mad<
allusion by saying, " Ye sent unto John." Am
on this account the Evangelist hath not merel;
related that they sent, but is exact as to the per
sons sent that' they were Priests and of th
Pharisees, not common or abject persons, no
such as might be corrupted or cheated, but me
able to understand exactly what he said.

Ver. 34. " But I receive not testimony fro»
man."

" Why then hast Thou brought forward that 1
John ? " His testimony was not the " testimon
of man," for, saith he, " He that sent me to baptb
with water. He said unto me." (c. i. 33.)
that John's testimony was the testimony of Goo
for having learned from Him he said what 1
did. But that none should ask, "Whence is-


X»P'n.


' al. " showing that."


Homily XL.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


145


;lear that he learnt from God?" and stop at
;his, He abundantly silences them by still ad-
dressing Himself to their thoughts. For neither
vas it likely that many would know these things ;
:hey had hitherto given heed unto John as to
3ne who spake of himself, and therefore Christ
iaith, " I receive not testimony from man."
\nd that the Jews might not ask, " And if Thou
vert not about to receive tiie testimony of man,
ind by it to strengthen Thyself, why hast Thou
brought forward this man's testimony ? " see
low He correcteth this contradiction by what
He addeth. For after saying, " I receive not
:estimony from man," He hath added,

" But these things I say, that ye may be
saved."

What He saith is of this kind ; " I, being God,
leeded not the witness of John which is man's
(vitness, yet because ye gave more heed to him,
believe him more trustworthy than any, ran to
iiim as to a prophet, (for all the city was poured
Forth to Jordan,) and have not believed on Me,
;ven when working miracles, therefore I remind
you of that witness of his."

Ver. 35. "He was a burning and a shining
light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice
in his light."

That they may not reply, "What if he did
speak and we received him not," He showeth
that they did receive John's sayings : since they
sent not common men, but priests and Pharisees,
ind were willing to rejoice ;' so much did they
idmire the man, and at the same time had noth-
ing to say against his words. But the "for a
season," is the expression of one noting their
evity,^ and the fact that they soon started away
rom him.

Ver. 36. " But I have greater witness than
hat of John."

" For had ye been willing to admit faith ac-
;ording to the (natural) consequence of the
acts, I would have brought you over by My
^orks more than he by his words. But since ye
nil not, I bring you to John, not as needing his
estimony, but because I do all ' that ye may be
aved.' For I have greater witness than that of
ohn, namely, that from My works ; yet I do
ot merely consider how I may be made accept-
ble to you by credible evidence, but how by
liat (of persons) known^ to and admired by
ou." Then glancing at them and saying that
liey rejoiced for a season in his (John's) light,
le declared that their zeal was but temporary
nd uncertain.*
He called John a torch,' signifying that he
ad not light of himself, but by the grace of the
pirit ; but the circumstance which caused the


1 Ben.


'al. •


^ clause omitted ii

* This passage is read variously in Ben. and MS- but without
ly variety of meaning. " Kvxvov.


absolute distinction' between Himself and John,
namely, that He was the Sun of righteousness,
this He put not yet ; but merely hinting as yet
at this He touched' them sharply, by showing
that from the same disposition which led them
to despise John, neither could they believe in
Christ. Since it was but for a season that they
admired even the man whom they did admire,
and who, had they not acted thus, would soon
have led them by the hand to Jesus. Having
then ])roved them altogether unworthy of for-
giveness. He went on to say, "I have greater
witness than that of John." "What is that?"
It is that from His works.

"For the works," He saith, "which the Father
hath given Me to finish, the same works that I
do bear witness of Me that the Father sent'
Me."

By this He reminded them of the paralytic
restored, and of many other things. The words
perhaps one of them might have asserted were
mere boast, and said by reason of John's friend-
ship towards Him, (though indeed it was not in
their power to say even this of John, a man
equal to the exact practice of wisdom,' and on
this account admired by them,) but the works
could not even among the maddest of them
admit this suspicion ; therefore He added this
second testimony, saying, " The works which the
Father hath given Me to finish, the same works
that I do bear witness of Me that the Father sent
Me."

[3.] In this place He also meeteth the accu-
sation respecting the violation of the Sabbath.
For since those persons argued, " How can he be
from God, seeing that he keepeth not the Sab-
bath?" (c. ix. 16), therefore He saith, "Which
My Father hath given unto Me." Yet in truth.
He acted with absolute power, but in order
most abundandy to show that He doth nothing
contrary to the Father, therefore He hath put the
expression of much inferiority. Since why did
He not say, "The works which the Father hath
given Me testify that I am equal to the Father" ?
for both of these truths were to be learned from
the works, that He did nothing contrary, and
that He was equal to Him who begat Him ; a
point which He is establishing elsewhere, where
He saith, " If ye believe not Me, believe the
works : that ye may know and believe that I am
in the Father and the Father in Me.'"" (ex. 38.)
In both respects, therefore, the works bare wit-
ness to Him, that He was equal to the Father,
and that He did nothing contrary to Him. Why
then said He not so, instead of leaving out the
greater and putting forward this? Because to
establish this was His first object. For although


* afTlSlOCTTOAi)!'.

^ awtO'TttAe [aTrearoAxc, G- T.],

' (^lAoao^eif.

10 ly c^ol e IIari)P) icayu iv avru, G. T*


7 al. '


cache!


146


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XL.


it was a far less thing to have it believed that
He came from God, than to have it believed
that God was equal with Him, (for that belonged
to the Prophets also,' but this never,) still He
taketh much pains as to the lesser point, as
knowing that, this admitted,- the other would
afterwards be easily received. So that making
no mention of the more important portion of
the testimony, He putteth' its lesser office, that
by this they may receive the other also. Hav-
ing effected this. He addeth,

Ver. 37. "And the Father Himself, which
hath sent Me, hath borne witness of Me."

Where did He " bear witness of" Him? In
Jordan : " This is My beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased" (Matt. iii. 16) ; hear Him.^
Yet even this needed proof. The testimony of
John then was clear, for they themselves had
sent to him, and could not deny it. The testi-
mony from miracles was in like manner clear,
for they had seen them wrought, and had heard
from him who was healed, and had believed ;
whence also they drew their accusation. It
therefore remained to give proof to the testi-
mony of the Father. Next in order to effect
this. He added,

"Ye have neither heard His voice at any
time " :

How then saith Moses, " The Lord spake, and
Moses answered"? (Ex. xix. 19) ; and David,
" He had heard a tongue which he knew not "
(Ps. Ixxxi. 5) ; and Moses again, " Is there any
such people which hath ' heard the voice of
God'?" (Deut. iv. 33.)

" Nor seen His shape."

Yet Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, are said to
have seen Him, and many others. What then
is that which Christ saith now? He guideth
them by degrees to a philosophical doctrine,
showing that with God is neither voice nor
shape, but that He is higher than such forms or
sounds like these. For as when He saith, " Ye
have not heard His voice," He doth not mean
that God doth indeed utter a voice, but one
which cannot be heard ; so when He saith,
" Nor seen His shape," He doth not mean that
God hath a shape though one invisible, but that
neither of these things belongeth to God. And
in order that they might not say, " Thou art a
boaster, God spake to Moses only"; (this at
least they did say, " We know that God spake
with Moses : as for this fellow, we know not
whence He is" — c. ix. 29;) on this account
He spake as He did, to show that there is nei-
ther voice nor shape with God. " But why,"
He saith, "name I these things? Not only
have ye ' neither heard His voice nor seen His


* al, " the Prophets said." ' al. *' said.'

* al. " deems worthy of mention."

* The latter words heard at the Transfiguration.


shape,' but it is not even in your power to
assert that of which you most boast and of
which you are all most fully assured, namely,
that ye have received and keep His command-
ments." Wherefore He addeth,

Ver. 38. " And ye have not His word abiding
in you."

That is, the ordinances, the commandments,
the Law, and the Prophets. For even if God
ordained these, still they are not with you, since
ye beheve not on Me. Because, if the Scrip-
tures everywhere say ' that it is necessary to give
heed to " Me, and yet ye believe not, it is quite
cleaf that His word is removed from you.
Wherefore again He addeth,

" For whom He hath sent. Him ye believe
not."

Then that they may not argue, " How, if we
have not heard His voice, hath He testified unto
thee?" He saith,

Ver. 39. " Search the Scriptures, for they are
they which testify of Me."

Since by these the Father gave His testimony.
He gave it indeed by Jordan also and in the
mount, but Christ bringeth not forward those
voices; perhaps by doing so' He would have
been disbeheved ; * for one of them, that in the
mount, they did not hear, and the other they
heard indeed, but heeded not. For this reason
He referreth them to the Scriptures, showing
that from them cometh the Father's ' testimony,
having first removed the old grounds on which
they used to boast, either as having seen God
or as having heard His voice. For as it was
likely that they would disbeUeve His voice, and
picture to themselves what took place on Sinai,
after first correcting their suspicions on these
points, and showing that what had been done
was a condescension, He then referreth them tc
the testimony of the Scriptures.

[4.] And from these too let us also, when wf
war against heretics, arm and fortify ourselves
For "all Scripture is given by inspiration o)
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reprooi
for correction, for instruction in righteousness
that the man of God may be perfect, thorough!;
furnished unto every good work " (2 Tim. ii:
16, 17) ; not that he may have some and nc
others, for such a man is not " perfect." Fc
tell me what profit is it, if a man pray contim;
ally, but give not liberal alms? or if he giv
liberal alms, but be covetous or violent? or
he be not covetous nor violent, but (is liberal
to make a show before men, and to gain tl:
praise of the beholders ? or if he give alms wil'
exactness and according to God's pleasure, y>
be lifted up by this very thing, and be higl


■ al. " teach." " al. " believe."

* al. *' they would have disbelieved them-"

" al. "of trie Spirit."


iii<y.


fiOMILY XLI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


147


ninded? or if he be humble and constant in
asting, but covetous, greedy of gain,* and nailed
o earth, and one who introduceth into his soul
he mother of mischief? for the love of money
s the root of all evils.- Let us then shudder at
:he action, let us flee the sin ; this hath made
;he world a waste,'' this hath brought all things
nto confusion, this seduceth us from the most
jlessed service of Christ. " It is not possible,"''
rle saith, " to serve God and mammon." For
nammon giveth commands contradictory to
hose of Christ. The one saith, " Give to them
hat need " ; the other, " Plunder the goods of
he needy." Christ saith, " Forgive them that
vrong thee " ; the other, " Prepare snares against
hose who do thee no wrong." Christ saith,
' Be merciful and kind " ; mammon saith, " Be
lavage and cruel, and count the tears of the
50or as nothing " ; to the intent that he may
■ender the Judge stern to us in that day. For
hen all our actions shall come ^ before our eyes,
md those who have been injured and stripped
3y us, shutting us out from all excuse. Since if
Lazarus, who received no wrong from Dives, but
jnly did not enjoy any of his good things, stood
"orth at that time * as a bitter accuser and allowed
lim not to obtain any pardon, what excuse, tell
Tie, shall they have, who, besides giving no alms
Df their own substance, seize that of others, and
overthrow orphans' houses? If they who have
lot fed Christ when He hungered have drawn
such fire upon their heads, what consolation


shall they enjoy who plunder what belongs not
to them at all, who weave ten thousand law-suits,
who unjustly grasp the property of all men?
Let us then cast out this desire ; and we shall
cast it out if we think of those before us who
did wrongfully, who were covetous and are gone.
Do' not others enjoy their wealth and labors
while they lie in punishment, and vengeance,
and intolerable woes? And how can this be
anything but extreme folly, to weary and vex
ourselves, that living we may strain ourselves
with labor, and on our departure hence undergo
intolerable punishments and vengeances, when
we might have enjoyed ourselves here, (for
nothing so much causeth pleasure as the con-
sciousness of almsgiving,'") and departing to that
place might have been delivered from all our
woes, and obtained ten thousand blessings ? For
as wickedness is wont to punish those who go
after it, even before (they arrive at) the pit, so
also virtue, even before the (gift of) the King-
dom, provides delights for those who here prac-
tice it, making them to live in company with
good hopes and continual pleasure. Therefore
that we may obtain this, both here and in the
life to come, let us hold fast to good works, so
shall we gain the future crown ; to which may
we all reach through the grace and lovingkind-
ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and
with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost,
be glory, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


HOMILY XLI.

John v. 39, 40.


Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have
• eternal life; and they are they which testify of Me.
And ye will not come to Me that ye might have
[eternal "] life."

[i.] Beloved, let us make great account of
^iritnal things, and not think tliat it is sufficient
)r us to salvation to pursue them anyhow. For if
I things of this life a man can gain no great profit

he conduct them in an indifferent and chance
ay, much more will this be the case in spiritual
lings, since these require yet greater attention,
therefore Christ when He referred the Jews to
jie Scriptures, sent them not to a mere reading,
Ut a careful and considerate * search ; for He
lid not, " Read the Scriptures," but, " Search


' al. " for Paul has said," &c.
' or. " revolted." a^'daraTOy.
» «v tiiratret, G. T.


' at. *' stand."

* Tore.

' not in G. T.

• al. " inquisitive.*


the Scriptures." Since the sayings relating to
Him required great attention, (for they had been
concealed from the beginning for the advantage
of the men of that time,) He biddeth them now
dig down with care that they might be able to
discover what lay in the depth below. These
sayings were not on the surface, nor were they
cast forth to open view, but lay like some trea-
sure hidden very deep. Now he that searcheth
for hidden things, except he seek them with
care and toil, will never find the object of his
search. For which cause He said, " Search the
Scriptures, because in them ye think ye have
eternal life." He said not, " Ye have," but " ye
think," showing that they gained from them
nothing great or high, expecting as they did to
be saved by the mere reading, without the addi-


« al. " shall."


' al. " almsgiving and a clear conscience."


148


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI


tion of faith. What He saith therefore is of
this kind : " Do ye not admire the Scriptures,
do ye not think that they are the causes of all
life? By these I confirm My claims now, for
they are they which testify of Me, yet ye will not
come to Me that ye may have eternal life." It
was thus with good reason that He said, " ye
think," because they would not obey, but merely
prided themselves on the bare reading. Then
lest owing to His very tender care He should
incur among them the suspicion of vainglory,
and because He desired to be believed by them,
should be deemed to be seeking His own ; (for
He reminded them of the words of John, and
of the witness of God, and of His own works,
and said all He could to draw them to Him, and
promised them "life";^) since, I say, it was
likely that many would suspect that He spake
these things from a desire of glory, hear what
He saith :

Ver. 41. "I receive not honor from men."

That is, " I need it not " : " My nature," He
saith, " is not of such a kind as to need the
honor which is from men, for if the sun can
receive no addition from the light of a candle,
much farther am I from needing the honor which
is from men." "Why then," asks some one,
" sayest thou these things, if thou needest it
not?" "That ye may be saved." This He
positively asserted above, and the same He im-
plied here also, by saying, " that ye might have
life." Moreover, He putteth another reason :

Ver. 42. "But I know you that ye have not
the love of God in you."

For when under pretense of loving God they "
persecuted Him because He made Himself equal
with God, and He knew that they would not
believe Him, lest any one should ask, " why
speakest thou these words?" "I speak them,"
He saith, " to convict you of this, that it is not
for the love of God that ye persecute Me, if it
be so that He testifieth to Me both by works
and by the Scriptures. For as before this when
ye deemed Me an enemy of God ye drove Me
away, so now, since I have declared these things,
ye ought to have hastened to Me, if ye had
really loved God. But ye love Him not. And
therefore have I spoken these words, to show
that you are possessed with excessive pride, that
you are vainly boasting and shading over * your
own enviousness." And the same He proveth
not by these things only, but by those that should
come to pass.

Ver. 43. " I am come in My Father's name,
and ye receive Me not ; if another shall come
in his own name, him will ye receive."

[2.] Seest thou that He everywhere declareth


* al. '* being destitute of."

* al, ** and promised all those things so as to draw them to
Himself." * al. *' they often." • al. *' veiling."


that He hath been " sent," that judgment ha
been committed to Him by the Father, that I
can do nothing of Himself, in order that He m
cut off all excuse for their unfairness? But wl
is it that He here saith shall come " in his ov
name " ? He alludeth here to Antichrist, ai
putteth " an incontrovertible proof of their u
fairness. " For if as loving God ye persecu
Me, much more ought this to have taken plac
in the case of Antichrist. For he will neith
say that he is sent by the Father, nor that
Cometh according to his will, but in everythi
contrariwise, seizing like a tyrant what belonge
not to him, and asserting that he is the very Gi
over all, as Paul saith, ' Exalting himself abo
all that is called God, or that is worshipe
showing himself that he is God.' (2 Thess.
4.) This is to ' come in his own name.' I i
not so, but am come in the Name of My Fathei
That they received not One who said that I
was sent of God, was a sufficient proof that th
loved not God ; but now from the contrary
this fact, from their being about to receive An
christ, He showeth their shamelessness.' F
when they received not One who asserteth tl
He was sent by God, and are about to worst
one who knoweth Him not, and who saith tl
he is God over all, it is clear that their persec
tion proceeded from malice and from hati
God. On this account He putteth two reaso
for His words ; and first the kinder one,* " Tl
ye may be saved " ; and, " That ye may ha
life " : and when they would have mocked
Him, He putteth the other which was mc
striking, showing that even although His heart
should not believe, yet that God was wont alw£
to do His own works. Now Paul speaking cc
cerning Antichrist said prophetically, that " G
shall send them strong delusion, — that they
might be judged who believed not the truth, 1
had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 Thess.
II, 12.) Christ said not, "He shall come;
but, " if He come," from tenderness for 1
hearers ; and because all their obstinacy ^
not yet complete. He was silent as to the r
son of His coming ; but Paul, for those who '
understand, has particularly alluded to it.
it is he who taketh away all excuse from then

Christ then putteth also the cause of tl
unbelief, saying,

Ver. 44. " How can ye believe, which reci
honor one of another, and seek not the ho
that Cometh from God only?"

Hence again He showeth that they loo
not to the things of God, but that under
pretense they desired to gratify private feel
and were so far from doing this on accouD


" al. '* whom also He putteth." " al. *

® al. ** ought ye to do this." * al. *

' al. "enviousness."


kindness, sari
wickedness.'*


Homily XIJ.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


149


His glory, that they preferred honor from men
to that which cometh from Him. How then
were they likely to entertain' such hostility
towards Him ^ for a kind of honor which they so
despised, as to prefer to it the honor which
Cometh from men?

Having told them that they had not the love
of God, and having proved it by what was doing
in His case, and by what should be in the case
of Antichrist, and having demonstrated that they
were deprived of all excuse. He next bringeth
Moses to be their accuser, going on to say,

Ver. 45-47. " Do not think that I will accuse
you to the Father ; there is one that accuseth
you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed Me ;
for he wrote of Me. But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe My words?"

What He saith is of this kind : " It is Moses '
who has been insulted more than I* by your
conduct towards Me, for ye have disbelieved
him rather than Me." See how in every way
He hath cast them out from all excuse. "Ye
said that ye loved God when ye persecuted Me ;
I have shown that ye did so from hatred of Him :
ye say * that I break the Sabbath and annul the
Law ; I have rid Me of this slander also : ye
maintain ^ that ye believe in Moses by what ye
dare to do against Me ; I on the contrary show
that this is most to disbelieve in Moses ; for so
far am I from opposing the Law, that he who
shall accuse you is none other than the man
who gave you the Law." As then He said of
the Scriptures, in which " ye think ye have eter-
nal life," so of Moses also He saith, " in whom
ye trust " ; everywhere conquering them by their
own weapons.

"And whence," saith some one, "is it clear
that Moses will accuse us, and that thou art not
a boaster? What hast thou to do with Moses?
Thou hast broken the Sabbath which he or-
dained that we should keep ; how then should
ihe accuse us? And how doth it appear that
iwe shall believe on another who cometh in his
|own name? All these assertions thou makest
ithout evidence." Now in truth all these
loints are proved above. " For " (Christ would
eply) " since it is acknowledged that I came
rom God, both by the works, by the voice of
ohn, and by the testimony of the Father, it is
vident that Moses will accuse the Jews." For
iwhat saith he ? " If a man come doing miracles
and leading you to God, and truly foretelling
Ithings future, ye must hearken unto him with
ill readiness." Now Christ had done all this.
He wrought miracles in very truth, He drew all


' ava&t^i<T9at.

■ or, " to take on them such hostility as they would have in-
:urred by following Him."

^ eKiivo^. * al. " accuse.'*

* or, " before Me." « al. " profess."


men to God, and (so that He ') caused accom-
plishment to follow His predictions.'

" But whence doth it appear that they will
believe another?" From their hating Christ,
since they who turn aside from Him who cometh
according to the will of God will, it is quite
plain, receive the enemy of God. And marvel
not if He now putteth forward Moses, although
He said, " I receive not witness from man,"
for He referreth them not to Moses, but to the
Scriptures of God. However, since the Scrip-
tures terrified them less, He bringeth round
His discourse to the very person (of Moses),
setting over against them their Lawgiver as
their accuser, thus rendering the terror more
impressive ; ° and each of their assertions He
refuteth. Observe : they said that they perse-
cuted Him through love for God, He showeth
that they did so through hating God ; they said
that they held fast to Moses, He showeth that
they acted thus because they believed not Moses.
For had they been zealous for the law, they
ought to have received Him who fulfilled it ; if
they loved God they ought to have believed
One who drew them to Him, if they believed
Moses they ought to have done homage to One
of whom Moses prophesied. " But " (saith
Christ) " if Moses is disbelieved before My
coming, it is nothing unlikely that I, who am
heralded by him, should be driven away by
you." As then He had shown from their con-
duct towards Himself that they who admired
John (really) despised him, so now He showeth
that they who thought that they believed Moses,
believed him not, and tumeth back on their
own head all that they thought to put forward
in their own behalf. " So far," He saith, " am
I from drawing you away from the Law, that I
call your Lawgiver himself to be your accuser."

That the Scriptures testified of Him He de-
clared, but where they testify He added not ;
desiring to inspire them with greater awe, and
to prompt them to search, and to reduce them
to the necessity of (juestioning. For had He
told them readily and without their questioning,
they would have rejected the testimony ; but
now, if they gave any heed to His words, they
needed first of all to ask, and learn from Him
what that testimony was."* On this account
He dealeth the more largely in assertions and
threats, not in proofs only, that even so He may
bring them over by fear of what He saith ; but
they even so were silent. Such a thing is wicked-
ness ; whatsoever a man say or do it is not
stirred to move, but remaineth keeping its pecu-
liar venom.


' Not in all copies.

* Not found in so many words. The command is given with
this test, Dcut. xviii. 18-22; see also Deut. xiii. I.

* al. " more horrible."

" al. " to enquire even if He held His peace."


I50


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV XLII,


Wherefore we must cast out all wickedness
from our souls, and never more contrive any
deceit ; for, saith one, " To the perverse God
sendeth crooked paths" (Prov. xxi. 8, LXX.) ;
and, " The holy spirit of discipline ' will flee de-
ceit, and remove from thoughts that are without
understanding." (Wisd. i. 5.) For nothing
maketh men so foolish as wickedness ; since
when a man is treacherous, unfair,^ ungrateful,
(these are different forms of wickedness,) when
without having been wronged he grieves another,
when he weaves deceits, how shall he not exhibit
an example of excessive folly ? Again, nothing
maketh men so wise as virtue ; it rendereth
them thankful and fair-minded, merciful, mild,
gentle, and candid ; it is wont to be the mother
of all other blessings. And what is more under-
standing than one so disposed ? for virtue is the
very spring and root of prudence, just as all
wickedness hath its beginning in folly. For
the insolent man and the angry become the
prey of their respective passions from lack of wis-
dom ; on which account the prophet said, "There
is no soundness in my flesh : my wounds stink
and are corrupt because of my foolishness "
(Ps. xxxviii. 3, 4) : showing that all sin hath its
beginning in folly : and so the virtuous man who
hath the fear of God is more understanding than
any ; wherefore a wise man hath said, " The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom."
(Prov. i. 7.) If then to fear God is to have
wisdom, and the wicked man hath not that fear,
he is deprived of that which is wisdom indeed ;
— and deprived of that which is wisdom indeed,
he is more foolish than any. And yet many
admire the wicked as being able to do injustice


and harm, not knowing that they ought to deerr
them wretched above all men, who thinking tc
injure others thrust the sword against them-
selves ; — an act of extremest folly, that a mar
should strike himself and not even know tha
he doth so, but should think that he is injuring
another while he is kiUing himself Wherefon
Paul, knowing that we slay ourselves when w(
smite others, saith, " Why do ye not rather tak(
wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselve:
to be defrauded ? " (i Cor. vi. 7.) For the no
suffering wrong consists in doing none, as als(
the not being ill-used in not using others ill
though this assertion may seem a riddle to th'
many, and to those who will not learn true wis
dom. Knowing this, let us not call wretche(
or lament for those who suffer injury or insult
but for such who inflict these things ; these ar
they who have been most injured, who hav
made God to be at war with them, and hav
opened the mouths of ten thousand accusers
who are getting an evil reputation in the preser
life, and drawing down on themselves sever
punishment in the life to come. While thos
who have been wronged by them, and hav
nobly borne it all, have God favorable to then
and all to condone with, and praise, and entei
tain them. Such as these in the present life
shall enjoy an exceeding good report, as afford
ing the strongest example of true wisdom, ani
in the life to come shall share the good thing
everlasting ; to which may we all attain throug!
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesu
Christ, with whom to the Father and the Hoi
Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world with
out end. Amen.


HOMILY XLII.

John vi. i, 4.


" After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, into
the parts of ' Tiberias. And a great multitude fol-
lowed Him, because they saw the * miracles which
He did on them that were diseased. And Jesus de-
parted ^ into a mountain, and there sat with His
disciples. And the Passover of the Jews * was nigh."

[i.] Beloved, let us not contend with violent
men, but learn' when the doing so brings no hurt
to our virtue to give place to their evil counsels ;
for so all their hardihood is checked. As darts
when they fall upon a firm,* hard, and resisting


1 iro^iac.
' ayvtJitttMVt

* ti« TO iitprif not in G. T.

* avTov, G. T.


» o)r^A9< [ik^A.] G. T.
« [i) eopri) tCiv "I.] G. T.
' al. " be content."
• iyTtrafiivoyf al. iioT,


substance, rebound with great violence on thoi
who throw them, but when the violence of tl
cast hath nothing to oppose it, it soon become
weaker and ceaseth, so is it with insolent me;
when we contend with them they become
fiercer, but when we yield and give ground,
easily abate all their madness. Wherefore
Lord when He knew that the Pharisees
heard " that Jesus made and baptized n
disciples than John," went into Galilee, to quen
their envy, and to soften by His retirepient
wrath which was likely to be engendered
these reports. And when He departed for
second time into Galilee, He cometh not to
same places as before ; for He went not to Ca


t!


1

b


HOMILV XLII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


»5i


but to " the other side of the sea," and ' great
multitudes followed Him, beholding " the mira-
cles which He did." What miracles? Why doth
he** not mention them specifically? Because
this Evangelist most of all was desirous of em-
ploying the greater part of his book on the dis-
courses and sermons [of Christ]. Observe, for
instance, how for a whole year, or rather how
even now at the feast of the Passover, he hath
given us no more information on the head of
miracles, than merely that He healed the para-
lytic and the nobleman's son. Because he was
not anxious to enumerate them all, (that would
have been impossible,) but of many and great
to record a few.

Ver. 2. " A great multitude followed Him be-
holding the miracles that He did." What is
here told marks not a very wise state of mind ; '
for when they had enjoyed such teaching, they
still were more attracted by the miracles, which
was a sign of the grosser state. For " miracles,"
It saith, " are not for believers, but for unbe-
Hevers."^ The people described by Matthew
acted not thus," but how? They all, he saith,
" were astonished at His doctrine, because He
taught as one having authority." (Matt. vii. 28,
29.)

"And why doth He occupy the mountain
now, and sit there with His disciples? " Because
of the miracle which was about to take place.
And that the disciples alone went up with Him,
was a charge against the multitude which fol-
lowed Him not. Yet not for this only did He
go up into the mountain, but to teach us ever to
rest at intervals from the tumults and confusion
of common life." For solitude is a thing meet
for the study of wisdom. And often doth He
go up alone into a mountain, and spend the
night there, and pray, to teach us that the man
who will come most near to God must be free
from all disturbance, and must seek times and
places clear of confusion.

Ver. 4. " And the Passover, a feast of the
Jews, was nigh."

" How then," saith some one, " doth He not
go up unto the feast, but, when all are pressing
to Jerusalem, goeth Himself into Galilee, and
not Himself alone, but taketh His disciples with
Him, and proceedeth thence to Capernaum ? "
Because henceforth He was quietly annulling the
Law, taking occasion from the wickedness of
the Jews.

Ver. 5. " And as He lifted up His eyes, He
beheld a great company." '


* Ben. " wherefore also." * al. ** dost thou."

* al. '* this kind of following belongs not to a settled mind.'*

* Not exactly quoted from i Cor. xiv. 22. where the words relate
to the gift of tongues.

* al. •• was not such." " t^« iv fieVu.

av(Lfi\itjjai Toif 6<^daAfAotf opa 6;i(Aoi' iroAul'. In G. T. the
words are; inapat oSv o 'lijtrov^ tov; 04^daAfLoi>c, tal 9*aaaiitvoi
OTi iroAifc o;^Aot ip\tTat iTpb\ auTOl'.


This showeth that He sat not at any time idly*
with the disciples, but perhaps carefully convers-
ing with them, and making them attend ' and
turn towards Him, a thing which peculiarly
marks '" His tender care, and the humility and
condescension of His demeanor towards them.
For they sat with Him, perhaps looking at one
another ; then having lifted up His eyes, He be-
held the multitudes coming unto Him. Now
the other Evangelists say, that the disciples
came and asked and besought Him that He
would not send them away fasting, while St.
John saith, that the question was put to Philip
by Christ. Both occurrences seem to me to be
truly reported, but not to have taken place at
the same time, the former account being prior to
the other, so that the two are entirely different.

Wherefore then doth He ask " Philip "? He
knew which of His disciples needed most in-
struction ; for this is he who afterwards said,
" Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us "
(c. xiv. 8), and on this account Jesus was before-
hand bringing him into a proper state." For
had the miracle simply been done, the marvel
would not have seemed so great, but now He
beforehand constraineth him to confess the exist-
ing want, that knowing the state of matters he
might be the more exactly acquainted with the
magnitude of the miracle about to take place.
Wherefore He saith,^^

" Whence shall we have so many loaves," that
these may eat?"

So in the Old [Testament] He spake to
Moses, for He wrought not the sign until He
had asked him, "What is that in thy hand?"
Because things coming to pass unexpectedly
and all at once,'* are wont to throw us into for-
getfulness of things previous, therefore He first
involved him in a confession of present circum-
stances, that when the astonishment should have
come upon him, he might be unable afterwards
to drive away the remembrance of what he had
confessed, and thus might learn by comparison
the greatness of the miracle, which in fact takes
place in this instance ; for Philip being asked,
replied,

Ver. 7, 6. " Two hundred pennyworth of bread
is not sufficient for them, that everj' one of them
may take a little. And this He said to prove
him : for He Himself knew what He would do."

[2.] What meaneth, "to prove him"? Did
not He know what would be said by him ? We
cannot assert that. What then is the meaning of
the expression ? We may discover it from the Old
[Testament]. For there too it is said, "And
it came to pass after these things that God did


" dirAuf. * al. " teaching."

^° Ben. Ed, reads: oC (idXtaTa xai ifrtvOtv ttjv KijStfiofiav ion
nade'iv. 11 ippvOpn^ev. *' Ben. " and sec what he saith."

'^ In G. T. TTodti' ayopaaofitv apTovt iva ipx*Taif ie.r.A*
u a0p6oVt


152


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLH.


tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Take thy
beloved son whom thou lovest " (Gen. xxii. i,
2) ; yet it doth not appear in that place either,
that when He saith this He waited to see the
end of the trial, whether Abraham would obey
or not, (how could He, who knoweth all things
before they come into existence?') but the
words in both cases are spoken after the manner
of men. For as when (the Psalmist") saith that
He " searcheth the hearts of men," he meaneth
not a search of ignorance but of exact knowl-
edge, just so when the Evangelist saith that He
proved (Philip), he meaneth only that He knew
exactly. And perhaps one might say another
thing, that as He once made Abraham more
approved, so also did He this man, bringing
him by this question to an exact knowledge of
the miracle. The Evangelist therefore, that thou
mayest not stop at the feebleness of the expres-
sion, and so form an improper opinion of what
was said, addeth, " He Himself knew what He
would do."

Moreover we must observe this, that when
there is any wrong suspicion, the writer straight-
way very carefully corrects ^ it. As then in this
place that the hearers might not form any such
suspicion, he adds the corrective, saying, " For
He Himself knew what He would do " : so also
in that other place, when He saith, that " the
Jews persecuted Him, because He not only had
broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was
His Father, making Himself equal with God,"
had there not been the assertion of Christ Him-
self confirmed by His works, he would there also
have subjoined this correction. For if even in
words which Christ speaketh the Evangelist is
careful that none should have suspicions, much
more in cases where others were speaking of
Him would he have looked closely, had he
perceived that an improper opinion prevailed
concerning Him. But he did not so, for he
knew that this * was His meaning,' and immov-
able decree.' Therefore after saying, " making
Himself equal with God," he used not any such
correction ; for the matter spoken of was not an
erroneous fancy of theirs, but His own assertion
ratified by His works. Philip then having been
questioned,

Ver. 8, 9. "Andrew, Simon's' brother, said.
There is a lad here, which hath five barley
loaves, and two small fishes : but what are they
among so many ? "

Andrew is higher minded than Philip, yet had
not he attained to everything. Yet I do not
think that he spake without an object, but as


having heard ' of the miracles of the Prophets,
and how Elisha wrought a sign with the loaves
(2 Kings iv. 43) ; on this account he mounted
to a certain height," but could not attain to the
very top.

Let us learn then,'" we who give ourselves to
luxury, what was the fare of those great and
admirable men; and in quality and quantity"
let us behold and imitate the thriftiness of their
table.

What follows also expresses great weakness.
For after saying, " hath five barley loaves," he
addeth, "but what are they among so many?"
He supposed that the Worker of the miracle
would make less out of less, and more out of
more. But this was not the case, for it was
alike easy to Him to cause bread to spring
forth '^ from more and from less, since He
needed no subject-matter. But in order that
the creation might not seem foreign to His Wis-
dom, as afterwards slanderers and those affected
with the disease of Marcion " said. He used the
creation itself as a groundwork for His marvels.
When both the disciples had owned them-
selves at a loss, then He wrought the miracle ;
for thus they profited the more, having first
confessed the difficulty of the matter, that when
it should come to pass, they might understand
the power of God. And because a miracle was
about to be wrought, which had also been per-
formed by the Prophets, although not in an
equal degree, and because He would do it after
first giving thanks, lest they should fall into
any suspicion of weakness on His part, observe
how by the very manner of His working He
entirely raiseth their thoughts of it and showeth
them the difference (between Himself and
others). For when the loaves had not yet
appeared," that thou mayest learn, that things
that are not are to Him as though they were,
(as Paul saith, " who calleth the things that be
not as though they were" — Rom. iv. 17,) He
commanded them as though the table were pre-
pared and ready, straightway to sit down, rous-
ing by this the minds of His disciples. And
because " they had profited by the questioning,
they immediately obeyed, and were not con-
founded, nor said, " How is this, why dost Thoi
bid us sit down, when there is nothing before
us?" The same men, who at first disbelievec
so much as to say, "Whence shall we bu;
bread?" began so far to beUeve even befon
they saw the miracle,'* that they readily madi
the multitudes to sit down.


* wptF ytvitrtuv, Hist. Susann. ycr. 43.

* Ps. vii. 9, or St. Paul, Rom. viii. 27.

* al. ** expels."

« i.e. the Equality of The Soti with The Father.

* Y>'"f '?>'' ' 'I'V'h''-
^ St^ufof nc'rpov, G. T.


> al. " for I think that the miracles of the Prophets had entere
his mind " ^'' ^^"""^

■0 al. " hence." " [of that which is set on.] Morel, and Ben.

" irriyaffiii. " See note, P- 30-

" In Ben. the reading is: "for when the loaves had not V'
appeared, He doth the miracle." This looks like the gloss of
transcriber, surprised at the suspension of the sense. ,

15 al. " when. ■ " al. " before the miracle.


Homily XLII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


153


[3.] But why when He was about to restore
the paralytic did He not pray, nor when He was
raising the dead, or bridhng the sea, while He
doth so here over the loaves ? It was to show,
that when we begin our meals, we ought to give
thanks unto God. Moreover, He doth it es-
pecially in a lesser matter, that thou mayest
learn that He doth it not as having any need ;
for were this the case, much more would He
have done so in greater things ; but when He
did them by His own authority, it is clear that
it was through condescension that He acted as
He did in the case of the lesser. Besides, a
great multitude was present, and it was neces-
sary that they should be persuaded that He had
come according to the will of God. Wherefore,
when He doth miracles in the absence of wit-
nesses, He exhibiteth nothing of the kind ; but
when He doth them in the presence of many,
in order to persuade them that He is no enemy
of God, no adversary of Him who hath begot-
ten Him, He removeth the suspicion by thanks-
giving.

" And He gave to them that were set down,
and they were filled." '

Seest thou how great is the interval between
the servants and the Master? They having
grace by measure, wrought their miracles ac-
cordingly, but God, who acteth with frefe power,
did all most abundantly.

Ver. 12. "And He said ^ unto His disciples.
Gather up the fragments which remain ; ' — and
they gathered them together, and filled twelve
baskets."

This was not a superfluous show, but in order
that the matter might not be deemed a mere
illusion ; and for this reason He createth * from
matter already subsisting. " But why gave He
not the bread to the multitudes to bear, but
(only) to His disciples?" Because He was
most desirous to instruct these who were to be
the teachers of the world. The multitude would
not as yet reap any great fruit from the mira-
cles, (at least they straightway forgot this one
and asked for another,) while these would gain
no common profit. And what took place was
moreover no ordinary condemnation of Judas,
who bore a basket. And that these things were
done for their instruction is plain from what is
said afterwards, when He reminded them, say-
ing, "Do ye not yet understand — how many
baskets ye took up?" (Matt. xvi. 9.) And for


1 These words, which are not found in G. T., are quoted in
place of V. 10, II. " And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now
there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in num-
ber about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves; and when He
had given thanks, He distributed to the disciples, and the disciples
to them that were set down ; and likewise of the fishes as much as
they would."

' " When they were filled. He said." N. T.

* *' That nothing be lost. Therefore they gathered them to-
gether, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five
Barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had
taten." N. T. * SijiJ.iovpyil.


the same reason it was that the baskets of frag-
ments were equal in number to the disciples ;
afterwards, when they were instructed, they took
not up so many, but only " seven baskets."
(Matt. XV. 37.) And I marvel not only at the
quantity of loaves created, but besides the quan-
tity, at the exactness of the surplus, that He
caused the superabundance to be neither more
nor less than just so much as He willed, fore-
seeing how much they would consume ; a thing
which marked unspeakable power. The frag-
ments then confirmed the matter, showing both
these points ; that what had taken place " was
no illusion, and that these were from the loaves
by which the people had been fed. As to the
fishes, they at this time were produced from
those already subsisting, but at a later period,
after the Resurrection, they were not made
from subsisting matter. " Wherefore ? " That
thou mayest understand that even now He em-
ployed matter, not from necessity, nor as need-
ing any base* (to work upon), but to stop the
mouths of heretics.'

" And the multitudes said, that this is of a
truth The Prophet." "

Oh, excess of gluttony ! He had done ten
thousand things more admirable than this, but
nowhere did they make this confession, save
when they had been filled. Yet hence it is
evident that they expected some remarkable
prophet; for those others had said (to John),
"Art thou that Prophet?"' while these say,
" This is that Prophet."

Ver. 15. "When Jesus therefore perceived
that they would come and take Him by force
to make Him a king, He departed again into
a mountain." '"

Wonderful ! How great is the tyranny of
gluttony, how great the fickleness of men's
minds ! No longer do they vindicate the Law,
no longer do they care for the violation " of the
Sabbath, no longer are they zealous for God ;
all such considerations are thrown aside, when
their bellies have been filled ; He was a prophet
in their eyes, and they were about to choose
Him for a king. But Christ fleeth. "Where-
fore?" To teach us to despise worldly digni-
ties, and to show us that He needed nothing
on earth. For He who chose " all things mean,
both mother and house and city and nurture
and attire would not afterwards be made illus-
trious by things en earth. The things which
(He had) from heaven were glorious and great,
angels, a star, His Father loudly speaking,'^ the


^ or, " had been made." • vnoPaSpai.

' i.e. the Gnostics, see note, p. 30.

* In place of ver. 14. " Then those men, when they had seen
the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that Prophet
which should come into the world."

'•> al. " wherefore elsewhere they said. Is this," &c.

'" [Himself alone] G. T. " wapaAiJaews, al. napafiiatu^.

" al. '* showed." *^ ^owc. .


154


WORKS OK ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLII.


Spirit testifying, and Prophets proclaiming Him
from afar ; those on earth were all mean, that
thus His power might the more appear. He
came also to teach us to despise the things of
the world, and not be amazed or astonished by
the splendors of this life, but to laugh them all
to scorn, and to desire those which are to come.
For he who admires things which are here, will
not admire those in the heavens. Wherefore
also He saith to Pilate, " My Kingdom is not
of this world" (c. xviii. 36), that He may not
afterwards appear to have employed mere human
terror or dominion for the purpose of persua-
sion. Why then saith the Prophet, " Behold,
thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting
upon an ass " ? (Zech. ix. 9.) He spake of that
Kingdom which is in the heavens, but not of
this on earth ; and on this account Christ saith,
" I receive not honor from men." (c. v. 41.)

Learn we then, beloved, to despise and not to
desire the honor which is from men ; for we
have been honored with the greatest of honors,
compared with which that other is verily ' insult,
ridicule, and mockery. And as the riches of
this world compared with the riches of that are
poverty, as this life apart from that is deadness,^
(for " let ' the dead bury their dead " — Matt. viii.
28,) so this honor compared with that is shame
and ridicule. Let us then not pursue it. If
they who confer it are of less account than a
shadow or a dream, the honor itself much more
so. " The glory of man is as the flower of the
grass " (i Pet. i. 24) ; and what is meaner than
the flower of the grass ? Were this glory ever-
lasting, in what could it profit the soul? In
no.thing. Nay, it very greatly injures us by
making us slaves, slaves in worse condition than
those bought with money, slaves who obey not
one master only, but two, three, ten thousand,
all giving different commands. How much bet-
ter is it to be a free man than a slave, to be free
from the slavery of men, and subject only to the
dominion of God ? In a word, if thou wilt de-
sire glory, desire it, but let it be the glory im-
mortal, for that is exhibited on a more glorious
stage, and brings greater profit. For * the men
here bid thee be at charges to please them, but
Christ, on the contrary, giveth thee an hundred-
fold for what thou givest Him, and addeth more-
over eternal life. Which of the two then is
better, to be admired' on earth, or in heaven?
by man, or by God ? to your loss, or to your
gain? to wear a crown for a single day, or for
endless ages? Give to him that needeth, but
give not to a dancer, lest thou lose thy money
and destroy his soul. For thou art the cause of
his (coming to) perdition through unseasonable


* al. ** seems to be."

• al. " ' let,' He saith."


• al. " how? for."

* Sav. teads " to be.*


munificence.' Since did those on the stage know
that their employment would be unprofitable,
they would have long ago ceased to practice it ;
but when they behold thee applauding, crowding
after them, spending and wasting thy substance
upon them, even if they have no desire to follow
(their profession), they are kept to it by the
desire of gain. If they knew that no one would
praise what they do, they would soon desist from
their labors, by reason of their unprofitableness ;
but when they see that the action is admired by
many, the praise of others becomes a bait to
them. Let us then desist from this unprofitable
expense, let us learn upon whom and when we
ought to spend. Let us not, I implore you,
provoke God in both ways, gathering whence
we ought not, and scattering where we ought
not ; for what anger doth not thy conduct de-
serve, when thou passest by the poor and givest
to a harlot ? Would not the paying the hire of
sin and the bestowing honor where it were meet
to punish have been a charge against thee, even
hadst thou paid out of thy just earnings? but
when thou feedest thine uncleanness by strip-
ping orphans and wronging widows, consider how
great a fire is prepared for those who dare such
things. Hear what Paul saith, " Who not only
do these things, but also have pleasure in' them
that do them." (Rom. i. 32.)

Perhaps we have touched you sharply, yet if
we touch you not, there are actual' punishments
awaiting those who sin without amendment.
What then availeth it to gratify by words those
who shall be punished by realities ? Dost thou
take pleasure ' at a dancer, dost thou praise and
admire him ? Then art thou worse than he ; his
poverty affords him an excuse though not a rea-
sonable one, but thou art stripped even of this
defense. If I ask him, " Why hast thou left other
arts and come to this accursed and impure
one?" he will reply, "because I can with little
labor gain great profits." But if I ask thee why
thou admirest one who spends his time in impur-
ity, and lives to the mischief of many, thou canst
not run to the same excuse, but must bow down
thy face and be ashamed and blush. Now if when
called by us to give account, thou wouldest have
nothing to reply,'" when that terrible and inexor-
able Judgment cometh where we shall render
account of thoughts and deeds and everything,
how shall we stand ? with what eyes shall we be-
hold our Judge ? what shall we say ? what defense
shall we make ? what excuse reasonable or unrea-
sonable shall we put forward ? shall we allege the
expense? the gratification? the perdition oi
others whom by means of his art we ruin ? We
can have nothing to say, but must be punished


' or, " love of praise."
' or, " consent with."
s £ia ritv npaylJiATtttv.


' consent with."

' couldest reply nothing.'


HOMILV XLIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


155


with a punishment having no end, knowing no
limit. That this come not to pass, let us hence-
forth guard all points, that having departed with
a good hope, we may obtain the everlasting
blessings; to which may we all attain through


the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XLIII.


John vi. 16-18.


"And when even was now come, His disciples went
down unto ' the sea and entered ^ into a ship, and
went over^ the sea toward Capernaum. And it
was' now dark, and Jesus was not come unto them.
And the sea arose by reason of a great wind -that
blew."

[i.] Christ provideth for the good of his dis-
ciples not only when He is present in the body,
but also when far away ; for having abundance
of means and of skill, He effecteth one and the
same end by contrary actions. Observe, for in-
stance, what He hath done here. He leaveth
His disciples, and goeth up into a mountain ;
and they,* when even was come, went down unto
the sea. They waited for Him until evening,
expecting that He would come unto them ; but
when even was come, they could no longer en-
dure not to seek their Master ; " so great a love
possessed them. They said not, " It is now
evening, and night hath overtaken us, whither
shall we depart? the place is dangerous, the
time unsafe"; but, goaded^ by their longing,
they entered into the ship. For it is not without
a cause that the Evangelist hath declared' the
time also, but by it to show the warmth of their
love.

Wherefore then doth Christ let them go, and
not show Himself? ' And again,'" wherefore doth
He show Himself walking alone upon the sea?
By the first He teacheth them how great (an
evil) it is to be forsaken by Him, and maketh
their longing greater ; by the second, again. He
showeth forth His power. For as in His teach-
ing they heard not all in common with the mul-
titude, so in the case of the miracles they saw
them not all with the mass of people, since it
was needful that they who were about to receive
in charge the presidency " of the world, should
have somewhat more than the rest. " And what
sort of miracles," saith some one, " saw they by


* iiTL [ets, G. T.]. ' ir€pay [«i« TO it. G. T.l.

* ayaliavTt^ [e>^^. G. T.]. * tyiffTo [eY«yd|/<i, G. T.l.

" Ben. " they having been left behind by their Master, when, &c.

* Ben. " not to go to seek Him.'* " al. " and retire."
' al. " inflamed." Jo al. '* but rather."

* al. '* signifies." *^ npovraviav.


themselves? " The Transfiguration on the mount ;
this on the sea, and those after the Resurrection,
which are many and important. And from these
I conjecture that there were others also. They
came to Capernaum without any certain infor-
mation, but expecting to find Him there, or
even in mid passage ; this the EvangeUst implies
by saying that " it was now dark, and Jesus was
not yet come to them."

" And the sea arose by reason of a great wind
that blew." What did they? They were troub-
led, for there were many and various causes
which forced them to be so. They were afraid
by reason of the time for it was dark, of the
storm for the sea had risen, of the place for they
were not near land ; but,

Ver. 19. " Had rowed about five and twenty "
furlongs."

And, lastly, by reason of the strangeness of
the thing, for,

" They see Him " walking upon the sea."

And when they were greatly troubled,

Ver. 20. " He saith unto them. It is I, be not
afraid."

Wherefore then appeareth He? To show
that it was He who would make the storm cease.
For this the Evangelist hath shown, saying,'*

Ver. 21. " They were wiUing to receive Him,"
and immediately the ship was near the land." "

He not only gave them a safe passage, but
also one with a fair wind.

To the multitude He showeth not Himself
walking upon the sea, for the miracle was too
great to suit their infirmity. Indeed, even by
the disciples He was not seen long doing this,
but He appeared, and at once retired." Now
this seems to me to be a different miracle from
that found in Matthew xiv. ; and that it is different
is clear from many reasons. For He worketh
often the same miracles, in order to cause the


" " five and twenty or thirty," N. T.

» " they see Jesus," N. T.

" al. " IS shown (or It shows by the Evangelist, saying," &c.).

>• [into the ship,] N. T.

** *' at the land whither they went," N. T.

*^ al. " withdrew from them."


156


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV XLIII.


beholders not merely to count them very strange,'
but also to receive them with great faith.

" It is I, be not afraid." As He spake the
word. He cast out fear from their souls. But
at another time not so ; wherefore Peter said,
" Lord, if it be Thou, bid me to come unto
Thee." (Matt. xiv. 28.) Whence then was it
that at that time they did not straightway admit
this,^ but now were persuaded ? It was because
then the storm continued to toss the bark, but
now at His voice the calm had come. Or if the
reason be not this, it is that other which I have
before mentioned, that oftentimes working the
same miracles, He made the second to be readily
received by means of the first. But wherefore
went He not up into the ship? Because He
would make the marvel greater, would more
openly' reveal to them His Godhead, and would
show them, that when He before gave thanks.
He did not so as needing aid, but in condescen-
sion to them. He allowed the storm to arise,
that they might ever seek Him ; He stilled the
storm, that He might make known to them His
power ; He went not up into the ship, that He
might make the marvel greater.

Ver. 22. "And the people that were there
saw that there was none other boat there save
the one into which the disciples had entered,
and that Jesus went not into the boat, but His
disciples."''

And why is John so exact ? Why said he not
that the multitudes having passed over on the
next day departed?* He desires to teach us
something else, namely, that Jesus allowed the
multitudes if not openly, at least in a secret
manner, to suspect what had taken place. For,
" They saw," saith he, " that there was none other
boat there but one, and that Jesus went not into
it with His disciples."

Ver. 24. And embarking in boats from Tiberias,
they "came to Capernaum seeking Jesus."

What else then could they suspect, save that
He had arrived there crossing the sea on foot?
for it was not possible to say that He had passed
over in another ship. For " there was one,"
saith the Evangelist, "into which His disciples
entered." Still when they came to Him after so
great a wonder, they asked Him not how He
crossed over, how He arrived there, nor sought to
understand so great a sign. But what say they?


* al. '* so that the beholders might both marvel, and not count
them very strange."

' i.e. that it was reallv Christ.

' lit. '* more nakedly," al. " more clearly."

* N. T. ver. 22-24. " The day following, when the people
which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none
other boat there save that one whereinto His disciples were entered,
and that Jesus went not with His disciples into the boat, but that
His disciples were gone away alone; (howbcit there came other
little boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat
bread, after that the T^rd had given thanks:) when the people
therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither His disciples, they
ajso took shipping, and came to Capernaum seeking for Jesus.
The readings here vary, without variety of meaning.

* al. " came."


Ver. 25. " Master, when camest Thou hither? "

[2.] Unless any one affirm that the "when"
is here used by them in the sense of "how."
But it is° worth while also to notice here the
fickleness of their impulses.' For they who said,
"This is that Prophet " ; they who were anxious
to " take Him and make Him a king," now when
they have found Him take no such counsel, but
having cast out their astonishment, they no longer
admire Him for His former deeds. They sought
Him, desiring again to enjoy a table like the
first.

The Jews under the guidance of Moses passed
over the Red Sea, but that case is widely differ-
ent from this. He did all with prayer and as a
servant, but Christ with absolute * power. There
when the south wind" blew, the water yielded
so as to make them pass over on dry land, but
here the miracle was greater. (Ex. xiv. 21.)
For the sea retaining its proper nature so bare
its Lord upon its surface,'" thus testifying to the
Scripture which saith, " Who walketh upon the
sea as upon a pavement." (Job ix. 8.)

And with reason, when He was about to enter
into stubborn and disobedient Capernaum, did
He work the miracle of the loaves, as desiring
not only by what took place within, but also by
the miracles which were wrought without the
city, to soften its disobedience. For was it not
enough to soften even any stone, that such multi-
tudes should come with great eagerness to that
city ? Yet they had no such feeling, but again
desired food for the body ; for which also they
are reproached by Jesus.

Let us then, beloved, knowing these things,
give thanks to God for things of sense, but much
more for things spiritual ; for such is His will,
and it is on account of the latter that He giveth
the former, leading in, as it were, by these the
more imperfect sort, and giving them previous
teaching, because they are yet gaping upon the
world. But when such persons having received
these worldly things, rest in them, then are they
upbraided and rebuked. For in the case of him
that had the palsy, Christ wished first to give
that which was spiritual, but they that were pres-
ent endured it not; for when He said, "Thy
sins be forgiven thee," they exclaimed, "This
man blasphemeth." (Matt. ix. 2.) Let us not,
I entreat you, be so affected, but let us make
more " account of those (spiritual) things.
Wherefore ? Because when spiritual things are
present with us, no harm ariseth from the ab-
sence '- of fleshly things ; but when they are not,
what hope, what comfort, shall then remain to
us ? wherefore it is for these we ought always to
call upon God, and entreat Him for them. And

0 al. " hence." , , , "* '"• " back."

' ev$paV(TTov op^ijf, al. €vito^ov yvdjfirfv, tl al, ** much."

« lit. " all." " al. " lack."

' a strong cast wind.


Homily XLIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


157


for such hath Christ also taught us to pray ; for
if we unfold that Prayer, we shall find that there
is nothing carnal in it, but all spiritual, and that
even the small portion which seemeth to relate
to sense, becometh by the manner spiritual. For
to bid us ask no more than our " successive," '
tnat is, our " daily," bread, would mark a mind
s])iritual and truly wise. And consider what
goeth before that, " Hallowed be Thy Name,
'I'hy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in
heaven so on earth " ; then, after naming that
temporal (need). He quickly leaveth it, and
bringeth ' us again to the spiritual doctrine, say-
ing, " Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors." Nowhere hath He put in the Prayer
riches or glory or dominion, but all things con-
tributing to the benefit of the soul ; nothing
earthly, but all things heavenly. If then we are
bidden to refrain from the things of this present
Ufe, how could we help being wretched and
miserable, asking from God those things which
even having He biddeth us cast away, to free us
from care about them, and for which He biddeth


us take no pains.'' This is the " using vain repe-
tition " ; and this is why we effect nothing by
our prayers. " How then," saith some one, " do
the wicked grow rich, how the unjust and im-
pure, plunderers and covetous?" Not by God's
giving; (away with the thought!) but by plun-
dering, and taking more than their due.' " And
how doth God allow them ? " As He allowed
that rich man, reserving him for greater punish-
ment. (Luke xvi. 25.) Hear what (Abraham)
saith to him ; " Son, thou in thy lifetime re-
ceivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus
evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented." Therefore that we also come not
to hear that voice, by living softly and idly, and
gathering together for ourselves many sins, let
us choose the true riches and right wisdom, that
we may obtain the promised good things ; to
which may we all arrive, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever and world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY XLIV.

John vi. 26, 27.


" Jesus answered them, and said. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Ye seek Me, not because ye saw the miracles,
but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled.
Labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for
that meat which endureth unto everlasting life."

[i.] The mild and gentle is not always use-
ful, but there are times when the teacher needs
sharper language. For if the disciple be dull and
gross, then, in order to touch his dullness to the
quick, we must rouse him with' a goad. And this
the Son of God hath done in the present as well as
in many other cases. For when the crowds had
come and found Jesus, and were flattering Him,
land saying, " Master, when earnest Thou hither ? "
ito show that He desireth not honor from men,
but looketh to one thing only, their salvation.
He answereth them sharply, wishing to correct
them not in this way only, but also by revealing
and exposing their thoughts. For what saith
He.? "Verily, verily, I say unto you," (speaking
positively and with a confirmation,) "Ye seek
Me, not because ye saw miracles, but because
vc did eat of the loaves and were filled." He
hideth and reproveth them by these words, yet
loth not so abruptly or violently, but very spar-
ingly. For He saith not, " O ye gluttons and


■ iVtov(riov, !.e. «is rijy f^i^y^^y DM.


belly-slaves, I have wrought so many wonders,
and ye never have either followed Me, or mar-
veled at My doings"; but mildly and gently
somewhat in this manner ; " Ye seek Me, not
because ye saw miracles, but because ye did
eat of the loaves and were filled" ; speaking not
only of the past, but also of the present miracle.
" It was not," He saith, " the miracle of the
loaves that astonished you, but the being filled.""
And that He said not this of them by conjecture
they straightway showed, for on this account
they came the second time, as being about to
enjoy the same (food) as before. Wherefore
they said, "Our fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness." Again they draw Him to (the sub-
ject oO carnal food, which was the chief accusa-
tion and charge against them. But He stoppeth
not at rebukes, but addeth instruction also, say-
ing, "Labor not for the meat which perisheth,
but for that meat which endureth unto everlast-
ing life."

" Which the Son of Man giveth ' unto you ;
for Him hath God the Father sealed."


» al. " u« towjirds him."


* al. " no pains, but rather neither to have nor to desire them."_

^ Ben. omits " but by plundering, and taking more than their
due.**

« al. For He all but saith this in what He direeteth against
them : "It was not," &c.

' " shall give," N. T.


158


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIV


What He saith, is of this kind : " Make ye no
account of this earthly, but of that spiritual food."
But since some of those who desire to live in
doing nothing have abused this speech, as though
Christ would entirely abolish working, it is
seasonable to say somewhat to them. For they
slander, so to speak, all Christianity, and cause
it to be ridiculed on the score of idleness. First,
however, we must mention that saying of Paul.
What saith he ? " Remember the Lord, how He
said, It is more blessed to give than to receive."
(Acts XX. 35.) Now how can it be possible
for him to give who hath not ? How then saith
Jesus to Martha, " Thou art careful and troubled
about many things, but one thing is needful, and
Mary hath chosen that good part " ? (Luke x. 41,
42) ; and again, " Take no thought for the
morrow." (Matt. vi. 34.) For it is necessary
now to resolve all these questions, not only that
we may check men if they would be idle, but
also that the oracles of God may not appear to
bring in what is contradictory.

Now Paul in another place saith, " But we
beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more
and more, that ye study to be quiet, and to do
your own business ; that ye may walk honestly
toward them that are without" (i Thess. iv. 10,
II, 12) ; and again; "Let him that stole, steal
no more ; but rather let him labor, working
with his own hands, that he may have to give
to him that needeth." (Eph. iv. 28.) Here
the Apostle bids not simply " work," but to work
so vigorously and laboriously, as to have thereby
somewhat to give to others. And in another
place the same saith again ; " These hands have
ministered to my necessities, and to them that
were with me." (Acts xx. 34.) And writing
to the Corinthians he said, " What is my reward
then ? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I
may make the Gospel of Christ without charge."
(i Cor. ix. 18.) And when he was in that city,
he abode with Aquila and Priscilla, " and wrought,
for by their occupation they were tentmakers."
(Acts xviii. 3.)

These passages show a yet more decided
opposition as to the letter ; ' we must therefore
now bring forward the solution. What then
must be our reply? That to " take no thought,"
doth not mean " not to work," but " not to be
nailed to the things of this life " ; that is, to take
no care for to-morrow's ease, but to deem that
superfluous. For a man may do no work, and
(yet) lay up treasure for the morrow ; and a man
may work, yet be careful for nothing ; for care-
fulness and work are not the same thing ; it is
not as trusting to his work that a man worketh,
but, " that he may impart to him that needeth."
And that too which was said to Martha refers


' Kvra rh ^ifthv.


not to works and working, but to this, that it i;
our duty to know the right season, and not tc
spend on carnal things the time proper for listen
ing. Thus Christ spake not the words as urging
her to " idleness," but to rivet her to listening
" I came," saith He, " to teach you needfu
things, but thou art anxious about a meal. Dos'
thou desire to receive Me, and to provide foi
Me a costly table? Provide another sort o
entertainment, by giving me a ready hearing
and by imitating thy sister's longing for instruc
tion." He said not this to forbid her hospitality
(away with the thought ! how could that be f
but to show that she ought not in the season fo:
listening be busy about other matters. For t(
say, " Labor not for the meat that perisheth,'
is not the expression of one implying that w<
ought to be idle ; (in fact, this most especiall]
is " meat that perisheth," for idleness is wont t(
teach all wickedness ;) but that we ought t(
work, and to impart. This is meat that nevei
perisheth ; but if any be idle and gluttonous
and careth for luxury, that man worketh foi
" the meat that perisheth." So too, if a man b]
his labor should feed Christ, and give Him drink
and clothe Him, who^ so senseless and mad' ai
to say that such an one labors for the mea
that perisheth, when there is for this the promise
of the kingdom that is to come, and of thos<
good things ? This meat endureth forever. Bu
at that time, since the multitudes made no ac
count of faith, nor sought to learn who it wa;
that did these things, and by what power, bu'
desired one thing only, to fill their bellies with
out working ; Christ with good reason callec
such food, " meat that perisheth." " I fed," H(
saith, " your bodies, that after this ye might seel
that other food which endureth, which nourishetl
the soul ; but ye again run * after that which i
earthy. Therefore ye do not understand tha
I lead you not to this imperfect food, but to tha
which giveth not temporal but eternal life, whic
nourisheth not the body but the soul." The j
when He had uttered such great words concerr
ing Himself, and had said that He would giv
this food, in order that what was spoken migl
not stand in their way, to make His saying cred
ble He attributeth the supply to the Father. F(
after saying, " Which the Son of Man shall gi»
you" ; He addeth, " Him hath God the Fath'
sealed," that is, " hath sent Him for this purposf
that He might bring the food to you." TI
saying also admits of another interpretatioi
for in another place Christ saith, "He th
heareth My words, hath set to his seal that G
is true" (c. iii. 33), that is, hath " showed foi
undeniably." Which indeed the expressi
seems to me to hint at even in this place,

» al, •' none," » al. " unschooled." « »l- "Widow


Homily XLV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


159


" the Father hath sealed," is nothing else than
" hath declared," " hath revealed by His testi-
mony." He in fact declared Himself too, but
since He was speaking to Jews, He brought for-
ward the testimony of the Father.

[2.] Learn we then, beloved, to ask of God
the things which it is meet for us to ask of Him.
For those other things, those, I mean, which
belong to this life, whichever way they may fall
out, can do us no injury ; for if we be rich, it
is here only that we shall enjoy our luxury ; and
if we fall into poverty, we shall suffer nothing
terrible. For neither the splendors nor the
pains of the present life have much power in
respect either of despondency or pleasure, they
are contemptible, and slip away very swiftly.
Wherefore they are called " a way," with reason,
because they pass away, and by their very nature
do not long endure,* but the things which are to
come endure eternally, both those of punishment
and those of the Kingdom. Let us then in re-
gard of these things use much diligence to avoid
the first and to choose the last. For what is the
advantage of this world's luxury? To-day it is,
and to-morrow it is not ; to-day a bright flower,
to-morrow scattered dust ; to-day a burning fire,
to-morrow smouldering ashes. But spiritual
things are not so, they ever remain shining and
blooming, and becoming brighter every day.
That wealth never perishes,'' never departs, never


ceases, never brings with it care or envy or
blame, destroys not the body, cornipts not the
soul, is without ill will, heaps not up malice ; all
which things attend on the other kind of wealth.
That honor lifts not men into folly, doth not
make them puffed up, never ceases nor is
dimmed. Again, the rest and delight of heaven
endureth continually, ever being immovable
and immortal, one cannot find its end or limit.
This life then let us desire, for if we do so we
shall make no account of present things, but
shall despise and mock at them all, and though
one should bid us enter into kingly halls, we shall
not while we have this hope choose to do so ;
yet nothing (earthly) seems more near to happi-
ness than such a permission ; but to those who
are possessed by love of heaven, even this seems
little and mean, and worthy of no account.
Nothing which comes to an end is to be much
desired ; whatever ceases, and to-day is and to-
morrow is not, even though it be very great, yet
seems to be very little and contemptible. Then
let us not cling to fleeting things which slip away
and depart, but to those which are enduring and
immovable. To which may we all attain,''
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XLV.

John vi. 2S-30.


'Then said they unto Him, What shall we do,' that we
might work the works of God ? Jesus answered and
said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye be-
Heve on Him whom He hath sent. They said there-
fore unto Him, What sign showest thou then, that we
may see and beUeve thee? what dost thou work?"

[i.] There is nothing worse, nothing more
shameful, than gluttony ; it makes the mind gross,
and the soul carnal ; it blinds, and permits not to
see clearly. Observe, for instance, how this is the
case with the Jews ; for because they were intent
upon gluttony, entirely occupied with worldly
[things, and without any spiritual thoughts, though
IChrist leads them on by ten thousand sayings,
sharp and at the same time forbearing, even thus
hey arise not, but continue groveling below.
t iFor consider ; He said to them, " Ye seek Me,
$ Inot because ye saw the miracles, but because ye


' al. '* are called by God a 7fay, for there is one broad, and one
ftrait and narrtnv ; but things to come," &c.
' al. '' ceases."
• iroiwfxti' [irocoOfxcv, G. T. ].


did eat of the bread, and were filled " ; He
touched them by the reproof. He showed them
what food they ought to seek, saying, " Labor
not for the meat that perisheth " ; He set before
them the prize, saying, " but that which endur-
eth unto everlasting life " ; then provided a
remedy for what might have been an objection,
by declaring that He was sent from the Father.
What then did they? As though they had
heard nothing, they said, " What shall we do,
that we might work the works of God ? " This
they said, not that they might learn and do them,
(as the sequel shows,) but to induce Him again
to supply them with food, and desiring to per-
suade Him to satisfy them. What then saith
Christ? "This is the work of God, that ye be-
lieve on Him whom He hath sent." On this
they asked, " What sign showest thou, that we
may see and believe?"


* al. " that we may also be able to attain them."


i6o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLV.


Ver. 31. "Our fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness."

Nothing more senseless, nothing more unrea-
sonable, than these men ! While the miracle
was yet in their hands,' as though none had been
done, they spake after this manner, " What sign
shewest thou?" and having thus spoken, they
do not even allow Him the right of choosing the
sign, but think to force Him to exhibit none
other than such a one as was wrought in the
days of their fathers ; wherefore they say, " Our
fathers did eat manna in the wilderness," think-
ing by this to prgvoke Him to work such a mir-
acle as might supply them with carnal nourish-
ment. Else why did they mention none other
of the miracles of old, though many took place
in those times, both in Egypt and at the sea and
in the wilderness, but only that of the manna?
Was it not because they greatly desired that one
by reason of the tyranny of their bellies? Ye
who when ye saw His miracle called him a
Prophet, and attempted to make Him a king, how
is that now, as though none had been wrought,
ye have become thankless and ill-minded, and
ask for a sign, uttering words fit for parasites, or
hungry dogs ? Does the manna now seem won-
derful to you? Your soul is not now* parched
up.

Mark too their hypocrisy. They said not,
"Moses did this sign, what doest thou?" think-
ing it would annoy Him ; but for a while they
address Him with great reverence, through ex-
pectation of food. So they neither said, " God
did this, what doest thou? " that they might not
seem to make Him equal with God ; nor did
they bring forward Moses, that they might not
seem to lower Him, but put the matter in an
intermediate form, " Our fathers did eat manna
in the wilderness." He indeed might have re-
plied, " I, but now, have wrought greater won-
ders than did Moses, requiring no rod, having no
need of prayer, but doing all of Myself; and,
if ye call to remembrance the manna, see, I
have given you bread." But this was not the
season for such speeches ; and the one thing He
earnestly desired was, to bring them to spiritual
food. And observe His infinite wisdom and His
manner of answering.

Ver. 32. " Moses gave you not that bread
from heaven ; but My Father giveth you the
true bread from heaven."

Why said He not, " It was not Moses that
gave it to you, but I " ; but putteth God in the
place of Moses, and Himself instead of manna ?
Because the infirmity of His hearers was great.
As is seen from what foUoweth. For not even
when He had spoken thus did He secure their
attention, although He said at first, " Ye seek


> al. " in their ejres.'


* al. " when your soul is."


Me, not because ye saw the miracle, but because
ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled." (Ver.
26.) Now because they sought these (carnal)
things. He would have corrected them by His
succeeding words, yet not even so did they de-
sist. When He promised the Samaritan woman
that He would give her " the water," He made
no mention of the Father. What saith He?
" If thou knewest who it is that saith unto thee.
Give Me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of
Him, and He would have given unto thee living
water" (c. iv. 10); and again, "The water
which I shall give." He referreth her not to
The P"ather. But here He maketh mention of
The Father, that thou mayest understand how
great was the faith of the Samaritan woman, and
how great the infirmity of the Jews.

Was then the manna not from heaven ? Hqw
then is it said to be from heaven? In the same
manner as Scripture speaketh of " fowls of
heaven" (Ps. viii. 8) ; and again, "The Lord
thundered from heaven." (Ps. xviii. 13.) And
He calleth that other the " true bread," not be-
cause the miracle of the manna was false, but
because it was a type, and not the very truth.
But in mentioning Moses, He doth not compare
Himself to him, for the Jews did not as yet pre-
fer Him to Moses, of whom they still had a
higher opinion. So that after saying, " Moses
gave not," He addeth not that " I give," but
saith that The Father, and not Moses, giveth.
They, when they heard this, replied, " Give us
this bread to eat " ; for they yet thought that it
was something material, they yet expected to
gratify their appetites, and so hastily ran to
Him. What doth Christ? Leading them on'
litrie by little. He saith,

Ver. 2;^. " The bread of God is He which
Cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto
the world."

Not, saith He, to Jews alone, but to all the]
" world," not mere food, but " life," another and
an altered " life." He calleth it " life," because
they all were dead in sins. Yet they still kept
downward bent, saying,

Ver. 34. " Give us this bread."

Then He, to rebuke them, because while the*
supposed that the food was material they ran tt
Him, but not when they learned that it was
spiritual kind, said,

Ver. 35, 36. " I am the bread of life : he tha;
Cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he ths
believeth on Me shall never thirst. But I sai
unto you, that ye also have seen Me, and believ
Me not."

[2.] Thus also John crieth, saying beforf
hand, " He speaketh that He knoweth, and te
tifieth that He hath seen, and no man receive*

' al. " up."


Homily XLV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


i6i


His testimony " (c. iii. 32) ; and again Christ
Himself, " We speak that We do know, and tes-
tify that We have seen" (c. iii. 11), "and ye
believe not."' This He doth to prevent them,
and to show them that the matter doth not
trouble Him, that He desireth not honor, that
He is not ignorant of the secrets of their minds,
nor of things present, nor of things to come.

" I am the bread of life." Now He proceed-
eth to commit unto them mysteries. And first
He discourseth of His Godhead, saying, " I am
the bread of life." For this is not spoken of
His Body, (concerning that He saith towards
the end, " And the bread which I shall give is
My flesh,") but at present it referreth to His
Godhead. For That, through God the Word, is
Bread, as this bread also, through the Spirit de-
scending on it, is made Heavenly Bread. Here
He useth not witnesses, as in His former ad-
dress, for He had the miracle of the loaves to
witness to Him, and the Jews themselves for a
while pretending to believe Him ; in the former
case they opposed and accused Him. This is
the reason why here He declareth Himself.
But they, since they expected to enjoy a carnal
feast, were not^ disturbed until they gave up
their hope. Yet not for that was Christ silent, but
uttered many words of reproof. For they,'' who
while they were eating called Him a Prophet, were
here offended, and called Him the carpenter's
son ; not so while they ate the loaves, then they
said, " He is The Prophet," and desired to make
Him a king. Now they seemed to be indignant
at His asserting that He " came down from
heaven," but in truth it was not this that caused
their indignation, but the thought that they
should not enjoy a material table. Had they
been really indignant, they ought to have asked
and enquired how He was the " bread of life,"
how He had " come down from heaven " ; but
now they do not this, but murmur. And that it
was not this which offended them is plain from
another circumstance. When He said, " My
Father giveth you the bread," they exclaimed
not, " Beseech Him that He give " ; but what?
" Give us that bread " ; yet He said not, " I
give," but, " My Father giveth " ; nevertheless,
they, from desire of the food, thought Him
worthy to be trusted to for its supply. Now
how should they, who deemed Him worthy of
their trust for giving, be afterward offended when
they also heard that " the Father giveth " ? What
is the reason ? It is that when they heard that
they were not to eat, they again disbelieved, and
put forth by way of a cloak for their disbelief,
that " it was a high saying." Wherefore He
saith, " Ye have seen Me, and beUeve not " (c.
V. 39) ; alluding partly to His miracles, partly


* al. " and ye receive not our witness," as in N. T.

' al. " remain and are not." ' Ben. " But they.'


to the testimony from the Scriptures ; " For
they," He saith, " are they which testify of Me "
(c. V. 43, 44) ; and, " I am come in My P'ather's
Name, and ye receive Me not " ; and, " How
can ye believe which receive honor of men? "*

Ver. 37. "All that the Father giveth Me shall
come to Me, and him that cometh to Me I will
in nowise cast out."

Observe how He doeth all things for the sake
of them that are saved ; therefore He added
this, that He might not seem to be trifling and
speaking these things to no purpose. But what
is it that He saith, " All that the Father giveth
Me shall come unto Me " (ver. 37), and " I will
raise it ' up in the last day " ? (Ver. 40.) Where-
fore speaketh He of the common resurrection,
in which even the ungodly have a part, as though
it were the peculiar gift of those who believe on
Him? Because He speaketh not simply of
resurrection, but of a particular kind of resur-
rection. For having first said, " I will not cast
him out, I shall lose nothing of it," He then
speaketh of the resurrection. Since in the
resurrection some are cast out,' (" Take him,
and cast him into outer darkness," Matt. xxii.
13,) and some are destroyed. ("Rather fear
Him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell.") (Matt. x. 28.) And' the expression,
" I give eternal hfe " (c. x. 28), declareth this ;
for they " that have done evil shall go forth to
the resurrection of damnation, and they that
have done good to the resurrection of life." '
(c. V. 29.) This then, the resurrection to good
things," is that which He here designed. But
what meaneth He by saying, " All that the
Father giveth Me, shall come to Me " ? He
toucheth their unbelief, showing that whosoever
believeth not on Him transgresseth the will of
the Father. And thus He saith it not nakedly,
but in a covert manner, and this He doth '" every-
where, wishing to show that unbelievers are at
variance with the Father, not with Him alone.
For if this is His will, and if for this He came,
that He might save man," those who believe not
transgress His will. " When therefore," He
saith, " the Father guideth any man, there is
nothing that hindereth him from coming unto
Me " ; and in another place, " No man can
come unto Me, except the Father draw him."
(Ver. 44.) And Paul saith, that He delivereth
them up unto the Father ; " When He shall
have deUvered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father." (i Cor. xv. 24.) Now as the
Father when He giveth doth so without first
depriving Himself, so the Son when He deliver-
eth up doth so without excluding Himself. He


* al. "one of another?"
^ Ben. " him."

^ Ben. " as appears from," &c.

' al. " So that."

* clauses transposed.


* eirt Toi? aya0oiK.
*•* al, " thou wilt see Him do-
ing."
" al. " all the world."


l62


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLV.


is said to deliver us up, because through Him
we have access (to the Father) .

[3.] And the "by whom'" is also applied to
the Father, as when the Apostle saith, " By whom
ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son "
(i Cor. i. 9) : and,* " By the will of the Father."
And again ; " Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for
flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee."
(Matt. xvi. 17.) What He here intimateth is
something of this kind,' that " faith in Me is no
ordinary thing, but needeth an impulse* from
above " ; and this He establisheth throughout
His discourse, showing that this faith requires a
noble sort of soul, and one drawn on by God.

But perhaps some one will say, " If all that
the Father giveth, and whomsoever He shall
draw, Cometh unto Thee, if none can come unto
Thee except it be given him from above, then
those to whom the Father giveth not are free
from any blame or charges." These are mere
words and pretenses. For we require our own
deliberate choice also, because whether we will
be taught is a matter of choice, and also whether
we will believe. And in this place, by the " which
the Father giveth Me," He declareth nothing else
than that " the believing on Me is no ordinary
thing, nor one that cometh of human reasonings,
but needeth a revelation from above, and a well-
ordered soul to receive that revelation." And
the, " He that cometh to Me shall be saved,"
meaneth that he shall be greatly cared for.
" For on account of these," He saith, " I came,
and took upon Me the flesh, and entered into °
the form of a servant." Then He addeth ;

Ver. 38. " I came down from heaven not to
do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me."

What sayest Thou? Why, is Thy will one,
and His another? That none may suspect this,
He explaineth it by what follows, saying ;
1^ Ver. 40. " And this is the will of Him that
sent Me, that every one which seeth the Son,
and believeth on Him, may have everlasting
life."

Is not then this Thy will? And how sayest
Thou, " I am come to send fire upon the earth,
and what have I desired to see,* if that be
already kindled " ? (Luke xii. 49.) For if Thou
also desirest this, it is very clear that Thy will
and the Father's is one. In another place also
He saith, " For as the Father raiseth up the
dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will." (c. v. 21.) But
what is the will of the Father? Is it not, that
not so much as one of them should perish?
This Thou wiliest also. (Matt, xviii. 14.) So


that the will of the One differeth not from the
will of the Other. So ' in another place He is
seen establishing yet more firmly His equality
with the Father, saying, " I and My Father ' will
come, and will make Our abode with him.' "
(c. xiv. 23.) What He saith then is this ; " I
came not to do anything other than that which
the Father willeth, I have no will of Mine own
different from that of the Father, for all that is
the Father's is Mine, and all that is Mine is the
Father's." If now the things of the Father and
the Son are in common. He saith with reason,
"Not that I might do Mine own will." But
here He speaketh not so, but reserveth this for
the end. For, as I have said. He concealeth
and veileth for a while high matters, and desireth
to prove that had He even said, " This is My
will," they would have despised Him. He there-
fore saith, that " I co-operate with that Will,"
desiring thus to startle them more ; as though
He had said, " What think ye ? Do ye anger
Me by your disbelief? Nay, ye provoke My
Father." "For this is the will of Him that
sent Me, that of all which He hath given Me
I should lose nothing." (Ver. 39.) Here He
showeth that He needeth not their service, that
He came not for His own advantage," but for
their salvation ; and not to get honor from them.
Which indeed He declared in a former address,
saying, " I receive not honor from men " (c. v.
41); and again, " These things I say that ye
may be saved." (c. v. 34.) Since He every-
where laboreth to persuade " them that He came
for their salvation. And He saith, that He
obtaineth honor to the Father, in order that He
may not be suspected by them. And that it is
for this reason He thus speaketh. He hath more
clearly revealed by what follows. For He saith,
" He that seeketh his own will '" seeketh his own
glory ; but He that seeketh His glory that sent
Him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in
Him." (c. vii. 18.) " And this is the will of the
Father, that every one which seeth the Son, and
believeth on Him, may have everlasting life."
(Ver. 40.)

"And I will raise him up at the last day."
Why doth He continually dwell upon the Resur-
rection ? Is it that men may not judge of God's
providence by present things alone ; that if they
enjoy not results " here, they become not on that
account desponding, but wait for the things that
are to come, and that they may not, because
their sins are not punished for the present,
despise Him, but look for another Ufe.

Now those men gained nothing, but let us


> «i' oi.

' al. " that is."

• al. " all but this."

* S. C. here instead of ri 9cA<d ; reads W ^9f Aof IBuv*


' In place of the passage which follows, Savile notices in the
margin another reading: "Besides at a later time He said, (Lulte-
xiii. 34,) ' How often would I have gathered thy children together,
and ye would notl' what is it then that He sailh? Nothing else-
but,''&c.

• al. " ministering." '" " that speaketh of himself," N. T.

• al. " show,** ** aTToAauwffl.


Homily XLV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


163


take pains to gain by having the Resurrection
continually sounded in our ears ; and if we
desire to be grasping, or to steal, or to do any
wrong thing, let us straightway take into our
thoughts that Day, let us picture to ourselves
the Judgment-seat, for such reflections will
check the evil impulse more strongly than any
bit. Let us continually say to others,' and to
ourselves, " There is a resurrection, and a fear-
ful tribunal awaiteth us." If we see any man
insolent and puffed up with the good things of
this world, let us make the same remark to him,
and show him that all those things abide here :
and if we observe another grieving and impa-
tient, let us say the same to him, and point out
to him that his sorrows shall have an end ; if we
see one careless and dissipated,' let us say the
same charm over him, and show that for his
carelessness he must render account. This say-
ing is able more than any other remedy to heal
our souls. For there is a Resurrection, and
that Resurrection is at our doors, not afar off,
nor at a distance. " For yet a little while, and
He that shall come will come, and will not
tarry." (Heb. x. 37.) And again, " We must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ "
(2 Cor. V. 10) ; that is, both bad and good, the
one to be shamed in sight of all, the other in
sight of all to be made more glorious. For as
they who judge here punish the wicked and
honor the good publicly, so too will it be there,
that the one sort may have the greater shame,
and the other more conspicuous glory. Let us
picture these things to ourselves every day. If
we are ever revolving them, no care for present
things will be able to sting us.^ " For the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. iv.
18.) Continually let us say to ourselves and to
others,* " There is a Resurrection, and a Judg-
ment, and a scrutiny of our actions " ; and let as
many as deem that there is such a thing as fate
repeat this, and they shall straightway be deliv-
ered from the rottenness of their malady ; for if
there is a Resurrection, and a Judgment, there
is no fate, though they bring ten thousand argu-
"ments, and choke themselves to prove it. But
I am ashamed to be teaching Christians con-
cerning the Resurrection : for he that needeth
to learn that there is a Resurrection, and who
hath not firmly persuaded himself that the affairs
of this world go not on by fate, and without
design, and as chance will have them, can be no
Christian. Wherefore, I exhort and beseech
you, that we cleanse ourselves from all wicked-
ness, and do all in our power to obtain pardon
and excuse in that Day.


* al. "one to another." ' ^laKtxvixiyov.

* al. " none of the things present and perishable will be able to
{■ occupy us." * al. *' one to another."


Perhaps some one will say, " When will be the
consummation? When will be the Resurrec-
tion ? See how long a time hath gone by, and
nothing of the kind hath come to pass?" Yet
it shall be, be sure. For those before the flood
spake after this manner, and mocked at Noah,
but the flood came and swept away' all those
unbelievers, but preserved him" who believed.
And the men of Lot's time expected not that
stroke from God, until those lightnings and
thunderbolts came down and destroyed them
all utterly. Neither in the case of these men,
nor of those who lived in the time of Noah,
was there any preamble^ to what was about to
happen, but when they were all living daintily,
and drinking, and mad with wine, then came
these intolerable calamities upon them. So also
shall the Resurrection be ; not with any pre-
amble, but while we are in the midst of good
times.' Wherefore Paul saith, " For when they
shall say. Peace and safety ; then sudden de-
struction Cometh upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child ; and they shall not escape."
(i Thess. v. 3.) God hath so ordered this, that
we may be always struggling, and be not confi-
dent even in time of safety. What sayest thou ?
Dost thou not expect that there will be a Resur-
rection and a Judgment? The devils confess
these, and art thou shameless ? ' " Art Thou
come," they say, " to torment us before the
time?" (Matt. viii. 29) ; now they who say that
there will be " torment," are aware of the Judg-
ment, and the reckoning, and the vengeance.
Let us not then besides daring evil deeds, anger
God by disbelieving the word of the Resurrec-
tion. For as in other things Christ hath been
our beginning, so also hath He in this ; where-
fore He is called " the first-born from the dead."
(Col. i. 18.) Now if there were no Resurrec-
tion, how could He be "the first-born," when
no one of " the dead " was to follow Him ? If
there were no Resurrection, how would the
justice of God be preserved, when so many evil
men prosper, and so many good men are afflicted
and die in their affliction? Where shall each
of these obtain his deserts, if so be that there is
no Resurrection? No one of those who have
lived aright disbelieves the Resurrection, but
every day they pray and repeat that holy sen-
tence, "Thy Kingdom come." Who then are
they that disbelieve the Resurrection? They
who have unholy ways and an unclean life : as
the Prophet saith, " His ways are always pol-
luted. Thy judgments are far above out of his
sight." (Ps. X. 5.) For a man cannot possibly
live a pure life without believing in the Resur-
rection ; since they who are conscious of no


5 al. " seized."
" al. " him only."
^ nftooiiiiovt


* lit. " fair weather."

" al. " dost thou not confess?"


164


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVI.


iniquity both speak of, and wish for, and believe
in it, that they may receive their recompense.
Let us not then anger Him, but hear Him when
He saith, " Fear Him wliich is able to destroy
both body and soul in hell " (Matt. x. 28) ; that
by that fear we may become better, and being
delivered from that perdition, may be deemed


worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which may
we all attain to, through the grace and loving-
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
and with whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, now and ever and to the end-
less ages of eternity. Amen.


HOMILY XLVI.

John vi. 41, 42.


"The Jews then murmured at Him, because He said, I
am the Bread which came down from heaven; and
they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? How is it then that
He saith, I came down from heaven? "

[i.] "Whose god is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame " (Phil. iii. 19), said Paul
of certain persons, writing to the Philippians.'
Now that the Jews were of this character is clear,
both from what has gone before, and from what
they came and said to Christ. For when He gave
them bread, and filled their bellies, they said
that He was a Prophet, and sought to make
Him a King : but when He taught them con-
cerning spiritual food, concerning eternal life,
when He led them away from objects of sense,
and spake to them of a resurrection, and raised
their thoughts to higher matters, when most they
ought to have admired, they murmur and start
away. And yet, if He was that Prophet as they
before asserted, declaring that he it was of whom
Moses had said, " A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto
me, unto Him shall ye hearken " ( Deut. xviii. 15);
they ought to have hearkened to Him when He
said, "I came down from heaven"; yet they
hearkened not, but murmured. They still rev-
erenced Him, because the miracle of the loaves
was recent, and therefore they did not openly
gainsay Him, but by murmuring expressed their
displeasure, that He did not give them the meal
which they desired. And murmuring they said,
" Is not this the son of Joseph ? " Whence it is
plain, that as yet they knew not of His strange
and marvelous Generation. And so they still
say that He is the son of Joseph, and are not
rebuked ; and He saith not to them, " I am not
the Son of Joseph " ; not because He was his son,
but because they were not as yet able to hear of
that marvelous Birth. And if they could not
bear to hear in plain terms of His birth accord-
ing to the flesh, much less could they hear of


> al. " fpeakiog coDceiDing the Jews."


that ineffable Birth which is from above. If He
revealed not that which was lower to them, much
less would He commit to them the other. Al-
though this greatly offended them, that He was
born from a mean and common father, still He
revealed not to them the truth, lest in removing
one cause of offense He should create another.
What then said He when they murmured ?

Ver. 44. " No man can come unto Me, except
the Father which hath sent Me draw Him."

The Manichseans spring upon these words,
saying, "that nothing lies in our own power";
yet the expression showeth that we are masters
of our will. " For if a man cometh to Him,"
saith some one, " what need is there of drawing ? "
But the words do not take away our free will, but
show that we greatly need assistance. And He
impUeth not an unwilling^ comer, but one enjoy-
ing much succor. Then He showeth also the
manner in which He draweth ; for that men
may not, again, form any material idea of God,
He addeth,

Ver. 46. " Not that any man hath seen God,"
save He which is of God, He hath seen the
Father."

"How then," saith some one, "doth the
Father draw?" This the Prophet explained
of old, when he proclaimed beforehand, and
said,

Ver. 45. "They shall all be taught of God.'
(Isa. liv. 13.)

Seest thou the dignity of faith, and that not of
men nor by man, but by God Himself they shall*
learn this ? And to make this assertion credible,
He referred them to their prophets. " If then ' all
shall be taught of God,' how is it that some shall
not believe?" Because the words are spoken
of the greater number. Besides, the prophecy
meaneth not absolutely all, but all that have the
will. For the teacher sitteth ready to impart
what he hath to all, and pouring forth his instruc-
tion unto all.


^ Sav. aKovTa, Ben. Tvxoyra.
* Ben. " he foretold they shall.'


' The Father," N.T.


Homily XLVL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


165


Ver. 44. " And I will raise him up in the liast
day."

Not slight here is the authority of the Son, if
so be that the Father leadeth, He raiseth up.
He distinguisheth not His working from that of
the Father, (how could that be ?) but showeth
equality ' of power. As, therefore, after saying
in that other place, "The Father which hath
sent Me beareth witness of Me," He then, that
they might not be over-curious about the utter-
ance, referred them to the Scriptures ; so here,
that they may not entertain similar suspicions.
He referreth them to the Prophets, whom He
continually and everywhere quoteth, to show
that He is not opposed to the Father.

"But what of those," saith some one, "who
were before His time? Were not they taught
of God ? why then the special application of the
words here?" Because of old they learned the
things of God by the hands of men, but now by
the Only-begotten Son of God, and by the Holy
Ghost. Then He addeth, " Not that any man
hath seen the Father, save He which is of God," ^
using this expression here not with reference to
the cause, but to the manner of being.' Since
had He spoken in the former sense, we are all
"of God." And where then would be the
special and distinct nature of the Son ? " But
wherefore," saith some one, "did He not put
this more clearly?" Because of their weakness.
For if when He said, " I am come down from
heaven," they were so offended, what would they
have felt had He added this?

He calleth Himself, (ver. 48,) " the bread of
life," because He maintaineth* our life both
which is and which is to be, and saith, " Whoso-
ever" shall eat of this bread shall live for ever."
By " bread " He meaneth here either His saving
doctrines and the faith which is in Him, or His
own Body ; for both nerve the soul. Yet in
another place He said, "If a man hear" My
saying, he shall never taste of death." (c. viii. 51.)
And they were offended ; here they had no such
feeling perhaps, because they yet respected Him
on account of the loaves which had been made.

[2.] And observe how He distinguisheth be-
tween His bread and the manna, by causing them
to hear the result of each kind of food. For to
show that the manna afforded them no unusual
advantage, He added,

Ver. 49. " Your fathers did eat maima in the
wilderness, and are dead."

He then establisheth a thing most likely to
persuade them, that they were deemed worthy
of greater things than their fathers, (meaning


' laotTTaviov, al. laoTtfiov. ' e« ©sou [irapa &, v. 46].

• i.e. with reference, not to men who arc of God " as being
Aeir Cause by creation, but to Himself who is " of God" by His
Btsence, ^ (TuvKpaTet, al. <rvyiepoT«t.

' Ver. 58, o? av <t>ayjif [6 Tpwvwv, G. T.l.

• " keep," N. T,


those marvelous men who lived in the time of
Moses,) and so, after saying that they were dead
who ate the manna, He addeth,

Ver. 51. " He that eateth' of this bread, shall
live for ever."

Nor hath He put " in the wilderness " without
a cause, but to point out that the supply of
manna was not extended to a long time, nor
entered with them into the land of promise.
But this " bread " was not of the same kind.

" And the bread that I will give is My flesh,
which I will give for the hfe of the world."

Here one might reasonably enquire, how this
was a fit season for these words, which neither
edified nor profited, but rather did mischief to
those who had been edified ; for " from that
time," saith the Evangelist, " many of His dis-
ciples went back," saying, " This is a hard say-
ing; who can hear it?" (ver. 60) ; since these
things might have been entrusted to the disciples
only, as Matthew hath told us that He discoursed
with them apart. (Mark iv. 34 : see Matt. xiii.
36.) What then shall we say? What is the
profit of the words ? Great is the profit and ne-
cessity of them. Because they pressed upon Him,
asking for bodily food, reminding Him of the
food provided in the days of their forefathers,
and speaking of the manna as a great thing, to
show them that all those things were but type
and shadow, but that the very reality of the
matter was now present with them. He men-
tioneth spiritual food. " But," saith some one,
" he ought to have said, Your fathers did eat
manna in the wilderness, but I have given you
bread." But the interval between the two mira-
cles was great, and the latter of them would have
appeared inferior to the former, because the
manna came down from heaven, but this, the
miracle of the loaves, was wrought on earth.
When therefore they sought food " coming down
from heaven," He continually told them, " I
came down from heaven." And if any one
enquire why He introduced the discourse on the
Mysteries, we will reply, that this was a very fit-
ting time for such discourses ; for indistinctness
in what is said always rouses the hearer, and ren-
ders him more attentive. They ought not then
to have been oflended, but rather to have asked
and enquired. But now they went back. If they
believed Him to be a Prophet, they ought to
have believed His words, so that the offense was
caused by their own folly, not by any difficulty
in the words. And observe how by little and
little He led them up to Himself. Here He
saith that Himself giveth, not the Father ; * " The


' " If any man eat,'* N. T.

* al. ** And observe how He bound the disciples to Himself; for
these are they who say, ' Thou hast the words of life, whither shall
we depart?* but here He bringeth in Himself giving, not the
Father."

f


>166


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVI.


bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world."

" But," saith some one, " this doctrine was
strange to them and unusual." ' And yet John
at an earlier period alluded to it by calling Him
" Lamb." (c. i. 29.) " But for all that, they
knew it not." I know they did not ; nay, neither
did the disciples understand. For if as yet they
had no clear knowledge of"the Resurrection, and
so knew not what, " Destroy this Temple, and
in three days I will raise it up" (John ii. 19),
might mean, much more would they be ignorant
of what is said here. For these words were less
clear than those. Since that prophets had raised
men^ from the dead, they knew, even if the
Scriptures have not spoken so clearly on the
subject, but not one of them ever asserted that
any man had eaten flesh. Still they obeyed, and
followed Him, and confessed that He had the
words of eternal life. For this is a disciple's
part, not to be over-curious about the assertions
of his teacher, but to hear and obey him, and to
wait the proper time for the solution of any diffi-
culties. " How then," saith some one, " was it
that the contrary came to pass, and that these
men 'went back'?" It was by reason of their
folly. For when questioning concerning the
" how " comes in, there comes in with it un-
belief. So Nicodemus was perplexed, saying,
" How can a man enter into his mother's
womb?" So also these are confounded, say-
ing,

Ver. 52. " How can this man give us his flesh
to eat?"

If thou seekest to know the "how," why
askedst not thou this in the matter of the loaves,
how He extended five to so great a number?
Because they then only thought of being satis-
fied, not of seeing the miracle. " But," saith
some one, " their experience then taught them."
Then by reason of that experience these words
ought to have been readily received. For to
this end He wrought beforehand that strange
miracle, that taught by it they might no longer
disbelieve what should be said by Him after-
wards.

[3.] Those men then at that time reaped no
fruit from what was said, but we have enjoyed the
benefit in the very realities. Wherefore it is
necessary to understand the marvel of the Mys-
teries, what it is, why it was given, and what is
the profit of the action. We become one Body,
and " members of His flesh and of His bones."
(Eph. V. 30.) Let the initiated' follow what
I say. In order then that we may become
this not by love only, but in very deed, let us
be blended * into that flesh. This is effected by


^ al. '* ' The bread which 1 will give.' But the multitudes not
so, but contr.nriwisc, ' This is a hard saying,' wherefore they go
■back. Vet it was no strange or unusual doctrine, for John," &c.

- or, " risen." * i.e. communicants. * avaKipatrObifiey,


the food which He hath freely given us, desiring
to show the love which He hath for us. On this
account He hath mixed up Himself with us ;
He hath kneaded up ' His body with ours, that
we might be a certain One Thing,' like a body
joined to a head. For this belongs to' them
who love strongly ; this, for instance. Job im-
plied, speaking of his servants, by whom he
was beloved so exceedingly, that they desired to
cleave unto his flesh. For they said, to show the
strong love which they felt, " Who would give us
to be satisfied with his flesh? " (Job xxxi. 31.)
Wherefore this also Christ hath done, to lead us
to a closer friendship, and to show His love for
us ; He hath given to those who desire Him not
only to see Him, but even to touch, and eat
Him, and fix their teeth in His flesh, and to em-
brace Him, and satisfy all their love. Let us
then return from that table like lions breathing
fire, having become terrible to the devil ; think-
ing on our Head, and on the love which He
hath shown for us. Parents often entrust their
offspring to others to feed ; " but I," saith He,
" do not so, I feed you with Mine own flesh,
desiring that you all be nobly born,* and holding
forth to you good hopes for the future. For He
who giveth out Himself to you here, much more
will do so hereafter. I have willed to become '
your Brother, for your sake I shared in flesh and
blood, and in turn I give out to you the flesh
and the blood by which I became your kins-
man." This blood causeth the image of our
King to be fresh ' within us, produceth beauty
unspeakable, permitteth not the nobleness of our
souls to waste away, watering it continually, and
nourishing it. The blood derived from our food
becomes not at once blood, but something else ;
while this doth not so, but straightway watereth
our souls, and worketh in them some mighty
power. This'" blood, if rightly taken, driveth
away devils, and keepeth them afar off from us,
while it calleth to us Angels and the Lord of
Angels. For wherever they see the Lord's
blood, devils flee, and Angels run together.
This blood poured forth washed clean all the
world ; many wise sayings did the blessed Paul
utter concerning it in the Epistle to the Hebrews.
This blood cleansed the secret place, and the
Holy of HoUes. And if the type of it had such
great power in the temple of the Hebrews, and
in the midst of Egypt, when smeared on the
door-posts, much more the reality. This blood
sanctified the golden altar ; without it the high
priest dared not enter into the secret place.
This blood consecrated " priests, this in types
cleansed " sins. But if it had such power in thei


^ avei^vpe.

■ <y IT.

' al. " is proof of."

' i.e. by the New Birth.


• av9T}pa.v,
1*^ al. " this mystical blood.'

" al. ** washed away."


Homily XLVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


167


types, if death so shuddered at the shadow, tell
me how would it not have dreaded the very
reality ? This blood is the salvation of our souls,
by this the soul is washed,' by this is beautiful,
by this is inflamed, this causeth our understand-
ing to be more bright than fire, and our soul
more beaming than gold ; this blood was poured
forth, and made heaven accessible.

[4.] .^wful in truth are the Mysteries of the
Church, awful in truth is the Altar. A fountain
went up out of Paradise sending forth ^ material
rivers, from this table springeth up a fountain
which sendeth forth rivers spiritual. By the side
of this fountain are planted not fruitless willows,
but trees reaching even to heaven, bearing fmit
ever timely and undecaying. If any be scorched
with heat, let him come to the side of this foun-
tain and cool his burning. For it quencheth
drought, and comforteth^ all things that are
burnt up, not by the sun, but by the fiery darts.
For it hath its beginning from above, and its
source is there, whence also its water floweth.
Many are the streams of that fountain which the
Comforter sendeth forth, and the Son is the
Mediator, not holding mattock to clear the way,
but opening our minds. This fountain is a
fountain of light, spouting forth rays of truth.
By it stand the Powers on high looking upon
the beauty of its streams, because they more
clearly perceive the power of the Things set
forth, and the flashings unapproachable. For as
when gold is being molten if one should (were it
possible) dip in it his hand or his tongue, he
would immediately render them golden ; thus,
but in much greater degree, doth what here is
set forth work upon the soul. Fiercer than fire
the river boileth up, yet bumeth not, but only
japtizeth that on which it layeth hold. This
jlood was ever typified of old in the altars and
iacrifices ■• of righteous men. This is the price of
:he world, by This Christ purchased to Himself
he Church, by This He hath adorned Her all.
For as a man buying servants giveth gold for
hem, and again when he desireth to deck them
)ut doth this also with gold ; so Christ hath pur-


' al. *' is delighted."
* al. " pouring forth."


* al. " cooleth."

* or, ** slayings."


chased us with His blood, and adorned us with
His blood. They who share this blood stand
with Angels and Archangels and the Powers that
are above, clothed in Christ's own kingly robe,
and having the armor of the Spirit. Nay, I have
not as yet said any great thing : they are clothed
with the King Himself.

Now as this is a great and wonderful thing, so
if thou approach it with pureness, thou approach-
es! for salvation ; but if with an evil conscience,
for punishment and vengeance. " For," It saith,
" he that eateth and drinketh unworthily " of the
Lord, " eateth and drinketh judgment to him-
self" (i Cor. xi. 29) ; since if they who defile
the kingly purple are punished equally with those
who rend it, it is not" unreasonable that they
who receive the Body with unclean thoughts
should suffer the same punishment as those who
rent it with the nails. Observe at least how fear-
ful a punishment Paul declareth, when he saith,
" He that despised Moses' law dieth without
mercy under two or three witnesses ; of how
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot
the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of
the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing?" (Heb. i. 28.) Take we then
heed to ourselves, beloved, we who enjoy such
blessings ; and if we desire to utter any shame-
ful word, or perceive ourselves hurried away by
wrath or any like passion, let us consider of what
things we have been deemed worthy, of how great
a Spirit we have partaken, and this consideration
shall be a sobering of our unreasonable passions.
For how long shall we be nailed to present
things ? How long shall it be before we rouse
ourselves ? How long shall we neglect our own
salvation ? Let us bear in mind of what things
Christ has deemed us worthy, let us give thanks,
let us glorify Him, not by our faith alone, but
also by our very works, that we may obtain the
good things that are to come, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever and world
without end. Amen.


^ al. " what is there.'


i6B


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVll.


HOMILY XLVII.

John vi. 53, 54.


" Jesus therefore said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink His blood, ye have not eternal ' life in your-
selves. Whoso eateth My flesh, and drinketh My
blood, hath life' in himself."

[i.] When we converse of spiritual things, let
there be nothing secular in our souls, nothing
earthy, let all such thoughts retire, and be ban-
ished, and let us ' be entirely given up to the hear-
ing the divine oracles only. For if at the arrival
of a king * all confusion is driven away, much more
when the Spirit speaketh with us do we need "
great stillness, great awe. And worthy of awe
is that which is said to-day. How it is so, hear.
" Verily I say unto you, Except a man eat My
flesh, and drink My blood, he hath not eternal
life in him." Since the Jews had before asserted
that this was impossible. He showeth not only
that it is not impossible, but that it is absolutely
necessary. Wherefore He addeth, " He that
eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood, hath
eternal life."

" And I will raise him up at the last day." For
since He had said, " He that eateth of this bread
shall not die for ever " (ver. 50, not verbally
quoted), and it was likely that this would stand
in their way, (just as they before said, " Abraham
is dead, and the prophets are dead ; and how
sayest Thou, that he shall not taste of death?"
— c. viii. 52, not verbally quoted.) He bringeth
forward the Resurrection to solve the question,
and to show that (the man who eateth) shall not
die at the last.* He continually handleth the sub-
ject of the Mysteries, showing the necessity of
the action, and that it must by all means be done.

Ver. 55. "For My flesh is true' meat, and
My blood is true drink."

What is that He saith?' He either desireth
to declare that this is the true meat which saveth
the soul, or to assure them concerning what had
been said, that they might not suppose the words
to be a mere enigma or parable, but might know
that it is by all means needful to eat the Body.
Then He saith,

Ver. 56. " He that eateth My flesh, dwelleth
in Me."

This He said, showing that such an one is


* " no life," N. T. ' " eternal life," N. T.

* al. *' but having renounced all these things, and having ban-
ished all these things from our minds, let us," &c.

* Ben. adds, " in a city."

* al. " we must needs near with." • €« reAo?.
' " truly," N. T.

* aL " but What is the, ' is true meat ' ? " &c.


blended with ' Him. Now what follows seems
unconnected, unless we enquire into the sense ;
for, saith some one, after saying, " He that
eateth My flesh, dwelleth in Me," what kind of
a consequence is it to add,

Ver. 57. "As the living Father hath sent Me,
and I hve by the Father "?

Yet the words harmonize perfectly. For

since He continually spake of " eternal life," to

prove this point He introduceth the expression,

" dwelleth in Me " ; for " if he dwelleth in Me,

and I live, it is plain that he will live also."

Then He saith, " As the living Father hath sent

Me." This is an expression of comparison and

resemblance, and its meaning is of this kind, " I

live in like manner as the Father liveth." And

that thou mayest not deem Him unbegotten, He

immediately subjoineth, "by the Father," not by

this to show that He needeth, in order to live,

any power working in Him,'" for He said before,

to remove such a suspicion, " As the Fathei

hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the

Son also to have life in Himself" ; now if He

needeth the working of another, it will be found

that either the Father hath not given Him so tc

have it, and so the assertion is false, or if H«

hath so given it, then He will need no other one

to support Him. What then means the, " By the

Father " ? He here merely hinteth at the cause

and what He saith is of this kind ; " As th<

Father hveth, so I live, and he that eateth M(

shall live by Me." And the " life " of which Hi

speaketh is not life merely, but the excellent'

life ; for that He spake not simply of life, but 0

that glorious and ineffable life, is clear from this

For all men " live," even unbelievers, and unin

itiated, who eat not of that flesh. Seest tho

that the words relate not to this life, but to thj

other? And what He saith is of this kind

"He that eateth My flesh, when he dieth sha

not perish nor suffer punishment " ; He spali

not of the genefral resurrection, (for all alil<

rise again,) but concerning the special, i\

glorious Resurrection, that which hath a rewan

Ver. 58. "This is that bread which came do«

from heaven ; not as your fathers did eat mann

and are dead ; he that eateth of this bread sh:

live for ever."

Continually doth He handle the same poii
so as to imprint it on the understanding of t
hearers, (for the teaching on these points was


* OLi^ajcipfdrcUi


W ci^pyciaf.


** ffviOKi^OI'.


Homily XLVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


169


kind of final teaching,) and to confirm the doc-
trine of the Resurrection and of eternal life.
Wherefore He mentioneth the Resurrection
since He promiseth eternal life, showing that
that life is not now, but after the Resurrection.'
" And whence," saith some one, " are these
things clear? " From the Scriptures; to them
He everywhere referreth the Jews, bidding
them learn these things from them. And by
saying, " Which giveth life to the world," He
inciteth them to jealousy, that from very vexa-
tion that others should enjoy the gift, they may
not stay without. And continually He remind-
eth them of the manna, showing the difference,
(between it and His bread,) and guiding them
to the faith ; for if He was able ^ to support
their life for forty years without harvest, or corn,
or other things in course ; ^ much more now will
He be able to do so, as having come for greater
ends. Moreover, if those things were but types,
and yet men collected what came down without
sweat or labor; much more shall this be the
case, where the difference is great both in the
lever dying, and in the enjoying the true life.
\nd rightly hath He spoken often of " life,"
lince this is desired by men, and nothing is so
jleasing to them as not to die. Since even
mder the old Covenant, this was the promise,
ength of life and many days, but now it is not
ength merely, but life having no end. He de-
ireth at the same time to show, that He now
evoketh the punishment caused by sin, annul-
ing that sentence which condemneth to death,
nd bringing in not life merely, but life eternal,
ontrariwise to the former things.''

Ver. 59. "These things said He in the syna-
ogue, as He taught in Capernaum."

[2.] The place where most of His marvels

ad been done, so that He ought there espe-

lally to have been hstened to. But wherefore

lught He in the synagogue and in the Temple ?

s well because He desired to catch the greatest

imber of them, as because He desired to show

lat He was not opposed to the Father.

Ver. 60. " But many of the disciples, when

ey had heard this, said, This is a hard saying."

What means " hard " ? Rough, laborious,

oublesome. Yet He said nothing of this kind,

r He spake not of a mode of life,'' but of doc-

ines, continually handling the faith which is in

im. What then means, " is a hard saying " ?

it because it promiseth life and resurrection ?

it because He said that He came down from

aven? Or that it was impossible for one to

saved who ate not His flesh? Tell me, are

ese things " hard " ? Who can assert that they


\ Ben. " both because He had said eternal life, and also show-

' al. ** it was possible.'*
* AjtoAoudt'a?. * or, " those before."

' roA(Tcia$.


are ? What then means " hard " ? It means,
" difficult to be received," " transcending their
infirmity," " having much terror." For they
thought that He uttered words too high for His
real character, and such as were above Himself.
Therefore they said,

"Who can hear it?"

Perhaps making excuse for themselves, since
they were about to start away.

Ver. 61, 62. "When Jesus knew in Himself
that His disciples murmured at it," (for this is
an attribute of His Godhead to bring secret
things to light,) " He said unto them, Doth this
offend you ? What and if ye shall see " the Son
of Man ascend up where He was before? "

This also He doth in the case of Nathanael,
saying, " Because I said unto thee, I saw thee
under the fig-tree, believest thou ? Thou shalt
see greater things than these." (c. i. 50.) And
to Nicodemus, " No man hath ascended up to
heaven but the Son of man which is in heaven."
(c. iii. 13.) What then, doth He add difficulties
to difficulties? No, (that be far from Him,) but
by the greatness of the doctrines, and the number
of them, He desireth to bring them over. For
if one had said simply, " I have come down from
heaven," and added nothing more, he would
have been the more likely to offend them ; but
He who said, " My body is the life of the
world " ; He who said, " As the living Father
hath sent Me, so I live by the Father " ; and
who said, " I have come down from heaven,"
solves the difficulty. For the man who utters
any one great thing concerning himself may
perhaps be suspected of feigning, but he who
connects together so many one after another
removes all suspicion. All that He doth and
saith is intended to lead them away from the
thought, that Joseph was His father. And it
was not with a wish to strengthen, but rather to
do away that stumbling-block, that He said this.
For whosoever deemed that He was Joseph's
son could not receive His sayings, while one
that was persuaded that He had come down
from heaven, and would ascend thither, might
more easily give heed to His words : at the
same time He bringeth forward also another
explanation, saying,

Ver. 63. " It is the Spirit that quickeneth,
the flesh profiteth nothing."

His meaning is, " Ye must hear spiritually
what relateth to Me, for he who heareth carnally
is not profited, nor gathereth any advantage."
It was carnal to question how He came down
from heaven, to deem that He was the son of
Joseph, to ask, " How can he give us His flesh
to eat? " All this was carnal, when they ought
to have understood the matter in a mystical and


8 lfil)TC dcwp^TC, G. T.


170


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVI


spiritual sense. " But," saith some one, " how
could they understand what the ' eating flesh '
might mean ? " Then it was their duty to wait
for the proper time and enquire, and not to
abandon Him.

" The words that I speak unto, you, they are
spirit and they are life."

That is, they are divine and spiritual, have
nothing carnal about them, are not subject to
the laws of physical consequence, but are free
from any such necessity, are even set above the
laws appointed for this world, and have also
another and a different meaning. Now as in
this passage He said " spirit," instead of " spir-
itual," so when He speaketh of "flesh," He
meant not " carnal things," but " carnally hear-
ing," and alluding at the same time to them,
because they ever desired carnal things when
they ought to have desired spiritual. For if a
man receives them carnally, he profits nothing.
"What then, is not His flesh, flesh?" Most
certainly. " How then saith He, that the flesh
profiteth nothing?" He speaketh not of His
own flesh, (God forbid !) but of those who
received His words in a carnal manner. But
what is " understanding carnally " ? It is look-
ing merely to what is before our eyes, without
imagining anything beyond. This is understand-
ing carnally. But we must not judge thus by
sight, but must look into all mysteries with the
eyes within. This is seeing spiritually. He that
eateth not His flesh, and drinketh not His
blood, hath no life in him. How then doth
" the flesh profit nothing," if without it we can-
not live ? Seest thou that the words, " the flesh
profiteth nothing," are spoken not of His own
flesh, but of carnal hearing?

Ver. 64. " But there are some of you that
believe not."

Again, according to His custom, He addeth
weight to His words, by foretelling what would
come to pass, and by showing that He spake
thus not from desire of honor from them, but
because He cared for them. And when He said
" some," He excepted the disciples. For at first
He said, " Ye have both seen Me, and believe
not" (ver. 36) ; but here, "There are some of
you that believe not."

For He " knew from the beginning who they
were that believed not, and who should betray
Him."

Ver. 65. " And He said, Therefore said I unto
you, that no man can come unto Me except it
were given unto Him from above from My
Father."

[3.] Here the Evangelist intimates to us the
voluntary character of the Dispensation, and
His endurance of evil. Nor is the, " from the
beginning," put here without a cause, but that
thou mayest be aware of His foreknowledge


from the first, and that before the words wei
uttered, and not after the men had murmure
nor after they had been offended. He knew tl
traitor, but before, which was an attribute (
Godhead. Then He added, " Except it be give
him from above from My Father " ; thus pe
suading them to deem God His Father, m
Joseph, and showing them that it is no commc
thing to believe in Him. As though He ha
said, " Unbelievers disturb Me not, trouble V.
not, astonish Me not. I know of old befo:
they were created, I know to whom the Fath(
hath given to believe ; " and do thou, whe
thou hearest that " He hath given," imagine ni
merely an arbitrary distribution,' but that if ar
hath rendered himself worthy to receive the gil
he hath received it.

Ver. 66. " From that time many of His di
ciples went back, and walked no more wii
Him."

Rightly hath the Evangelist said, not th
they " departed," but that they " went back '
showing that they cut themselves off from ai
increase in virtue, and that by separating ther
selves they lost the faith which they had of 61
But this was not the case with the twelv(
wherefore He saith to them,

Ver. 67. " Will ye also go away ? "

Again showing that He needeth not the
ministry and service, and proving to them th
it was not for this that He led them about wii
Him. For how could He when He used sue
expressions even to them? But why did F
not praise them? why did He not approi
them ? Both because He preserved the digni
befitting a teacher, and also to show them th
they ought rather to be attracted by this mo(
of dealing. For had He praised them, thi
might, supposing that they were doing Him
favor, have had some human feeling ; but
showing them that He needed not their atten
ance. He kept them to Him the more. A]
observe with what prudence He spake,
said not, " Depart ye," (this would have be
to thrust them from Him,) but asked thera
question, " Will ye also go away?" the expr
sion of one who would remove all force or co
pulsion, and who wished not that they she
be attached to Him through any sense of shai
but with a sense of favor. By not openly ace
ing, but gently glancing at them. He show
what is the truly wise course under such circi
stances. But we feel differently ; with gi
reason, since we do everything holding fast
own honor, and therefore think that our es'
is lowered by the departure of those who att
on us. But He neither flattered nor repu!
them, but asked them a question. Now this


1 anoK\riputriv»


lOMILY XLVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


171


ot the act of one despising them, but of one
wishing them not to be restrained by force and
ompulsion : for to remain on such terms is the
ame as to depart. What then saith Peter?
Ver. 68, 69. "To whom shall we go? Thou
ast the words of eternal life. And we believe
nd are sure that Thou art the Christ, the Son
if the living God."

Seest thou that it was not the words that
aused offense, but the heedlessness, and sloth,
nd wrong-raindedness of the hearers? For
ven had He not spoken, they would have been
'ffended, and would not have ceased to be ever
nxious about bodily food, ever nailed to earth,
iesides, the disciples heard at the same time
'ith the others, yet they declared an opinion
ontrary to theirs, saying, " To whom shall we
o?" An expression indicating much affection,
)r it shows that their Teacher ' was more pre-
ious to them than anything, than father or
lother, or any possessions,' and that if they
ithdrew from Him, they had not then whither
) flee. Then lest it should seem that he had
lid, " to whom shall we go ? " because there
ere none that would receive them, he straight-
ay added, " Thou hast the words of eternal
fe." For the Jews listened carnally, and with
uman reasonings, but the disciples spiritually,
id committing all to faith. Wherefore Christ
lid, " The words which I have spoken unto you
re spirit " ; that is, " do not suppose that the
laching of My words is subject to the rule of
laterial consequences, or to the necessity of
•eated things. Things spiritual are not of this
iture, nor endure to submit to the laws of
irth." This also Paul declareth, saying, " Say
)t in thine heart. Who shall ascend into heaven ?
hat is, to bring Christ down ;) or, Who shall
;scend into the deep? (that is, to bring up
hrist again from the dead.") (Rom. x. 6, 7.)
"Thou hast the words of eternal life." These
en already admitted the Resurrection, and all
e apportionment ' which shall be there. And
)serve the brotherly and affectionate man, how
; maketh answer for all the band. For he said
»t, " I know," but, " We know." Or rather,
«erve how he goes to the very words of his
;acher, not speaking as did the Jews. They
id, " This is the son of Joseph " ; but he said,
rhou art the Christ, the Son of the living God " ;
d, "Thou hast the words of eternal life";
.ving perhaps heard Him say,* " He that be-
veth on Me '' hath eternal life, and I will raise
up at the last day." For he showed that
retained all that had been said, by recalling
very words. What then did Christ? He
lither praised nor expressed admiration of


al. " Chrisl."

or, '* anything that is.*

or, " rest," ATjf ci*.


* al. "often say.*'

» "Him CtheSon),"N. T.


Peter, though He had elsewhere done so ; but
what saith He?

Ver. 70. " Have not I chosen you twelve, and
one of you is a devil ? "

For since Peter said, "We believe," Jesus
excepteth Judas from the band. In the other
place Peter made no mention of the disciples ;
but when Christ said, " Whom say ye that I
am ? " he replied, " Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God" (Matt. xvi. 15) ; but here,
since he said, " We believe," Christ with reason
admitteth not Judas into that band. And this
He did afar off, and long before the time, to
check the wickedness of the traitor, knowing
that He should avail nothing, yet doing His
own part.

[4.] And remark His wisdom. He made
not the traitor manifest, yet allowed him not to
be hidden ; that on the one hand he, might not
lose all shame, and become more contentious ;
and on the other, that he might not, thinking to
be unperceived, work his wicked deed without
fear. Therefore by degrees He bringeth plainer
reproofs against him. First, He numbered him
too among the others, when He said, "There
are some of you that believe not," (for that He
counted the traitor the Evangelist hath declared,
saying, " For He knew from the beginning who
they were that believed not, and who should
betray Him ; ") but when he yet remained such.
He brought against him a more severe rebuke,
" One of you is a devil," yet made the fear
common to them all, wishing to conceal him.
And here it is worth while to enquire, why the
disciples at this time said nothing, but afterwards
were afraid and doubted, looking one upon
another, and asking, "Lord, is it I?" (Matt.
xxvi. 22), when Peter beckoned to John to
find out the traitor, by enquiring of their Teacher
which was he. What is * the reason ? Peter had
not yet heard, "Get thee behind me, Satan,"
wherefore he had no fear at all ; but when he
had been rebuked, and though he spoke through
strong affection,^ instead of being approved of,
had even been called " Satan," he afterwards
with reason feared when he heard, " One of you
shall betray Me." Besides, He saith not even
now, " One of you shall betray Me," but, " One
of you is a devil " ; wherefore they understood
not what was spoken, but thought that He was
only reflecting upon their wickedness.

But wherefore said He, " I have chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil"? It was to
show that His teaching was entirely free from
flattery. For that they might not think that He
would flatter them, because when all had left
Him they alone remained, and confessed by
Peter that He was the Christ, He leadeth them


• al. " Is not this.*


' itaBfffttitt'


172


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVI]


away from such a suspicion. And what He saith
is of this kind. " Nothing abasheth Me from
rebuking the bad ; think not that because ye
have remained I shall choose to flatter you, or
that because ye have followed Me I shall not
rebuke the wicked. For neither doth another
circumstance abash Me, which is much more
powerful than this to abash a teacher. For he
that remaineth affordeth a proof of his affection,
while one that hath been chosen by a teacher,
being rejected, attacheth to him a character for
folly among senseless persons. Still neither doth
this cause Me to refrain from My reproofs."
This at least even now the heathen frigidly and
senselessly urge against Christ. For God is not
wont to make men good by compulsion and
force, neither is His election and choice com-
pulsory on those who are called,' but persuasive.^
And that thou mayest learn that the calling com-
pelleth not, consider how many of these who
have been called have come to perdition, so
that it is clear that it lieth in our own will ^ also
to be saved, or to perish.

[5.] Hearing therefore these things, learn we
always to be sober and to watch. P"or if when
he who was reckoned among that holy band,
who had enjoyed so great a gift, who had
wrought miracles, (for he too was with the
others who were sent to raise the dead and
to heal lepers,) if when he was seized by the
dreadful disease of covetousness, and betrayed
his Master, neither the favors, nor the gifts, nor
the being with Christ, nor the attendance on
Him, nor the washing the feet, nor the sharing
His table, nor the bearing the bag, availed him,
if these things rather served to help on'' his
punishment, let us also fear lest we ever through
covetousness imitate Judas. Thou betrayest not
Christ. But when thou neglectest the poor man
wasting with hunger, or perishing with cold, that
man draws upon thee the same condemnation."
When we partake of the Mysteries unworthily,
we perish equally with the Christ-slayers. When
we plunder, when we oppress* those weaker
than ourselves, we shall draw down upon us
severest punishment. And with reason ; for
how long shall the love of things present so
occupy us, superfluous as they are and unprofit-
able ? since wealth consists in superfluities, in
which no advantage is. How long shall we be
nailed to vanities ? How long shall we not look
through and away into heaven, not be sober, not
be satiated with these fleeting things of earth,
not learn by experience their worthlessness ?


* al. " for what is to come."
' ,rpoTpe,rTlKf).


* ititohiOi yiyovt.

* al. " vengeance.'

* lit. " throttle."


Let us think of those who before us have beei
wealthy ; are not all those things a dream ? ar
they not a shadow, a flower? are they not i
stream which floweth by? a story and a tale
Such a man has been rich, and where now is hi
wealth ? It has gone, has perished, but the sin
done by reason of it stay by him, and the pun
ishment which is because of the sins. Yea
surely if there were no punishment, if no king
dom were set before us, it were a duty to shov
regard for those of like descent and family, t(
respect those who have like feelings with our
selves. But now we feed dogs, and many of u
wild asses, and bears, and different beasts, whil(
we care not for a man perishing with hunger
and a thing alien to us is more valued than tha
which is of our kin, and our own family les:
honored than creatures which are not so, no
related to us.

Is it a fine thing to build one's self splendic
houses, to have many servants, to lie and gaze a
a gilded roof? Why then, assuredly, it is super
fluous and unprofitable. For other building
there are, far brighter and more majestic thai
these ; on such we must gladden our eyes, fo:
there is none to hinder us. Wilt thou see th<
fairest of roofs? At eventide look upon th<
starred heaven. " But," saith some one, " this roo
is not mine." Yet in truth this is more thin(
than that other. For thee it was made, and ii
common to thee and to thy brethren ; the otliei
is not thine, but theirs who after thy death in-
herit it. The one may do thee the greatest ser
vice, guiding thee by its beauty to its Creator
the other the greatest harm, becoming thy great
est accuser at the Day of Judgment, inasmucl
as it is covered with gold, while Christ hath no
even needful raiment. Let us not, I entreat you
be subject to such folly, let us not pursue thing
which flee away, and flee those which endure
let us not betray our own salvation, but hold fas
to our hope of what shall be hereafter ;
aged, as certainly knowing that but a little spac
of life is left us ; the young, as well persuade
that what is left is not much. For that
cometh so as a thief in the night. Knowi
this, let wives exhort their husbands, and hu
bands admonish their wives ; let us teach yout'
and maidens, and all instruct one another,
care not for present things, but to desire tho
which are to come, that we may be able also
obtain them ; through the grace and lovir
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whc
and with whom, to the Father and the H(
Ghost be glory, now and ever and world withe
end. Amen.


flOMILY XLVIIL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


173


HOMILY XLVIII.


John vii. i, 2.


'After these things Jesus walked in Galilee; for He
would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought
to kill Him. Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles
was at hand."

[i.] Nothing is worse than envy and malice ;
hrough these death entered into the world.
?0T when the devil saw man honored, he en-
lured not his prosperity, but used every means
o destroy him. (Wisd. ii. 24.) And from the
ame root one may everywhere see this same
ruit produced. Thus Abel was slain ; thus
David, with many other just men, was like to have
)een so ; from this also the Jews became Christ-
layers. And declaring this the Evangelist said,
■ After these things Jesus walked in Galilee ; for
■le had not power ' to walk in Jewry, because the
ews sought to kill Him." What sayest thou, O
lessed John ? Had not He " power," who was
ble to do all that He would? He that said,
Whom seek ye?" (c. xviii. 6) and cast them
ackward ? He who was present, yet not seen
xxi. 4), had not He "power"? How then
fterwards did He come among them in the midst
f the temple, in the midst of the feast, when there
as an assembly, when they that longed for mur-
er were present, and utter those sayings which
nraged them yet the more ? Yea, this at least
len marveled at, saying, " Is not this He, whom
ley seek to kill ? And, lo, He speaketh boldly,
id they say nothing unto Him." (Ver. 25, 26.)
^hat mean these riddles? Away with the
ord ! ' The Evangelist spake not so that he
ight be supposed to utter riddles, but to make
plain that He showeth proofs both of His
odhead and His Manhood. For when he
.ith, that " He had not power," he speaketh of
im as a man, doing many things after the
anner of men ; but when he saith, that He
3od in the midst of them, and they seized
im not, he showeth to us the power of the
odhead, (as man He fled, as God He ap-
lared,) and in both cases he speaks truly. To
; in the midst of those who were plotting
ainst Him, and yet not be seized by them,
owed His unrivaled and irresistible nature ;
yield strengthened and authenticated the Dis-
nsation, that neither Paul of Samosata,^ nor
rcion,'' nor those affected with their maladies,


Ight have anything to say.
pppeth all" their mouths.


By this then he


' aC yap e'x*" i(ov<riav.

' al. "they are not riddles, God forbid! but this maybe said,

' kc. ' p. 30.

' p. 30. » »1. " both."


"After these things was the Jews' feast of
tabernacles." The words, " after these things,"
mean only, that the writer has here been con-
cise, and has passed over a long interval of time,
as is clear from this circumstance. When Christ
sat' on the mountain, he saith, that it was the
feast of the Passover;' while here the writer
mentions the " feast of tabernacles," and during
the five months hath neither related or taught us
anything else, except the miracle of the loaves,
and the sermon made to those who ate them.
Yet He ceased not to work miracles, and to
converse, both in the day, and in the evening,
and oftentimes at night ; at least, it was thus
that He presided over His disciples, as all the
Evangelists tell us. Why then have they omitted
that interval? Because it was impossible to
recount everything fully, and moreover, because
they were anxious to mention those points which
were followed' by any fault-finding or gainsaying
of the Jews. There were many circumstances
like those which here are omitted ; for that He
raised the dead, healed the sick, and was ad-
mired, they have frequently recorded;" but
when they have anything uncommon to tell,
when they have to describe any charge seem-
ingly put forth against Him, these things they
set down ; such as this now, that " His brethren
believed Him not." For a circumstance like
this brings with it no slight suspicion, and it is
worth our while to admire their truth-loving dis-
position, how they are not ashamed to relate
things which seem to bring disgrace upon their
Teacher, but have been even more anxious to
report these than other matters. For instance,
the writer having passed by many signs and
wonders and sermons, has sprung at once to
this.

Ver. 3-5. For, saith he, " His brethren said
unto Him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea,
that Thy disciples also may see the works that
Thou doest ; for there is no man that doeth any-
thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be
known openly. Show thyself to the world. For
neither did His brethren believe in Him."

[2.] What unbelief, saith some one, is here?
They exhort '" Him to work miracles. It is great
deed ; for of unbelief come their words, and
their insolence, and their unseasonable freedom


* al. *' when he showed Him sitting."
' " The Passover was nigh," c. vi. 4.
' at. *' to be followed."

• al. " we have often heard."

*•* al. " what a word of unbelief, spak* they, exhorting."


174


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVIII.


of s|>eech. For they thought, that owing to
their relationship, it was lawful ' for them to ad-
dress Him boldly. And their request seems
forsooth to be that of friends, but the words
were those of great maliciousness.' For in this
place they reproach Him with cowardice and
vainglory : since to say, " no man doeth anything
in secret," is the expression of persons charging
Him with cowardice, and suspecting the things
done by Him as being not really done ; and to
add, that " he seeketh to be known," was to ac-
cuse Him of vainglory. But observe, I pray you,
the power of Christ. Of those who said these
things, one became first Bishop of Jerusalem,
the blessed James, of whom Paul saith, " Other
of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the
Lord's brother " (Gal. i. 19) ; and Judas also is
said to have been a marvelous man. And yet
these persons had been present also at Cana,
when the wine was made, but as yet they profited
nothing. Whence then had they so great unbe-
lief? From their evil mind,' and from envy ; for
superiority among kindred is wont somehow to
be envied by such as are not alike exalted. But
who are those that they call disciples here ? The
crowd that followed Him, not the twelve. What
then saith Christ? Observe how mildly He an-
swered ; He said not, " Who are ye that counsel
and instruct Me thus ? " but,

Ver. 6. " My time is not yet come."

He here seemeth to me to hint at something
other than He expresseth ; perhaps in their envy
they designed to deliver Him up to the Jews ;
and pointing out this to them. He saith, " My
time is not yet come," that is, " the time of the
Cross and the Death, why then hasten ye to slay
Me before the time ? "

" But your time is always ready."

As though He had said, " Though ye be ever
with the Jews, they will not slay you who desire
the same things with them ; but Me they will
straightway wish to kill. So that it is ever your
time to be with them without danger, but My
time is when the season of the Cross is at hand,
when I must die." For that this was His mean-
ing, He showed by what followed.

Ver. 7. " The world cannot hate you ; " (how
should it hate those who desire, and who run for
the same objects as itself?) " but Me it hateth,
because I testify of it, that the works thereof are
evil."

"That is, because I upbraid and rebuke it,
therefore I am hated." From this let us learn
to master our anger, and not to give way to un-
worthy passion, though they be mean men who
give us counsel. For if Christ meekly bore with
unbelievers counseling Him, when their counsel
was improper and not from any good intention.


* al. "was fitting."
' al. " bitterness."


* al. " deliberate choice."


what pardon shall we obtain, who being but dust
and ashes, yet are annoyed with those who coun-
sel us, and deem that we are unworthily treated,
although the persons who do this may be but a
little humbler than ourselves ? Observe in this
instance how He repelleth their accusation with
all gentleness ; for when they say, '' Show Thy-
self to the world," He replieth, " The world
cannot hate you, but Me the world hateth " ;
thus removing their accusation. " So far," He
saith, " am I from seeking honor from men, that
I cease not to reprove them, and this when I
know that by this course hatred is produced
against and death prepared for Me." " And
where," asketh some one, " did He rebuke
men?" When did He ever cease to do so?
Did He not say, " Think not that I will accuse
you to the Father? There is one that accuseth
you, even Moses." (c. v. 45.) And again ; " I
know you, that ye have not the love of God in
you " : and, " How can ye believe, who receive
honor from men,* and seek not the honor that
cometh from God only ? " Seest thou how He
hath everywhere shown, that it was the open
rebuke, not the violation of the Sabbath, which
caused the hatred against Him?

And wherefore doth He send them to the
feast, saying,

Ver. 8. " Go ye up to the feast : I go not up
yet"?

To show that He said these things not as
needing them, or desiring to be flattered" by
them, but permitting them to do what pertained
to Jews. " How then," saith some one, " went
He up after saying, ' I go not up ' ? " He said
not, once for all," " I go not up," but, " now,"
that is, " not with you."

" For My time is not yet fulfilled."

And yet He was about to be crucified at the
coming Passover. " How then went He not up
also? for if He went not up because the time
was not yet come. He ought not to have gon<
up at all." But He went not up for this purpose
that He might suffer, but that He might instruc
them. " But wherefore secretly ? since He migh
by going openly both have been amidst them
and have restrained their unruly impulses as H
often did." It was because He would not d
this continually. Since had He gone up openh
and again blinded them,' He would have mad
His Godhead to shine through in a greater d«
gree, which at present behooved not, but H
rather concealed it.' And since they thougl
that His remaining was from cowardice, H
showeth them the contrary, and that it was froi


• " one of another," N. T.

^ al. '* desiring their company and honor."

* Kii9aTra(, ^ ai/Tovi in^puivt.

" al. *' He would have displayed greater signs of the GodheJ
and revealed It in greater degree."


Homily XLVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


175


confidence, and a dispensation,' and that knowing
beforehand the time when He should suffer, He
would, when it should at length be at hand, be
most desirous of going up to Jerusalem. And
methinks by saying, "Go ye up," He meant,
Think not that I compel you to stay with Me
against your will," and this addition of, " My
time is not yet fully come," is the expression of
one declaring that miracles must be wrought
and sermons spoken, so that greater multitudes
might believe, and the disciples be made more
steadfast by seeing the boldness and the sufferings
of their Master.

[3.] Learn we then, from what hath been
said. His kindness and gentleness ; " Learn of
Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart " (Matt.
xi. 29) ; and let us cast away^ all bitterness. If
any exalt himself against us, let us be humble ;
f any be bold, let us wait upon him ; if any bite
and devour us with mocks and jests, let us not
be overcome ; lest in defending ourselves we
destroy ourselves. For wrath is a wild beast, a
wild beast keen and angry. Let us then repeat
to ourselves' soothing charms drawn from the
lioly Scripture, and say, "Thou art earth and
ishes." "Why is earth and ashes proud?"
(Ecclus. X. 9), and, "The sway of his fury
hall be his destruction" (Ecclus. i. 22) : and,
'The wrathful man is not comely" (Prov.
ici. 25, LXX.) ; for there is nothing more shame-
ful, nothing uglier than a visage inflamed with
inger. As when you stir up mud there is an ill
savor, so when a soul is disturbed by passion
here is great indecency and unpleasantness.
' But," saith some one, " I endure not insult
from mine enemies." Wherefore? tell me. If
he charge be true, then thou oughtest, even be-
'ore the affront, to have been pricked at heart,
md thank thine enemy for his rebukes ; if it be
"alse, despise' it. He hath called thee poor,
augh at him ; he hath called thee base-bom and
bolish, then mourn for him ; for " He that saith
o his brother. Thou fool, shall be in danger of
jell fire." (Matt. v. 22.) Whenever therefore
)ne insults thee, consider the punishment that
le undergoeth ; then shalt thou not only not be


> al.


al. " at once a dispansation and a confidence."

al. *' cut up." * al. " to it." * al. " laugh at.'


angry, but shalt even shed tears for him. For
no man is wroth with one in a fever or inflam-
mation, but pities and weeps for all such ; and
such a thing is a soul that is angry. Nay, if
even thou desire to avenge thyself, hold thy
peace, and thou hast dealt thine enemy a mortal
blow ; while if thou addest reviling to revihng,
thou hast kindled a fire. " But," saith some one,
" the bystanders accuse us of weakness if we
hold our peace." No, they will not condemn
your weakness, but admire you for your wisdom.
Moreover, if you are stung by insolence, you
become insolent ; and being stung, compel men
to think that what hath been said of you is true.
Wherefore, tell me, doth a rich man laugh when
he is called poor? Is it not because he is con-
scious that he is not poor ? if therefore " we wiU
laugh at insults, we shall afford the strongest
proof that we are not conscious of the faults
alleged. Besides, how long are we to dread the
accounts we render to men ? how long are we to
despise our common Lord, and be nailed to the
flesh ? " For whereas there is among you strife,
and envying, and divisions, are ye not carnal ? "
(i Cor. iii. 3.) Let us then become spiritual,
and bridle this dreadful wild beast. Anger differs
nothing from madness, it is a temporary devil,
or rather it is a thing worse than having a devil ;
for one that hath a devil may be excused, but
the angry man deserves ten thousand punish-
ments, voluntarily casting himself into the pit
of destruction, and before the hell which is to
come suffering punishment from this already, by
bringing a certain restless turmoil and never
silent ' storm of fury, through all the night and
through all the day, upon the reasonings of his
soul. Let us therefore, that we may deliver
ourselves from the punishment here and the
vengeance hereafter, cast out this passion, and
show forth all meekness and gentleness, that we
may find rest for our souls both here and in the
Kingdom of Heaven. To which may we all
attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom,
to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.


° al. •* so also do ye ; if rather."


• al. " unbearable,"


176


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIX.


HOMILY XLIX.


John vii. 9, 10.


"When He had said these words unto them, He abode
still in Galilee. But when His brethren were gone
up, then went He up also unto the feast, not openly,
but as it were in secret." ^


[1.] The things done^ by Christ after the
manner of men, are not so done only to establish
the Incarnation, but also to educate us for virtue.
For had He done all as God, how could we
have known, on falling in with such things as we
wished not, what we must do ? As, for instance,
when He was in this very place, and the Jews
would have killed Him, He came into the midst
of them, and so appeased the tumult. Now had
He done this continually, how should we, not
being able to do so, and yet falling into the like
case, have known in what way we ought to deal
with the matter, whether to perish at once, or
even to use some contrivance' in order that the
word might go forward? Since, therefore, we
who have no power could not have understood
what to do on coming into the midst of our foes,
on this account we are taught this very thing by
Him. For, saith the Evangelist, Jesus, " when
He had said these words, abode in Galilee ; but
when His brethren were gone up, then went He
up also unto the feast, not openly, but as it were
in secret." The expression, " when His brethren
were gone up," is that of one showing that He
chose not to go up with them. On which ac-
count He abode where He was, and manifested
not Himself, although they in a manner urged *
Him to do so. But why did He, who ever spake
openly, do so now " as it were in secret " ? The
writer saith not " secretly," but, " as it were in
secret." For thus, as I have said, He seemed"
to be instructing us how to manage matters.
And, apart from this," it was not the same to come
among them when heated and restive,' as to do
so afterwards when the feast was ended.

Ver. II. "Then the Jews sought Him,' and
said, Where is He?"

Excellent truly the good deeds at their feasts !
they are eager for murder, and wish to seize Him,
even during the feast.' At least, in another place
they speak thus, "Think ye that He will not
come to the feast?" (John xi. 56) ; and here
they said, "Where is He? " Through their ex-


cessive hatred and enmity they would not even
call Him by name. Great was their reverence
towards the feast, great their caution. By occa-
sion of"* the very feast they wished" to entrap
Himl

Ver. 12. "And there was much murmuring
among the people concerning Him."

I think they were exasperated by the place
where the miracle had been wrought, and were "
greatly infuriated and afraid, not so much from
anger at what had gone before, as from fear lest
He should again work something similar. But
all fell out contrary to what they desired, and
against their will they rendered Him conspic-
uous.

" And some said, He is a good man ; others
said. Nay, but He deceiveth the people."

Methinks the first of these opinions was that of
the many, the other that of the rulers and priests.
For to slander Him suited their malice and
wickedness. "He deceiveth," say they, "the
people." How, tell me ? Was it by seeming to
work, not really working miracles? But experi-
ence witnesses'' the contrary.

Ver. 13. " Howbeit no man spake openly of
Him for fear of the Jews."

Seest thou everywhere the ruling body cor-
rupted, and the ruled sound indeed in judg-
ment, but not having that proper courage"
which a multitude especially lacketh?"

Ver. 14. " Now about the middle of the feast
Jesus went up '' and taught."

By the delay He made them more attentive ;
for they who had sought Him on the first days
and said," "Where is He?" when they saw Him
suddenly present, observe how they drew near,
and were like to press upon Him as He was
speaking, both those who said that He was a
good man, and those who said that He was not
such ; " the former so as to profit by and admire
Him, the latter to lay hold on and detain Him.
One party then said, " He deceiveth the people,"
by reason of the teaching and the doctrines, not
understanding His meaning ; the other on ac-
count of the miracles said, " He is a good man."
He therefore thus came among them when Ha
had slackened '" their anger, so that they might


' al. " but secretly.'*

* lit. " dispensed. '

* lit. " economize somewhat,
al. " were eager,"


" al. '* it behooved."

• al. " besides, because." ^

^ a4>a&a46vTiov, al. aKfia^ovTiav.

' at the feast," N. T.


* ai. " they were always eager for murder, and by means of
diese (feasts) desired to catch Him."


" al. " and at the same time."
13 al. " showed."


w or, " directly after."

*^ al. " were eager."

1* al. " opinion." . . . . 1 •» j »

15 al. " which thine is especially characteristic of the muUitude.

*8 " into the TcmpTe," N. T. . . . ., - 1 j ».

" al. " they who seek Him and say." » al. " was wicked.

1* XCLKacai, al. xauvwcra?.


Homily XLIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


177


hear His words at leisure, when passion no
longer stopped their ears. What He taught, the
Evangelist hath not told us; that He taught
marvelously, this only he saith, and that He
won' and brought them over. Such was the
power of His speech. And they who had said,
" He deceiveth the people," altered their opin-
ion, "and marveled." Wherefore also they
said,

Ver. 15. " How knoweth this man letters,
having never learned?"

Observest thou how the Evangelist showeth here
also their marveling to be full of wickedness? for
he saith not, that they admired the teaching,
or that they received the words, but simply that
they " marveled." That is, were thrown into
a state of astonishment, and doubted, saying,
"Whence hath this man ^ these things"? when
they ought from this very difficulty to have known
that there was nothing merely human in Him.
But because they would not confess' this, but
stopped at wondering only, hear what He saith.

Ver. 16. " My doctrine is not Mine."

Again He answereth to their secret thoughts,
referring them to the Father, and so desiring to
stop their mouths.

Ver. 17. "If any man will do His will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of Myself."

What He saith is this, " Cast out from your-
selves the malice and wrath and envy and hatred
which has without cause been conceived against
Me, then there is nothing to hinder you from
knowing that My words are indeed the words of
God. For at present these things cast a dark-
ness over you, and destroy the light of right
judgment, while if ye remove them this shall
no longer be your case." Yet He spake not
(plainly) thus, (for so He would have con-
founded them exceedingly,) but implied it all by
saying, " He that doeth His will shall know of
the doctrine, whether it is of God, or whether
I speak of Myself" ; that is, "whether I speak
anything different and strange and contrary to
God." For, "of Myself " is always put with
this meaning, that " I say nothing except what
seemeth good to Him, but all that the Father
willeth, I will also."

"If any man do His will, he shall know of the
doctrine."

"What meaneth," "If any man do His will?"
" If any man be a lover of the life which is
according to virtue, he shall know the power of
the sayings." " If any man will give heed to the
prophecies, to see whether I speak according
to them or not."

[2.] But how is the doctrine His and not His?
For He said not, " This doctrine is not Mine " ;


but having first said, " it is Mine," and having
claimed it as His own. He then added, " it is
not Mine." How then can the same thing be
both "His" and not " His"? It is " His," be-
cause He spake it not as one who had been
taught ; and it is " not His," because it was the
doctrine of the Father. How then saith He,
" All that is the Father's is Mine, and Mine
His"? (c. xvii. 10.^) "For if because the doc-
trine is the Father's, it is not thine, that other
assertion is false, for according to that it ought
to be thine." But the " is not Mine," affords a
strong proof that His doctrine and the Father's
are one ; as if He had said, " It hath nothing
different,* as though it were another's. For
though My Person" be different, yet so do I
speak and do as not to be supposed to speak
or do anything contrary to the Father, but rather
the very same things that the Father saith and
doeth." Then He addeth another incontro-
vertible argument, bringing forward something
merely human, and instructing them by things
to which they were accustomed. And what is
that?

Ver. 8. " He that speaketh of himself seeketh
his own glory."

That is, " He that desireth to establish any
doctrine of his own, desireth to do so only that
he himself may enjoy the glory .^ Now if I de-
sire not to enjoy glory, wherefore should I desire
to establish any doctrine of My own ? He that
speaketh of himself, that is, who speaketh any-
thing peculiar or different from others, speaketh
on this account, that he may establish his own
glory ; but if I seek the glory of Him that sent
Me, wherefore should I choose to teach other'
things ? " Seest thou that there was a cause
wherefore He said there too that He " did noth-
ing of Himself"? (c. v. 19, and viii. 28.) What
was it? It was that they might believe that He
desired not the honor of the many. Therefore
when His words are lowly, " I seek," He saith,
"the glory of the Father," everywhere desiring
to persuade them that He Himself loveth not
glory. Now there are many reasons for His
using lowly words, as that Pe might not be
deemed unbegotten, or opposed to God, His
being clothed with flesh, the infirmity of His
hearers, that He might teach men to be modest,
and to speak no great thing of themselves :
while for speaking lofty words one could only
find one reason, the greatness of His Nature.
And if when He said, " Before Abraham was, I
am" (c. viii. 58), they were offended, what
would have been their case if they had continu-
ally heard high expressions ?


'Uf'took.'


' al. " knoweth he."


* al. *' reveal."


* "all Mine are Thine," &c. ^ virotrrAtrii.

* i.e. from the Father's.

' al. " He that desires to speak of himself, desires it on no other
account, but only to reap glory from this."

* i.e. other than He willeth.


178


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIX.


Ver. 19. " Did not Moses give you the Law?
and yet none of you keepeth the Law ? Why go
ye about to kill Me ? "

" And what connection," saith some one, " has
this, or what has this to do with what was said
before?" The Jews brought against Him two
accusations ; one, that He broke the Sabbath ;
the other, that He called God His Father, mak-
ing Himself equal with God. And that this was
no imagination of theirs, but His own declared
judgment,' and that He spake not as do the
many, but in a special and peculiar sense, is
clear from this circumstance. Many often
called God their Father ; as " Have we not all
one Father, hath not one God created us?"
(Mai. ii. 10), but not for that was the people
equal to God, on which account the hearers
were not offended. As then when the Jews said,
"This man is not from God," He often healed
them,^ and made defense for the violation of
the Sabbath ; so now had the sense they assigned
to His words been according to their imagina-
tion, not according to His intention. He would
have corrected them, and said, " Why suppose
ye Me equal to God ? I am not equal " ; yet He
said nothing of the kind, but, on the contrary,
declared by what followed, that He is equal. For,
" As the Father raiseth up the dead, and quicken-
eth them, so also the Son" (c. v. 21); and
" That all may honor the Son as they honor the
Father " ; and " The works which He doeth, the
same doeth the Son likewise ; " all these go to
establish His equality. Again, concerning the
Law He saith, " Think not that I am come to de-
stroy the Law or the Prophets." (Matt. v. 17.)
Thus He knoweth how to remove evil suspicions
which are in their minds ; but in this place He
not only doth not remove, but even confirmeth
their suspicion of His equality. On which
account also, when they said in another place,
" Thou makest thyself God," He did not remove
their suspicion, but even confirmed it, saying,
" That ye may know that the Son of Man hath
power on earth to forgive sins, He saith to the
sick of the palsy. Take up thy bed, and walk." ^
(Matt. ix. 6.) This then He first aimed at, to
make Himself equal with God, showing that He
was not God's adversary, but that He said the
same and taught the same with Him, and after-
wards He setteth Himself to * the breach of the
Sabbath, saying, " Did not Moses give you the
Law, and none of you keepeth the Law?" As
though He had said, " The I>aw saith, Thou
shalt not kill ; but ye kill, and yet accuse Me as
transgressing the Law." But wherefore saith
He, " None of you " ? Because they all sought
to kill Him. " And if," He saith, " I even have
broken the Law, it was in saving a man, but ye


* i.e. of then critor.


* " go to thine house," N. T.
' i*. to meet the charge of.


transgress it for evil. And if My action was even
a transgression, yet it was in order to save, and
I ought not to be judged by you who transgress
in the greatest matters. For your conduct is a
subverting of the whole Law." Then also He
presseth it farther, although He had said many
things to them before, but at that former time
He spake after a loftier manner, and more suit-
ably to His own dignity, while now He speaketh
more humbly. Wherefore ? Because He would
not continually irritate them. At present their
anger had become intense, and they went on to
murder. And therefore He continueth to check
them in these two ways, by reproving their evil
daring, and saying, "Why go ye about to kill
Me?" and by modestly calling Himself, "A Man
that hath told you the truth " (c. viii. 40), and
by showing that murderers in heart are not
worthy to judge others. And observe both the
humility of Christ's question, and the insolence
of their answer.

Ver. 20. " Thou hast a devil ; who goeth
about to kill thee?"

[3.] The expression is one of wrath and anger,
and of a soul made shameless by an unexpected
reproof, and put to confusion before their time, as
they thought.' For just as a sort of robbers
who sing over their plots, then when they desire
to put him against whom they are plotting off
his guard, effect their object by keeping silence,
so also do these. But He, omitting to rebuke
them for this, so as not to make them more
shameless, again taketh in hand His defense
with respect to the Sabbath, reasoning with them
from the Law. And observe how prudently.
" No wonder," He saith, " if ye disobey Me,
when ye disobey the Law which ye think ye
obey, and which ye hold to have been given you
by Moses. It is therefore no new thing, if ye
give not heed to My words." For because" they
said, " God spake to Moses, but as for this fellow
we know not whence he is" (c. ix. 29), He
showeth that they were insulting Moses as well
as Himself, for Moses gave them the Law, and
they obeyed it not.

Ver. 21. "I have done one work, and ye all
marvel."

Observe how He argueth, where it is necessary
to defend Himself, and make His defense a
charge against them.' For with respect to that
which had been wrought. He introduceth not
the Person of the Father, but His own : " I have
done one work." He would show,' that not to
have done it would have been to break the Law,


^ TTpoKaTairXijrTOfltvrji airriov (u9 <u6vT0. This appears to be the
tneaning, if the text is correct. The passage is suspected, but thei«
is no other reading. <* or, " when."

^ at, *' to admit what had taken place as a charge against Him-
self."

' i.e. by ver. 22. " Moses therefore gave you circumcision
(not because it is of Moses, but the fathers) and ye oa the Sabbath
day circumcise a man."


Homily XLIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


179


and that there are many things more authorita-
tive ' than the Law, and that " Moses " endured
to receive a command against ^ the Law, and
more authoritative than the Law. For " circum-
cision " is more authoritative than the Sabbath,
and yet circumcision is not of the Law, but of
" the fathers." " But I," He saith, " have done
that which is more authoritative and better than
circumcision." Then He mentioneth not the
command of the Law ; for instance, that the
Priests profane the Sabbath, as He had said
already, but speaketh more largely. The mean-
ing of, "Ye marvel" (Matt. xii. 5) is, "Ye are
confused," "are troubled." For if the Law was
to be lasting, circumcision would not have been
more authoritative than it. And He said not,
" I have done a thing greater than circumcision,"
but abundantly refuteth them by saying,^

Ver. 23. " If a man receive circumcision." ■*

" Seest thou that the Law is most established
when a man breaketh it? Seest thou that the
breaking of the Sabbath is the keeping of the
Law ? that if the Sabbath were not broken, the
Law must needs have been broken? so that I
also have established the Law." He said not,
" Ye are wroth with Me because I have wrought
a thing which is greater than circumcision," but
having merely mentioned what had been done,
He left it to them to judge, whether entire
health was not a more necessary thing than cir-
cumcision. " The Law," He saith, " is broken,
that a man may receive a sign which contribu-
teth nothing to health ; are ye vexed and in-
dignant at its being broken, that one might be
freed from so grievous a disease? "

Ver. 24. " Judge not according to appear-
ance."

What is, " according to appearance " ? " Do
not, since Moses hath the greatest honor among
you, give your decision according to your esti-
mation of persons, but according to the nature
of things ; for this is to judge rightly. Where-
fore hath no one of you reproved Moses?
Wherefore hath no one disobeyed him when he
ordereth that the Sabbath be broken by a com-
mandment introduced from without into the
Law? He alloweth a commandment to be of
more authority than his own Law ; a command-
ment not introduced by the Law, but from with-
out, which is especially wonderful ; while ye who
are not lawgivers are beyond measure jealous for
the Law, and defend it. Yet Moses, who order-


^ jcuptkjrfpa. * al. " but hinted by saying."

' Kara rov v,

* ver. 23. '* If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision,
that the Law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at Me,
because 1 have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day.' "


eth that the Law be broken by a commandment
which is not of the Law, is more worthy of con-
fidence than you." By saying then, (I have
made) "a whole man (healthy)," He showeth
that circumcision also was " partial " health.
And what was the health procured by circum-
cision? "Every soul,"' It saith, "that is not
circumcised, shall be utterly destroyed." (Gen.
xvii. 14.) "But I have raised up a man not
partially afflicted, but wholly undone." "Judge
not," therefore, " according to appearance."

Be we persuaded that this is " said not merely
to the men of that time, but to us also, that in
nothing we pervert justice, but do all in its be-
half; that whether a man be poor or rich, we
give no heed to persons, but enquire into things.
" Thou shall not pity," ^ It saith, " the poor in
judgment." (Ex. xxiii. 3.) What is meant?
" Be not broken down, nor bent," It saith, " if
he that doth the wrong be a poor man." Now
if you may not favor a poor man, much less
a rich. And this I say not only to you who are
judges, but to all men, that they nowhere per-
vert justice, but preserve it everywhere pure.
" The Lord," It saith, " loveth righteousness " ;
and, " he that loveth iniquity hateth his own
soul." (Ps. xi. 7 and 5, LXX.) Let us not, I
entreat, hate our own souls, nor love unrighteous-
ness. For certainly its profit in the present
world is little ' or nothing, and for the world to
come it brings great damage.' Or rather, I
should say, that not even here can we enjoy it ;
for when we live softly, yet with an evil con-
science, is not this vengeance and punishment?
Let us then love righteousness, and never look
aside '" from that law. For what fniit shall we
gain from the present life, if we depart without
having attained unto excellence? What there
will help us? Will friendship, or relations, or
this or that man's favor? What am I saying?
this or that man's favor? Though we have
Noah, Job, or Daniel for a father, this will avail
us nothing if we be betrayed by our own works.
One thing .alone we need, that is, excellency of
soul. This will be able to carry you safe through,
and to deliver you from everlasting fire, this will
escort " you to the Kingdom of Heaven. To
which may we all attain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever and world
without end. Amen.


* al. " soul of man."

• al. " but this is."
■ al. " and afterwards we perish mi'^erably."

" al. '* offend against," it al. " escorts."


' al. " for how great is, &c. little.'


i8o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMII.Y L.


HOMILY L.

John vii. 25-27.


"Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he,
whom they seek to kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly,
and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know
indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we
know this man whence he is."

[i.] Nothing is placed in the Holy Scrip-
tures without a reason, for they were uttered by
the Holy Ghost, therefore let us enquire exactly
into every point. For it is possible from one
expression to find out the entire meaning (of a
passage), as in the case before us. " Many of
them of Jerusalem said. Is not this he, whom
they seek to kill? But, lo, he speaketh boldly,
and they say nothing unto him." Now why is
added, " them of Jerusalem " ? The Evangelist
by this shows, that they who had most enjoyed
His mighty miracles were more pitiable than
any; they who had beheld the greatest proof
of His Godhead, and yet committed all to the
judgment of their corrupt rulers. For was it not
a great proof of it, that men furious and bent on
murder, who went about and sought to kill Him,
should be quiet of a sudden, when they had Him
in their hands? Who could have effected this?
who thus quenched their absolute fury? Still
after such proofs, observe the folly and the mad-
ness of the men. " Is not this he, whom they
seek to kill ? " See how they accuse themselves ;
" whom," It saith, " they seek to kill, and yet
they say nothing to him." And not only do they
say nothing to Him, but nothing even when He
" speaketh boldly." For one who spoke boldly
and with all freedom would naturally have the
more angered them ; but they did nothing.
" Do they know indeed that this is the very
Christ?" "What think ye? What opinion
give ye?" The contrary, It saith. On which
account they said, " We know this man whence
he is." What malice,* what contradiction !
They do not even follow the opinion of their
rulers, but bring forward another, perverse, and
worthy of their own folly ; " We know him
whence he is."

" But when Christ cometh, no man knoweth
whence He is." (Matt. ii. 4.)

" Yet your rulers when asked replied, that He
should be born in Bethlehem." And others again
said, " God spake unto Moses, but as for this
fellow, we know not from whence he is."
(c. ix. 29.) " We know whence he is," and
" we know not whence He is " : observe the


* al. " perplexity.*'


words of drunken men. And again, " Doth
Christ come out of Galilee?" (Ver. 41.) Is
He not of " the town of Bethlehem " ? Seest
thou that theirs is the decision of madmen?
" We know," and, " we know not " ; " Christ
cometh from Bethlehem " ; " When Christ com-
eth, no man knoweth whence He is." What
can be plainer than this contradiction? For
they only looked to one thing, which was, not
to believe. What then is Christ's reply?

Ver. 28. "Ye both know Me, and ye know
whence I am : and I am not come of Myself,
but He that sent Me is true, whom ye know
not."

[2.] And again, " If ye had known Me, ye
should have known My Father also." (c. viii. 19.)
How then saith He, that they both " know Him,"
and " whence He is," and then, " that they neither
know Him, nor the Father " ? He doth not
contradict, (away with the thought,) but is very
consistent with Himself. For He speaketh of
a different kind of knowledge, when He saith,
" ye know not " ; as when He saith, " The sons
of Eli were wicked sons, they knew not the
Lord " (i Sam. ii. 12) ; and again, " Israel doth
not know Me." (Isa. i. 3.) So also Paul saith,
" They profess that they know God, but in works
they deny Him." (Tit. i. 16.) It is therefore
possible, " knowing," " not to know." This then
is what He saith : " If ye know Me, ye know
that I am the Son of God." For the " whence
I am " doth not here denote place. As is clear
from what foUoweth, " I am not come of My-
self, but He that sent Me is true, whom ye
know not," referring here to the ignorance
shown by their works. [As Paul saith, " They
profess that they know God, but in works they
deny Him."] For their fault came not merely
of ignorance, but of wickedness, and an evil
will ; because even though they knew this, they
chose to be ignorant. But what manner of con-
nection is there here? How is it that He, re-
proving them, useth their own words ? For when
they say, " We know this man whence he is,"
He addeth, " ye both know Me." Was their
expression, " \Ve know him not " ? Nay, they
said, " We know him." But (observe), they by
saying the, " We know whence he is," declared
nothing else than that He was " of the earth,"
and that He was " the carpenter's son " ; but
He led them up to heaven, saying, " Ye know
whence I am," that is, not thence whence yc
suppose, but from that place whence He that


Homily L.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


i8i


sent Me (hath sent Me). For to say, "I am
not come of Myself," intimateth to them, that
they knew that He was sent by the Father,
though they did not disclose it.' So that He
rebuketh them in a twofold manner ; first, what
they said in secret He published aloud, so as to
put them to shame ; after that He revealed also
what was in their hearts. As though He had
said, " I am not one of the abjects, nor of those
who come for nothing, but He ' that sent Me is
true, whom ye know not.' " What meaneth, " He
that sent Me is true " ? " If He be true. He
hath sent Me for the truth ; if He be true, it is
probable that He who is sent is true also." This
also He proveth in another way, vanquishing them
with their own words. For whereas they had
said, "When Christ cometh, no man knoweth
whence He is," He proveth from this that He
Himself is the Christ. They used the words,
" No man knoweth," with reference to distinc-
tion of some definite locality ; but from the
same words He showeth Himself to be the
Christ, because He came from the Father ; and
everywhere He witnesseth that He alone hath
the knowledge of the Father, saying, " Not that
any man hath seen the Father, save He which
is from the Father."^ (c. vi. 46.) And His words
exasperated them ; for to tell them, " Ye know
Him not," and to rebuke them because knowing
they pretended to be ignorant, was sufficient to
sting and annoy them.

Ver. 30. "Then they sought to take Him, and
no man laid his hand upon Him, because His
hour was not yet come."

Seest thou that they are invisibly restrained,
and their anger bridled? But wherefore saith
It not, that He had restrained them invisibly,
but, " Because His hour was not yet come " ?
The Evangelist was minded to speak more
humanly and in a lowlier strain, so that Christ
might be deemed to be also Man. For because
Christ everywhere speaketh of sublime matters,
he therefore intersperseth expressions of this
kind. And when Christ saith, "I am from
Him," He speaketh not as a Prophet who
leameth, but as seeing Him, and being with
Him.

Ver. 29. " I know Him," He saith, " for I am
from Him, and He hath sent Me."

Seest thou how He continually seeketh to
prove the, "I am not come of Myself," and,
"He that sent Me is true," striving not to be
thought an enemy of God ? And observe how
great is the profit of the humility of His words ;
for, it saith, after this many said,

Ver. 31. "When Christ cometh, will He do
more miracles than these which this man hath
done?"


' iitniXv


'ofGod,"N. T.


How many were the miracles? In truth,
there were three, that of the wine, that of the
paralytic, and that of the nobleman's son ; and
the Evangelist hath related no more. From
which circumstance it is plain, as I have often
said, that the writers pass by most of them, and
discourse to us of those alone on account of
which the rulers ill-treated Him. "Then they
sought to take Him," and kill Him. Who
"sought"? Not the multitude, who had no
desire of rule, nor could be made captives by
malice ; but the priests. For they of the multi-
tude said, "When Christ cometh, will He do
more miracles?" Vet neither was this sound
faith, but, as it were, the idea of a promiscuous'
crowd ; for to say, "When He cometh," was not
the expression of men firmly persuaded that He
was the Christ. We may either understand the
words thus, or that they were uttered by the
multitudes when they came together. "Since,"
they may have said, " our rulers are taking every
pains to prove that this man is not the Christ,
let us suppose that he is not the Christ ; will the
Christ be better than he?" For, as I ever
repeat, men of the grosser sort are led in not
by doctrine, nor by preaching, but by miracles.

Ver. 32. "The Pharisees heard the people
murmuring,* and sent' servants to take Him."

Seest thou that the violation of the Sabbath
was a mere pretense ? and that what most stung
them was this murmuring? For here, though
they had no fault to find with Him for anything
said or done, they desired to take Him because
of the multitude. They dared not do it them-
selves, suspecting danger, but sent their hired
servants." Alas ! for their tyranny and their
madness, or rather, I should say, for their folly.
After having often attempted themselves, and
not prevailed, they committed the matter to
servants, simply satisfying their anger. Yet He
had spoken much at the pool (c. v.), and they
had done nothing of the kind ; they sought in-
deed occasion, but they attempted not, while
here they can endure it no longer, when the
multitude is about to run to Him. What then
saith Christ?

Ver. 33. " Yet a little while am I with you."

Having power to bow and terrify His hearers,
He uttereth words full of humility. As though
He had said, " Why are ye eager to persecute
and kill Me? Wait a little while, and even
though you should be eager to keep Me back,
I shall not endure it." That no one should (as
they did) suppose that the, "Yet a Uttle while
am I with you," denoted a common death, that
no one might suppose this, or that He wrought'
nothing after death. He added.


* Xyiaiov.

* murmuring such things concerning Him." N. T.
» " the Pharisees and Chief Priests sent," N. T.

* or, " sent their s. to be exposed " (<xi^«v«).


^ jvijpyct.


.182


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L.


Ver. 34. " And where I am, thither ye cannot
come."

Now had He been about to continue in death,
they might have gone to Him, for to that place
we all depart. His words therefore bent the
simpler portion of the multitude, terrified the
bolder, made the more inteUigent anxious to
hear Him, since but little time was now left,
and since it was not in their power always to
enjoy this teaching. Nor did He merely say,
" I am here," but, " I am with you," that is,
"Though ye persecute, though ye drive Me
away, yet for a little while I shall not cease dis-
pensing what is for your good, saying and
recommending the things that relate to your
salvation."

Ver. 33. "And I go unto Him that sent Me."

This was enough to terrify and throw them
into an agony. For that they should stand in
need of Him, He declareth also.

Ver. 34. "Ye shall seek Me," He saith, (not
only "ye shall not forget Me," but ye shall even
"seek Me,") "and shall not find Me."

[3.] And when did the Jews "seek Him"?
Luke saith that the women mourned over Him,
and it is probable that many others, both at the
time and when the city was taken, remembered
Christ and His miracles, and sought His pres-
ence. (Luke xxiii. 49.) Now all this He
added, desiring to attract them. For the facts
that the time left was short, that He should
after His departure be regretfully desired by
them, and that they should not then be able to
find Him, were all together sufficient to persuade
them to come to Him. For had it not been
that His presence should with regret be desired
by them. He would not have seemed to them
to be saying any great thing ; if, again, it was
about to be desired, and they able to find Him,
neither so would this have disturbed them.
Again, had He been about to stay with them a
long time, so also they would have been remiss.
But now He in every way compelleth and terri-
fieth them. And the, " I go to Him that sent
Me," is the expression of one declaring that no
harm will happen to Him from their plotting,
and that His Passion was voluntary. Wherefore
now He uttered two predictions, that after a
little while He should depart, and that they
should not come to Him ; a thing which be-
longed not to human intelligence, the foretelling
His own death. Hear for instance, David say-
ing, " Lord, make me to know mine end and
the number of my days, what it is, that I may
know what time I have." ' (Ps. xxxix. 4.) There
is no man at all that knoweth this ; and by one^
the other is confirmed. And I think that He
speaketh this covertly to the servants, and direct-

1 Ti vattfM eybi, LXX., thus rendered in margin of £. V.
* i.e. one prediction.


eth His discourse to them, thus specially attract-
ing them, by showing them that He knew the
cause of their arrival. As though He had said,
"Wait a little, and I shall depart."

Ver. 35. "Then said the Jews among them-
selves. Whither will he go?"

Yet they who had wished to be rid of Him,
who did all in their power not to see Him, ought
not to have asked this question, but to have
said, " we are glad of it, when will the departure
take place?" but they were somewhat affected
at His words, and with foolish suspicion question
one another, "whither will he go?"

" Will he go unto the dispersion of the Gen-
tiles? "»

What is, " the dispersion of the Gentiles " ?
The Jews gave this name to other nations, be-
cause they were everywhere scattered and min-
gled fearlessly with one another. And this re-
proach they themselves afterwards endured, for
they too were a " dispersion." For of old all
their nation was collected into one place, and
you could not anywhere find a Jew, except in
Palestine only ; wherefore they called the Gen-
tiles a " dispersion," reproaching them, and
boasting concerning themselves. What then
meaneth, "Whither I go ye cannot come"?
For all nations at that time had intercourse with
them, and there were Jews everywhere. He
would not therefore, if He had meant the Gen-
tiles, have said, " Where ye cannot come." After
saying, " Will he go to the dispersion of the Gen-
tiles?" they did not add, "and ruin," but, "and
teach them." To such a degree had they abated
their anger, and believed His words ; for they
would not, had they not believed, have enquired
among themselves what the saying was.

These words were spoken indeed to the Jews,
but fear there is lest they be suited to us also,
that " where He is " we " cannot come " on ac-
count of our life being full of sins. For con-
cerning the disciples He saith, " I will that they
also be with Me where I am " (c. xvii. 24), but I
concerning ourselves, I dread lest the contrary
be said, that, " Where I am, ye cannot come.'
For when we act contrary to the commandments,
how can we go to that place ? Even in the pres-
ent life, if any soldier act unworthily towards hii
king, he will not be able to see the king, bu'
being deprived of his authority will suffer th(.
severest punishment ; if therefore we steal, o:
covet, if we wrong or strike others, if we worl
not deeds of mercy, we shall not be able to g*'
thither, but shall suffer what happened to thi
virgins. For where He was, they were not abl
to enter in, but retired, their lamps having gon
out, that is, grace having left them. For
can, if we will, increase the brightness of tha


» lit. " Greeks."


Homily LI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


183


flame which we received straightway' by the
grace of the Spirit ; but if we will not do this,
we shall lose it, and when that is quenched, there
.will be nothing else than darkness in our souls ;
since, as while a lamp is burning the light is
strong, so when it is extinguished there is noth-
ing but gloom. Wherefore the Apostle saith,
"Quench not the Spirit." (i Thess. v. 19.)
And It is quenched when It hath not oil, when
there is any violent gust of wind, when It is
cramped and confined, (for so fire is quenched,)
and It is cramped by worldly cares, and quenched
by evil desires. In addition to the causes we
have mentioned, nothing quencheth It so much
as inhumanity, cnielty, and rapine. For when,
besides having no oil, we pour upon it cold
water, (for covetousness is this, which chills with
despondency the souls of those we wrong,)
whence shall it be kindled again? We shall
depart, therefore, carrying dust and ashes with
us, and having much smoke to convict us of


having had lamps and of having extinguished
them ; for where there is smoke, there needs
must have been fire which hath been quenched.
May none of us ever hear that word, " I know
you not." (Matt. XXV. 12.) And whence shall
we hear that word, but from this, if ever we see
a poor man, and are as though we saw him not ?
If we will not know Christ when He is an hun-
gered, He too will not know us when we entreat
His mercy. And with justice ; for how shall he
who neglects the afflicted, and gives not of that
which is his own, how shall he seek to receive
of that which is not his own? Wherefore, I
entreat you, let us do and contrive everything,
so that oil fail not us, but that we may trim our
lamps, and enter with the Bridegroom into the
bride-chamber. To which may we all attain,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LI.

John vii. 37, 38.


" In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come
unto Me, and drink. He that beHeveth on Me, as
the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water."

[i.] They who come to the divine preaching
and give heed to the faith, must manifest the
desire of thirsty men for water, and kindle in
themselves a similar longing ; so will they be
able also very carefully to retain what is said.
For as thirsty men, when they have taken a bowl,
eagerly drain it and then desist, so too they who
hear the divine oracles if they receive them
thirsting, will never be weary until they have
drunk them up. For to show that men ought
ever to thirst and hunger, " Blessed," It saith,
" are they which do hunger and thirst after right-
eousness" (Matt. V. 6); and here Christ saith,
" If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and
drink." What He saith is of this kind, " I draw
no man to Me by necessity and constraint ; but
if any hath great zeal, if any is inflamed with
desire, him I call."

But why hath the Evangelist remarked that it
was "on the last day, that great day"? For
both the first day and the last were "great,"
while the intermediate days they spent rather in
enjoyment. Wherefore then saith he, " in the


' Le. in baptism.


last day"? Because on that day they were all
collected together. For on the first day He
came not, and told the reason to His brethren,
nor yet on the second and third days saith He
anything of this kind, lest His words should
come to nought, the hearers being about to run
into indulgence. But on the last day when they
were returning home He giveth them supplies *
for their salvation, and crieth aloud, partly by
this showing to us His boldness, and partly for
the greatness of the multitude. And to show
that He spake not of material drink. He addeth,
" He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water." By " belly " he here meaneth the heart,
as also in another place It saith, " And Thy Law
in the midst of my belly." (Ps. xl. 10 ; Theodo-
tion.) But where hath the Scripture said, that
" rivers of living water shall flow from his belly " ?
Nowhere. What then meaneth, " He that be-
lieveth on Me, as the Scripture saith " ? Here
we must place a stop, so that the, " rivers shall
flow from his belly," may be an assertion of
Christ.' For because many said, "This is the
Christ " ; and, " When the Christ cometh will
He do more miracles?" He showeth that itbe-
hooveth to have a correct knowledge, and to be
convinced not so much from the miracles as from


' i^oSu


> i.c. not of the Scripture.


1^4


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI.


the Scriptures. Many, in fact, who even saw
Him working marvels received Him not as
Christ, and were ready to say, " Do not the
Scriptures say that Christ cometh of the seed of
David?" and on this they' continually dwelt.
He then, desiring to show that He did not shun
the proof from the Scriptures, again referreth
them to the Scriptures. He had said before,
"Search the Scriptures" (c. v. 39) ; and again,
" It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be
taught of God" (c. vi. 45) ; and, "Moses ac-
cuseth you " (c. v. 45) ; and here, " As the Scrip-
ture hath said, rivers shall flow from his belly,"
alluding to the largeness and abundance of grace.
As in another place He saith, " A well of water
springing up unto eternal life" (c. iv. 14), that
is to say, " he shall possess much grace " ; and
elsewhere He calleth it, " eternal life," but here,
" living water." He calleth that " living " which
ever worketh ; for the grace of the Spirit, when
it hath entered into the mind and hath been
established, springeth up more than any fountain,
faileth not, becometh not empty, stayeth not.
To signify therefore at once its unfailing supply
and unlimited^ operation, He hath called it "a
well " and " rivers," not one river but number-
less ; and in the former case He hath repre-
sented its abundance by the expression, " spring-
ing." And one may clearly perceive what is
meant, if he will consider the wisdom of Stephen,
the tongue of Peter, the vehemence of Paul,
how nothing bare, nothing withstood them, not
the anger of multitudes, not the risings up of
tyrants, not the plots of devils, not daily deaths,
but as rivers borne along with a great rushing
sound, so they went on their way hurrying all
things with them.

Ver. 39. " But this spake He of the Spirit,
which they that believe on Him should receive ;
for the Holy Ghost was not yet given."

[2.] How then did the Prophets prophesy
and work those ten thousand wonders? For
the Apostles cast not out devils by the Spirit,
but by power received from Him ; as He saith
Himself, " If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your children cast them out?" (Matt.
xii. 27.) And this He said, signifying that be-
fore the Crucifixion' not all cast out devils by
the Spirit, but that some did so by the power
received from Him. So when * He was about
to send them. He said, " Receive ye the Holy
Ghost" (c. XX. 22) ; and again, "The Holy
Ghost came upon them" (Acts xix. 6), and
then they wrought miracles. But when' He
was sending them, the Scripture said not, that
" He gave to them the Holy Ghost," but that
He gave to them "power," saying, "Cleanse


1 al. " He dwelt desiring/* &c. * i.e. after the Crucifixion.

* lit. '* unspeakable." * i.e. before the Crucifixion.

• lit. " the Cross."


the lepers, cast out devils, raise the dead, freely
ye have received, freely give." (Matt. x. i, 8.)
But in the case of the Prophets, all allow that
the Gift was that of the Holy Spirit. But this
Grace was stinted and departed and failed from
off the earth, from the day in which it was said,
"Your house is left unto you desolate" (Matt,
xxiii. 38) ; and even before that day its dearth
had begun, for there was no longer any prophet
among them, nor did Grace visit their holy'
things. Since then the Holy Ghost had been
withheld, but was for the future to be shed forth
abundantly, and since the beginning of this im-
parting was after the Crucifixion, not only as to
its abundance, but also as to the increased great-
ness of the gifts, (for the Gift was more marvel-
ous, as when It saith, " Ye know not what Spirit
ye are of" (Luke ix. 55) ; and again, "For
ye have not received the Spirit of bondage, but
the Spirit of adoption" (Rom. viii. 15); and
the men of old possessed the Spirit themselves,
but imparted It not to others, while the Apos-
tles filled tens of thousands with It,) since then,
I say, they were to receive this Gift, but It was
not yet given, for this cause he addeth, " The
Holy Ghost was not yet." Since then the Lord
spoke of this grace,' the Evangelist hath said,
" For the Holy Ghost was not yet," that is,
" was not yet given,"

"Because Jesus was not yet glorified."
Calling the Cross, "glory." For since we
were enemies, and had sinned, and fallen short
of the gift of God, and were haters of God, and
since grace was a proof of our reconciliation,
and since a gift is not given to those who are
hated, but to friends and those who have been
well-pleasing ; it was therefore necessary that
the Sacrifice should first be offered for us, that
the enmity (against God) which was in our flesh
should be done away, that we should become
friends of God, and so receive the Gift. For
if this was done with respect to the promise
made to Abraham, much more with respect to
grace. And this Paul hath declared, saying,
" If they which are of the Law be heirs, faith
is made void — because the Law worketh wrath."
(Rom. iv. 14, 15.) What he saith, is of this
kind : God " promised that He would give the
earth to Abraham and to his seed : but his
descendants were unworthy of the promise, and
of their own deeds could not be well- pleasing
unto God. On this account came in faith, an
easy action, that it might draw grace unto it, and
that the promise might not fail. And It saith,
"Therefore it is of faith, that it might be b>
grace, to the end the promise might be sure.'
(Rom. iv. 16.) Wherefore it is by grace, sinct
by their own labors they prevailed not.

" al. " divine."

7 In Ben. the reading is dilTerent, and the sense seems incom,^
plete. " Since then speaking of this grace, the Ev."


lOMILY LI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


185


But wherefore after saying, " according to the
Icriptures," ' did He not add the testimony?
Jecause their mind was corrupt ; for,

Ver. 40-42.^ " Some said, This is the Prophet.
)thers said, He deceiveth the people ; ^ others
aid, Christ cometh not from Galilee, but from
he village of Bethlehem."

Others said, " When Christ cometh, no man

noweth whence He is " (ver. 27) ; and there

fas a difference of opinion, as might be expected

a confused * multitude ; for not attentively

id they listen to His words, nor for the sake

f learning. Wherefore He maketh them no

nswer ; yet they said, " Doth Christ come out

f Galilee?" And He had praised, as being

an Israelite indeed," Nathanael, who had said

I a more forcible and striking manner, " Can

lere any good thing come out of Nazareth?"

i. 46.) But then these men, and they who

lid to Nicodemus, " Search and look, for out

F Galilee ariseth no prophet " (ver. 52), said it

3t seeking to learn, but merely to overturn the

jinion concerning Christ. Nathanael said this,

ling a lover of the truth, and knowing exactly

1 the ancient histories ; but they looked only

one thing, and that was to remove the opin-

n that He was the Christ, on which account

.e revealed nothing to them. For they who

fen contradicted themselves, and said at one

ne, " No man knoweth whence He cometh,"

another, " From Bethlehem," would mani-

stly even if they had been informed have

iposed Him. For be it that they knew not

.e place of His birth, that He was from Bethle-

m, because of His dwelling* in Nazareth, (yet

is cannot be allowed, for He was not born

ere,) were they ignorant of His race also, that

e was " of the house and lineage of David " ?

ow then said they, " Doth not Christ come of

iC seed of David ? " (Ver. 42.) Because they

shed to conceal even this fact by that ques-

m, saying all that they said with malicious

tent. Why did they not come to Him and

Y, "Since we admire thee in other respects,

d thou biddest us believe thee according to

e Scriptures, tell us how it is that the Scrip-

es say that Christ must come from Bethle-

m, when thou art come from Galilee?" But

sy said nothing of the kind, but all in malice.

id to show that they spoke not enquiringly,

r as desiring to learn, the Evangelist straight-

.y hath added, that,

Ver. 44. " Some of them would have taken

.'.'! m, but no man laid his hand upon Him."

This, if nothing else, might have been sufifi-

nt to cause compunction in them, but they

t it not, as the Prophet saith, "They were


[ " as saith the Scripture," ver. 38. * al. " not well ordered."
not verbally quoted. ^ al. " bringing up."


cleft asunder, and were not pricked in heart."
(Ps. XXXV. 15, LXX.)

[3.] Such a thing is malice ! it will give way
to nothing, it looks to one thing only, and that
is, to destroy the person against whom it plot-
teth. But what saith the Scripture? "Whoso
diggeth a pit for his neighbor, shall fall into it
himself." (Prov. xxvi. 27.) Which was the
case then. For they desired to kill Him, to
stop, as they thought. His preaching ; the result
was the opposite. For the preaching flourishes
by the grace of Christ, while all that was theirs
is quenched and perished ; they have lost their
country, their freedom, their security, their wor-
ship, they have been deprived of all their pros-
perity, and are become slaves and captives.

Knowing then this, let us never plot against
others, aware that by so doing we whet the
sword against ourselves, and inflict upon our-
selves the deeper wound. Hath any one grieved
thee, and desireth thou to avenge thyself on
him? Avenge not thyself; so shalt thou be
able to be avenged ; but if thou avenge thyself,
thou art not avenged. Think not that this is
a riddle, but a true saying. " How, and in
what way?" Because if thou avenge not thy-
self on him, thou makest God his enemy ; but
if thou avenge thyself, no longer so. " Ven-
geance is Mine, I will repay, saith the Lord."
(Rom. xii. 19.) For if we have servants, and
they having quarreled * with each other, do not
give place to us for judgment and for punish-
ment, but take it upon themselves ; though they
come to us ten thousand times, we not only shall
not avenge them, but shall even be wroth with
them, saying, "Thou runaway, thou flogging-
post, thou oughtest to have submitted all to us,
but since thou hast prevented us and avenged
thyself, trouble us no farther " ; much more
shall God, who hath bidden us commit all unto
Him, say this. For how can it be otherwise
than absurd, when we demand from our ser-
vants so much minding of wisdom and obe-
dience, but will not yield to our Master in those
matters in which we desire our domestics to
yield to us? This I say because of your readi-
ness to inflict punishment one upon another.
The truly wise man ought not to do this even,
but to pardon and forgive offenses, though there
were not that great reward proposed, the receiv-
ing in return forgiveness. For, tell me, if thou
condemnest one who hath sinned, wherefore
dost thou sin thyself, and fall into the same
fault? Hath he insulted? Insult not thou
again, or thou hast insulted thyself. Hath he
struck? Strike not thou again, for then there
is no difference between you. Hath he vexed
thee? Vex him not again, for the profit is


* al. " disputed."


1 86


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMILV L


nothing, and thou wilt in thy turn be placed on
an equality with those who have wronged thee.
Thus, if thou bear with meekness and gentleness,
thou shalt be able to reprove thine enemy,
to shame him, to weary' him of being wroth.
No man cures evil with evil, but evil with good.
These rules of wisdom give some of the heathen ;
now if there be such wisdom among the foolish
heathen, let us be ashamed to show ourselves
inferior to them. Many of them have been in-
jured, and have borne it ; many have been mali-
ciously accused, and not defended themselves ;
have been plotted against, and have repaid by
benefits. And there is no small fear lest some
of them be found in their lives to be greater
than we, and so render our punishment severer.
For when we who have partaken of the Spirit,
we who look for the Kingdom, who follow wis-
dom for the sake of heavenly things,^ who fear
(not) hell, and are bidden to become angels,
who enjoy the Mysteries ; when we reach not
to the virtue unto which they have attained,
what pardon^ shall we have? If we must go
beyond the Jews, (for, " Except your righteous-
ness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes


and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into t'.
Kingdom of Heaven " — Matt. v. 20,) mw
more the heathen ; if the Pharisees, much mo
the unbelievers. Since if when we go not b
yond the righteousness of the Jews, the Kin
dom is shut against us, how shall we be able
attain unto it when we prove ourselves wor
than the heathen? Let us then cast out
bitterness, and wrath, and anger. To spe;
" the same things, to me indeed is not grievoi
but for you it is safe." (Phil. iii. i.) F
physicians also often use the same remedy, ai
we will not cease from sounding the same thin
in your ears, reminding, teaching, exhortir
for great is the tumult of worldly things, and
causes in us forgetfulness, and we have ne
of continual teaching. Let us then, in ord
that we meet not together in this place uselesi
and in vain, exhibit the proof'' which is by worl
that so we may obtain the good things to con
through the grace and lovingkindness of c
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with who
to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glo:
now and ever and world without end. Amen,


HOMILY LII.

John vii. 45, 46.


" Then came the officers to the Chief Priests and Phari-
sees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not
brought him? The officers answered, Never man
spake like this Man."

[i.] There is nothing clearer, nothing sim-
pler than the truth, if we deal not perversely ;
just as (on the other hand) if we deal perversely,
nothing is more difficult. For behold, the
Scribes and Pharisees, who seemed forsooth to
be wiser than other men, being ever with Christ
for the sake of plotting against Him, and be-
holding His miracles, and reading the Scriptures,
were nothing profited, but were even harmed ;
while the officers, who could not claim one of
these privileges, were subdued by one single
sermon, and they who had gone forth to bind
Him, came back bound themselves by won-
der. We must not only marvel at their under-
standing, that they needed not signs, but were
taken by the teaching alone ; (for they said
not, " Never man wrought miracles thus," but,
" Never man spake thus " ;) we must not, I say,
merely marvel at their understanding, but also
at their boldness, that they spake thus to those


> or, " hinder." ' al. '* the heavens.*' * al. " hope of p."


that had sent them, to the Pharisees, to J
enemies, to men who were doing all with a vi(
to gratify their enmity. "The officers," sai
the Evangelist, " came, and the Pharisees sa
unto them. Why have ye not brought him
To " come " was a far greater deed than to ha
remained, for in the latter case they would hs
been rid of the annoyance of these men, 1
now they become heralds of the wisdom
Christ, and manifested their boldness in grea
degree. And they say not, " We could not
come of the multitude, for they gave heed u
Him as unto a prophet"; but what? " Ne
man spake as this Man." Yet they might
alleged that, but they show their right feeli
For theirs was the saying not only of men
miring Him, but blaming their masters, beca
they had sent them to bind Him whom it
hooved rather to hear. Yet they had not hea
sermon either, but a short one ; for when the "
mind is impartial, there is no need of long a
ments. Such a thing is truth. What then
the Pharisees? When they ought to have 1
pricked at the heart, they, on the contrary, r<
a charge on the officers, saying.


* or, '* display.'


1


[OMILY LIL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


187


Ver. 47. " Are ye also deceived ? "

They still speak them fair, and do not express

lemselves harshly, dreading lest the others

lould entirely separate themselves, yet never-

leless they give signs of anger, and speak spar-

igly. For when they ought to have asked

hat He spake, and to have marveled at the

ords, they do not so, (knowing that they might

ive been captivated,) but reason with them

cm a very foolish argument ;

Ver. 48. " Wherefore," saith one, " hath none *

f the rulers ^ believed on Him ? "

Dost thou then make this a charge against

hrist, tell me, and not against the unbelievers ?

Ver. 49. "But the ^people," saith one, "which

;ioweth not the Law, are accursed."

t Then is the charge against you the heavier,

cause the people beUeved, and ye believed

rhey acted like men that knew the Law ;

)w then are they accursed ? It is ye that are

cursed, who keep not the Law, not they, who

)ey the Law. Neither was it right, on the

idence of unbelievers, to slander one in whom

ey believed not, for this is an unjust mode of

ting. For ye also believed not God, as Paul

th ; "What if some did not believe? shall

eir unbelief make the faith of God of none

ect? God forbid." (Rom. iii. 3, 4.) For the

ophets ever rebuked them, saying, " Hear, ye

ers of Sodom " ; and, " Thy rulers are diso-

dient" (Isa. i. 10, 23) ; and again, " Is it not

you to know judgment?" (Mic. iii. i.)

everywhere they attack them vehemently.

blame God for this?

This blame is theirs.

id what other proof can a man bring of your

knowing the Law than your not obeying it ?

r when they had said, " Hath any of the rulers

iieved on him? " and, "These who know not

Law," Nicodemus in fair consequence up-

ids them, saying,

^er. 51. " Doth our * law judge any man be-
lt hear him ? "
He showeth that they neither know the Law,
• do the Law ; for if that Law commandeth to
no man without first hearing him, and they
ore hearing were eager for this deed, they
■e transgressors of the Law. And because they
1, " None of the rulers hath believed on him "
T. 50), therefore the Evangelist informs us that
:odemus was " one of them," to show that
n rulers believed on Him ; for although they
wed not yet fitting boldness, still they were
oming attached' to Christ. Observe how
tiously he rebukes them ; he said not, " Ye
aiire to kill him, and condemn the man for a
weiver without proof" ; but spake in a milder


iiat then? Shall one
ray with the thought.


;


' Hath any," N. T.

' or of the Pharisees," N. T.

' this," N, T.


* al, " your."


way, hindering their excessive violence, and
their inconsiderate and murderous disposition.
Wherefore he turns his discourse to the Law,
saying, " Except it hear him carefully, and know
what he doeth." So that not a bare " heanng,"
but " careful hearing " is required. For the
meaning of, " know what he doeth," is, " what
he intendeth," " on what account," " for what
purpose," " whether for the subversion of the
order of things and as an enemy." Being there-
fore perplexed, because they had said, " None
of the rulers hath believed on him," they ad-
dressed him, neither vehemently, nor yet with
forbearance. For tell me, after he had said,
" The Law judgeth no man," how doth it follow
that they should say,

Ver. 52. " Art thou also of Galilee ? "

[2.] When they ought to have shown that
they had not sent to summon Him without judg-
ment, or that it was not fitting to allow Him
speech, they take the reply rather in a rough and
angry manner.

" Search, and look : for out of Galilee hath
arisen no prophet."

Why, what had the man said ? that Christ was
a prophet ? No ; he said, that He ought not to
be slain unjudged ; but they replied insolently,
and as to one who knew nothing of the Scrip-
tures ; as though one had said, " Go, learn," for
this is the meaning of, " Search, and look."
What then did Christ ? Since they were contin-
ually dwelling upon Galilee and " The Prophet,"
to free all men from this erroneous suspicion,
and to show that He was not one of the proph-
ets, but the Master of the world, He said.

Chap. viii. ver. 12.° "I am the light of the
world."

Not " of Galilee," not of Palestine, nor of
Judaea. What then say the Jews?

Ver. 13. " Thou bearest record of thyself, thy
record is not true."

Alas ! for their folly. He continually referred
them to the Scriptures, and now they say,
"Thou bearest record of thyself." What was
the record He bare ? " I am the light of the
world." A great thing to say, great of a truth,
but it did not greatly amaze them, because He
did not now make Himself equal to the Father,
nor assert that He was His Son, nor that He
was God, but for a while calleth Himself "a
light." They indeed desired to disprove this
also, and yet this was a much greater thing than
to say,

" He that foUoweth Me, shall not walk in
darkness."

Using the words " light " and " darkness " in
a spiritual sense, and meaning thereby " abideth
not in error." In this place He draweth on


* The history of the woman taken in adultery is omitted by St
Chrysostom, and all the Greek commentators.


i88


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV L'


Nicodemus, and bringeth him in as having
spoken very boldly, and praiseth the servants
who had also done so. For to " cry aloud," ' is
the act of one desirous to cause that they also
should hear. At the same time He hinteth at
these ^ who were secretly contriving treacheries,
being both in darkness and error, but that they
should not prevail over the light. And He re-
mindeth Nicodemus of the words which He had
uttered before, " Every one that doeth evil
hateth the light, neither cometh to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved." (c. iii. 20.)
For since they had asserted that none of the ru-
lers had believed on Him, therefore He saith,
that " he that doeth evil cometh not to the light,"
to show that their not having come proceedeth
not from the weakness of the light, but from
their own perverse will.

" They answered and said unto Him, Dost
thou bear witness to thyself ? "

What then saith He ?

Ver. 14. " Though I bear record of Myself,
My record is true ; for I know whence I come,
and whither I go ; but ye cannot tell whence I
come."

What He had before said,' these men bring
forward as if it had been specially* asserted.
What then doth Christ? To refute this, and to
show that He used those expressions as suitable
to them and to their suspicions, who supposed
Him to be a mere man. He saith, " Though I
bear record of Myself, My record is true, for I
know whence I come." What is this ? " I am
of God, am God, the Son of God, and God Him-
self is a faithful witness unto Himself, but ye
know Him not ; ye willingly err,* knowing ye
pretend not to know, but say all that ye say ac-
cording to mere human imagination, choosing to
understand nothing beyond what is seen."

Ver. 15. "Ye judge after the flesh."

As to live after the flesh is to live badly, so to
judge after the flesh is to judge unjustly.

" But I judge no man."

Ver. 16. "And yet if I judge. My judgment is
true." "

What He saith, is of this kind ; " Ye judge
unjustly." " And if," saith some one, " we judge
unjustly, why dost Thou not rebuke us ? why dost
Thou not punish us? why dost Thou not con-
demn us? " " Because," He saith, " I came not
for this." This is the meaning of, " I judge no
man ; yet if I judge. My judgment is true."
" For had I been willing to judge, ye would have
been among the condemned. And this I say,
not judging you. Yet neither do I tell you that
I say it, not judging you, as though I were not


1 S. C. seems to refer to c. vii. 28. " Then cried Jesus in the
Temple," &c. _ ^ i.e. the Pharisees.

* Oirep <f>0ourac «Tff«, according to Savile's conjecture and a Vati-
can MS. llie common reading is eiTroi',

* nporjyoviiivtit, • c^cAoxoxctTc. • Ben. "just.*'


confident that had I judged you, I should ha
convicted you ; since if I had judged you,
must justly have condemned you. But now tl
time of judgment is not yet." He alluded al
to the judgment to come, saying,

" I am not alone, but I and the Father th
sent Me."

Here He hinted, that not He alone co
demneth them, but the Father also. Then I
concealed this, by leading them to His ov
testimony.

Ver. 17. " It is written in your Law, that i
testimony of two men is true."

[3.] What would the heretics say here ? (Th
would say,) " How is he better than man, if i
take what he hath said simply? For this rule
laid down in the case of men, because no m
by himself is trustworthy. But in the case
God, how can one endure such a mode of spea
ing? How then is the word 'two' used?
it because they are two, or because being m
they are therefore two? If it is because th
are two, why did he not betake himself to Jol
and say, I bear witness of myself, and Jo
beareth witness of me ? Wherefore not to t
angels? Wherefore not to the prophets? F
he might have found ten thousand other tes
monies." But he desireth to show not this oi
that there are Two, but also that they are of t
same Substance.

Ver. 19. "Then said they unto Him, Who
thy father? Jesus answered. Ye neither km
Me, nor My Father."

Because while they knew they spake as thou
they knew not, and as if trying Him, He dc
not even deem them worthy of an answ
Wherefore henceforth He speaketh all mc
clearly and more boldly ; drawing His testimo
from signs, and from His teaching of them tl
followed Him, and^ by the Cross being ne
For, " I know," He saith, " whence I com'
This would not greatly affect them, but the ;
ding, " and whither I go," would rather ten
them, since He was not to remain in dea
But why said He not, " I know that I am Go
instead of, " I know whence I come " ?
ever mingleth lowly words with sublime, i
even these He veileth. For after saying,
bear witness of Myself," and proving this,
descendeth to a humbler strain. As though
had said, " I know from whom I am sent,
to whom I depart." For so they could h
had nothing to say against it, when they he
that He was sent from Him, and would de
to Him. " I could not have spoken," He si
" any falsehood, I who am come from the
and depart thither, to the true God. Bui
know not God, and therefore judge accort


^ Ben. omits " and.'


HoMii.Y LIL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


189


to the flesh. For if having heard so many sure
signs and proofs ye still say, ' thy witness is not
true,' if ye deem Moses worthy of credit, both
as to what he speaketh concerning others and
what he speaketh concerning himself, but Christ
not so, this is to judge according to the flesh."
"But I judge no man." He saith indeed also
that " the Father judgeth no man." (c. v. 22.)
How then doth He here declare, that, " If I
judge. My judgment is just, for I am not alone " ?
He again speaketh in reply to their thoughts.
" The judgment which is Mine is the judgment
of the Father. The Father, judging, would not
judge otherwise than as I do, and I should not
judge otherwise than as the Father." Where-
fore did He mention the Father ? Because they
would not have thought that the Son was to be
believed unless He received the witness of the
iFather. Besides, the saying doth not even hold
good. For in the case of men when two bear
witness in a matter pertaining to another, then
their witness is true, (this is for two to witness,)
but if one should witness for himself, then they
ire no longer two. Seest thou that He said this
For nothing else but to show that He was of the
same Substance, that He needed no other wit-
less, and was in nothing inferior to the Father?
Observe at least His independence ^ ;

Ver. 18. "I am One that bear witness of My-
;elf ; and the Father that sent Me beareth wit-
less of Me."

Had He been of inferior substance, He would

lot have put this. But now that thou mayest

lot deem that the Father is included, to make

ip the number (of two), observe that His power

lath nothing different (from the Father's). A

nan bears witness when he is trustworthy of

limself, not when he himself needs testimony,

nd that too in a matter pertaining to another ;

lut in a matter of his own, where he needs the

ritness of another, he is not trustworthy. But

1 this case it is all contrary. For He though

earing witness in a matter of His own, and say-

ig that witness is borne to Him by another,

sserteth that He is trustworthy, in every way

lanifesting His independence. For why, when

[e had said, " I am not alone, but I and the

ather that sent Me," and, "The testimony of

ro men is true," did He not hold His peace,

istead of adding, " I am One that bear witness

f Myself"? It was evidently to show His in-

ependence. And He placeth Himself first ;

»I am One that bear witness of Myself." Here
!e showeth His equality of honor, and that
ley were profited nothing by saying that they
lew God the Father, while they knew not Him.
nd He saith that the cause of this (ignorance)
as that they were not willing to know Him.
"herefore He telleth them that it was not possi-


) * *v$*vriav.


ble to know the Father without knowing Him,
that even so He might draw them to the knowl-
edge of Him. For since leaving Him they even
sought to get the knowledge of the Father, He
saith, " Ye cannot know the Father without Me."
(Ver. 19.) So that they who blaspheme the Son,
blaspheme not the Son only, but Him that begat
Him also.

[4.] This let us avoid, and glorify the Son.
Had He not been of the same Nature, He
would not have spoken thus. For had He
merely taught, but been of different Substance,
a man might not have known Him, and yet have
known the Father ; and again, it would not have
been that one who knew Him, would have alto-
gether known the Father ; for neither doth one
who knoweth a man know an Angel. " Yes,"
replieth some one, " he that knoweth the crea-
tion, knoweth God." By no means. Many, or
rather I should say, all men know the creation,
(for they see it,) but they know not God. Let
us then glorify the Son of God, not with this
glory (of words) only, but that also which is by
works. For the first without the last is nothing.
"Behold," saith St. Paul, "thou art called a Jew,
and restest in the Law, and makest thy boast of
God — thou therefore that teachest another,
teachest* thou not thyself? Thou that makest
thy boast of the Law, through breaking of the
Law dishonorest thou God?" (Rom. ii. 17, 21,
23.) Beware lest we also who make boast of
the rightness of our faith dishonor God by not
manifesting a life agreeable to the faith, causing
Him to be blasphemed. For He would have
the Christian to be the teacher of the world, its
leaven, its salt, its light. And what is that light ?
It is a life which shineth, and hath in it no dark
thing. Light is not useful to itself, nor leaven,
nor salt, but showeth its usefulness towards
others, and so we are required to do good, not
to ourselves only, but to others. For salt, if it
salt not, is not salt. Moreover another thing is
evident, that if we be righteous, others shall
certainly be so also ; but as long as we are not
righteous, we shall not be able to assist others.
Let there be nothing foolish or silly among us ;
such are worldly matters, such are the cares of
this life. Wherefore the virgins were called
foolish, because they were busy about foolish,
worldly matters, gathering things together here,
but laying not up treasure where they ought.
Fear there is lest this be our case, fear lest we
too depart clothed with filthy garments, to that
place where all have them bright and shining.
For nothing is more filthy, nothing more impure,
than sin. Wherefore the Prophet declaring its
nature cried out, " My wounds stink, and are
corrupt." (Ps. xxxviii. 5.) And if thou wilt
fully learn how ill-savored sin is, consider it after


• Sav. " judgest."


I go


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LlII


it hath been done ; when thou art delivered from
the desire, when the fire no longer troubleth
thee, then shalt thou see what sin is. Consider
anger, when thou art calm ; consider avarice,
when thou dost not feel it. There is nothing
more shameful, nothing more accursed, than
rapine and avarice. This we continually say,
desiring not to vex you, but to gain some great
and wonderful advantage. For he who hath not


acted rightly after hearing once, may perhaps dc
so after hearing a second time ; and he whc
hath passed by the second time, may do righ
after the third. God grant that we, being deliv-
ered from all evil things, may have the sweei
savor of Christ ; for to Him, with the Fathei
and the Holy Ghost is glory, now and ever anc
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LIII.

John viii. 20.


" These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as He taught
in the Temple; and no man laid hands on Him, for
His hour was not yet come."

[i.] Oh the folly of the Jews 1 seeking Him
as they did before the Passover, and then having
found Him in the midst of them, and having
often attempted to take Him by their own or by
[others' hands without being able ; they were not
'even so awed by His power, but set themselves
to their wickedness, and desisted not. For it
saith, that they continually made the attempt ;
" These words spake He in the treasury, teach-
ing in the Temple ; and no man laid hands on
Him." He spake in the Temple, and in the
character of teacher, which was more adapted
to rouse them, and He spake those things be-
cause of which they were stung, and charged
Him with making Himself equal to the Father.
For " the witness of two men is true," proveth
this. Yet still " He spake these words," It saith,
" in the Temple," in the character of teacher,
"and no man laid hands on Him, for His hour
was not yet come " ; that is, it was not yet the
fitting time at which He would be crucified.
So that even then ' the deed done was not of
their power, but of His dispensation, for they
had long desired, but had not been able, nor
would they even then have been able, except
He had consented.

Ver. 21. "Then said Jesus unto them, I go
My way, and ye shall seek Me."

Why saith He this continually? To shame
and terrify their souls ; for observe what fear
this saying caused in them. Although they
desired to kill Him that they might be rid of
Him, they yet ask, "whither He goeth," such
great things did they imagine from the matter.
He desired also to show them another thing,
that the deed would not be effected through


i i.e. at the Crucifixion.


their force ; but He showed it to them ir
a figure beforehand, and already foretold th<
Resurrection by these words.

Ver. 22. "Then said the Jews, Will he kil
himself?"

What then doth Christ? To remove theii
suspicion, and to show that such an act is sin
He saith,

Ver. 23. "Ye are from beneath."

What He saith, is of this kind : " It is nc
wonder that ye imagine such things, ye who an
carnal men, and have no spiritual thoughts, bui
I shall not do anything of the kind, for,

" I am from above ; ye are of the world."

Here again He speaketh of their worldly anc
carnal imaginations, whence it is clear that the
" I am not of this world," doth not mean tha
He had not taken upon Him flesh, but that H<
was far removed from their wickedness. Foi
He even saith, that His disciples were " not o
the world" (c. xv. 19), yet they had flesh. A;
then Paul, when he saith, "Ye are not in thi
flesh" (Rom. viii. 9), doth not mean that the;
are incorporeal, so Christ when He saith, tha
His disciples are " not of the world," doth noth
ing else than testify to their heavenly wisdom.

Ver. 24. " I said therefore unto you that . . |
if ye believe not that I am He, ye shall die
your sins."

For if He came to take away the sin of th
world, and if it is impossible for men to put thi
off in any other way except by the washing,
needs must be that he that believeth not mu
depart hence, having ^ the old man ; since 1
that will not by faith slay and bury that o
man, shall die in him, and shall go away to thi
place to suffer the punishment of His fontt
sins. Wherefore He said, " He that believe^
not is judged already" (c. iii. 18) ; not merf
through his not believing, but because he <!■


* al. " must have."


Homily LIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


191


parteth hence having his former sins upon
him.

Ver. 25. "Then said they unto Him, Who art
thou?"

Oh folly ! After so long a time, such signs
and teaching, they ask, "Who art thou?" What
then saith Christ?

" The same that I told you from the be-
ginning."

What He saith, is of this kind ; " Ye are not
worthy to hear My words at all, much less to
learn who I am, for ye say all that ye do, tempt-
ing Me, and giving heed to none of My sayings.
And all this I could now prove against you."
For this is the sense of,

Ver. 26. " I have many things to say and to
judge of you."

" I could not only prove you guilty, but also
punish you ; but He that sent Me, that is, the
Father, willeth not this. For I am come not to
judge the world, but to save the world, since
God sent not His Son to judge the world, He
saith, but to save the world, (c. iii. 1 7.) If
now He hath sent Me for this, and He is true,
with good cause I judge no one now. But these
ihings I speak that are for your salvation, not
vhat are for your condemnation." He speaketh
:hus, lest they should deem that it was through
veakness that on hearing so much from them
rle went not to extremities, or that He knew
lot their secret thoughts and scoffings.

Ver. 27. " They understood not that He spake
o them of the Father."

Oh folly 1 He ceased not to speak concerning
lim, and they knew Him not. Then when,
fter working many signs, and teaching them,
le drew them not to Himself, He next speaketh
0 them of the Cross, saying,
Ver. 28, 29. "When ye have lifted up the
in of Man, then ye shall know that I Am, and
t I speak not' of Myself, and that He that
:nt Me is with Me. And the Father hath not
ft Me alone."

[2.] He showeth that He rightly said, "the

me that I said unto you from the begin-

ng." So little heed they gave to His words.

When ye have lifted up the Son of Man."

Do ye not expect that ye then shall certainly

id yourselves of Me, and slay Me? But I tell

lU that then ye shall most know that I Am, by

;on of the miracles, the resurrection, and the

iestruction (of Jerusalem)." For all these

.gs were sufficient to manifest His power.

!e said not, "Then ye shall know who I am " ;

If, " when ye shall see," He saith, " that I suffer

ithing from death, then ye shall know that I

.m, that is, the Christ, the Son of God, who

em' all things, and am not opposed to


» "do nothing," N.T.


' jtipuv Koi aywl'.


Him." ' For which cause He addeth, " and of
Myself I speak nothing." For ye shall know
both My power and My unanimity with the
Father. Because the, " of Myself I speak noth-
ing," showeth that His Substance differeth not
(from that of the Father), and that He uttereth
nothing save that which is in the mind of the
Father. " For when ye have been driven away
from your place of worship, and it is not allowed
you even to serve Him as hitherto, then ye shall
know that He doth this to avenge Me, and
because He is wroth with those who would not
hear Me." As though He had said, " Had I
been an enemy and a stranger to God, He
would not have stirred up such wrath against
you." This also Esaias declareth, " He shall
give the wicked in return for His Isurial " (Isa.
liii. 9,LXX.) ; and David, "Then shall He speak
unto them in His wrath " (Ps. ii. 5) ; and Christ
Himself, " Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate." (Matt, xxiii. 38.) And His para-
bles declare the same thing when He saith,
" What shall the Lord of that vineyard do to
those husbandmen? He shall miserably destroy
those wicked men." (Matt. xxi. 40, 41.) Seest
thou that everywhere He speaketh thus, because
He is not yet believed ? But if He will destroy
them, as He will, (for, " Bring hither," It saith,
" those which would not that I should reign over
them, and slay them,") wherefore saith He that
the deed is not His, but His Father's? He
addresseth Himself to their weakness, and at
the same time honoreth Him that begat Him.
Wherefore He said not, "I leave your house
desolate," but, it " is left " ; He hath put it im-
personally. But by saying, " How often would
I have gathered your children together — and
ye would not," and then adding, " is left," He
showeth that He wrought the desolation. " For
since," He telleth them, " when ye were bene-
fited and healed of your infirmities, ye would
not know Me, ye shall know by being punished
who I am."

" And the Father is with Me." That they
may not deem the " who sent Me " to be a mark
of inferiority. He saith, " is with Me " ; the first
belongeth to the Dispensation, the second to
the Godhead.

" And He hath not left Me alone," for I do
always those things that please Him.

Again He hath brought down His discourse
to a humbler strain, continually setting Himself
against that which they asserted, that He was
not of (iod, and that He kept not the Sabbath.
To this He replieth, " I do always those things
that are pleasing unto Him " ; showing that it
was pleasing unto Him even that the Sabbath
should be broken. So, for instance, just before


» i.e. to The Father.


192


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIII


the Crucifixion He said, " Think ye that I can-
not call upon My Father?" (Matt. xxvi. 53.)
And yet by merely saying, " Whom seek ye ? "
(c. xviii. 4, 6) He cast them down backwards.
Why then saith He not, " Think ye that I can-
not destroy you," when He had proved this by
deed? He condescendeth to their infirmity.
For He took great pains to show that He did
nothing contrary to the Father. Thus He speak-
eth rather after the manner of a man ; and as
" He hath not left Me alone," was spoken, so
also was the, " I do always those things that are
pleasing unto Him."

Ver. 30. "As He spake these words, many
believed on Him."

When He brought down His speech to a lowly
strain, many believed on Him. Dost thou still
ask wherefore He speaketh humbly? Yet the
Evangelist clearly alluded to this when he said,
" As He spake these things, many believed on
Him." By this all but proclaiming aloud to us,
" Oh hearer, be not confounded if thou hear any
lowly expression, for they who after such high
teaching were not yet persuaded that He was of
the Father, were with good reason made to
hear humbler words, that they might believe."
And this is an excuse for those things which
shall be spoken in a humble way. They believed
then, yet not as they ought, but carelessly and
as it were by chance, being pleased and re-
freshed by the humility of the words. For that
they had not perfect faith the Evangelist shows
by their speeches after this, in which they insult
Him again. And that these are the very same
persons he has declared by saying,

Ver. 31. "Then said Jesus to those Jews
which believed on Him, If ye continue in My
word."

Showing that they had not yet received His
doctrine, but only gave heed unto His words.
Wherefore He speaketh more sharply. Before
He merely said, " Ye shall seek Me " (c. vii. 34),
but now He addeth what is more, " Ye shall die
in your sins." (c. viii. 21.) And He showeth
how ; " because ye cannot when ye are come to
that place afterwards entreat Me."

"These things which I speak unto the world."'
By these words He showed that He was now
going forth to the Gentiles. But because they
still knew not that He spake to them of the
Father, He again speaketh of Him, and the
Evangelist hath put the reason of the humility
of the expressions.

[3.] If now we will thus search the Scrip-
tures, exactly and not carelessly, we shall be
able to attain unto our salvation ; if we con-
tinually dwell upon them, we shall learn right


' Savile connects these words with the clause preceding: with
this reading it is difficult to see the sense of the clause which follows.
The Bened. reading is as rendered above. The reference loay be to
t. vU. M, u-


doctrine and a perfect life. For although i
man be very hard, and stubborn, and proud
and profit nothing at other times, yet at least h«
shall gain fruit from this time, and receive bene-
fit, if not so great as to admit of his being sen
sible of it, still he shall receive it. For if j
man who passes by an ointment-maker's shop
or sitteth in one, is impregnated with the per
fume even against his will, much more is this thf
case with one who cometh to church. For ai
idleness is bom of idleness, so too from working
is generated a ready mind. Although thou ar
full of ten thousand sins, although thou art im
pure, shun not the tarrying here. "Wherefore,"
it may be said, "when hearing I do not?" I
is no small profit to deem one's self wretched
this fear is not useless, this dread is not un
seasonable. If only thou groanest that, " hear-
ing I do not," thou wilt certainly come also tc
the doing at some time or other. For it canno
be that he who speaks with God, and hears Goc
speak, should not profit. We compose our
selves at once and wash our hands when w(
desire to take the Bible into them. Seest thoi
even before the reading what reverence is here '.
And if we go on with exactness, we shall reaj
great advantage. For we should not, unless i
served to place the soul in reverence, have
washed our hands ; and a woman if she be un-
veiled straightway puts on her veil, giving proo
of internal reverence, and a man if he be cov
ered bares his head. Seest thou how the out
ward behavior proclaims the inward reverence i
Then moreover he that sits to hear groans often
and condemns his present life.

Let us then, beloved, give heed to the Scrip
tures, and if no other part be so, let the Gospel!
at least be the subjects of our earnest care, le
us keep them in our hands. For straightwa]
when thou hast opened the Book thou shall set
the name of Christ there, and shalt hear one say
" The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise
When His mother Mary was espoused to Joseph
she was found with Child of the Holy Ghost.
(Matt. i. 18.) He that heareth this will im
mediately desire virginity, will marvel at th
Birth, will be freed from earthly things. It i
not a little thing when thou seest the Virgi
deemed worthy of the Spirit, and an Angel tall I
ing with her. And this upon the very surface
but if thou perseverest to go on unto the em
thou shalt loathe all that pertains to this lif
shalt mock at all worldly things. If thou
rich, thou shalt think nothing of wealth, whe
thou hearest that she who was (the wife) of
carpenter,, and of humble family, became tl
mother of thy Lord. If thou art poor thou sha
not be ashamed of thy poverty, when thou her
est that the Creator of the world was not ashann
of the meanest dwelling. Considering this, th<


Homily LIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


193


wilt not rob, thou wilt not covet, thou wilt not
take the goods of others, but wilt rather be a
lover of poverty, and despise wealth. And if
this be the case, thou shalt banish all evil. Again,
wh2n thou seest Him lying in a manger, thou
wilt not be anxious to put golden garments about
thy child, or to cause thy wife's couch to be in-
laid with silver. And if thou carest not for these
things, thou wilt not do either the deeds of
covetousness and rapine, which are caused by
them. Many other things you may gain which
I cannot separately enumerate, but they will
know who have made the trial. Wherefore I
exhort you both to obtain Bibles, and to retain


together with the Bibles the sentiments they set
forth, and to write them in your minds. The
Jews because they gave no heed were com-
manded to suspend their books from their
hands;' but we place them not even in our
hands but in our house, when we ought to stamp
them on our heart. Thus cleansing our present
life, we shall obtain the good things that are to
come ; to which may )ve all attain, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LIV.


John viii. 3t, 32.


' Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on Him,
If ye continue in My word, then are ye My disciples
indeed. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free."

[i.] Beloved, our condition needs much en-
durance ; and endurance is produced when doc-
rines are deeply rooted. For as no wind is
ible by its assaults to tear up the oak, which
lends down its root into the lower recesses of
;he earth, and is firmly clenched there ; so too
;he soul which is nailed by the fear of God none
vill be able to overturn. Since to be nailed is
nore than to be rooted. Thus the Prophet
)rayeth, saying, " Nail my flesh by Thy fear "
Ps. cxix. 120, LXX.) ; "do Thou so fix and
oin me, as by a nail riveted into me." For as
nen of this kind are hard to be captured, so
he opposite sort are a ready prey, and are easily
brown down. As was the case of the Jews at
hat time ; for after having heard and believed,
hey again turned out of the way. Christ there-
3re desiring to deepen their faith that it might
ot be merely superficial, diggeth into their souls
y more striking words. For it was the part of
elievers to endure even reproofs, but they im-
lediately were wroth. But how doth He this ?
le first telleth them, " If ye continue in My
■ Vord, ye are My disciples indeed ; and the truth
hall make you free." All but saying, " I am
l>out to make a deep incision, but be not ye
loved " ; or rather by these expressions He
illayed the pride of their imagination. " Shall
hake you free " : from what, tell me ? From
our sins. What then say those boasters ?

Ver. 33. " We be Abraham's seed, and were
ever in bondage to any man."

Immediately their imagination dropped, and


this happened from their having been fluttered '
about worldly things. " If ye continue in My
word," was the expression of One declaring what
was in their heart, and knowing that they had
indeed believed, but had not continued. And
He promiseth a great thing, that they should
become His disciples. For since some had gone
away from Him before this, alluding to them
He saith, " If ye continue," because they also
had heard and believed, and departed because
they could not continue. " For many of His
disciples went back, and walked no more openly
with Him." ^ (c. vi. 66.)

"Ye shall know the truth," that is, "shall
know Me, for I am the tnith. All the Jewish
matters were types, but ye shall know the truth
from Me, and it shall free you from your sins."
As to those others He said, "Ye shall die in
your sins," so to these He saith, " shall make
you free." He said not, " I will deliver you
from bondage," this He allowed them to con-
jecture. What then said they?

" We be Abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage to any man." And yet if they must
needs have been vexed, it might have been ex-
pected that they would have been so at the
former part of His speech, at His having said,
" Ye shall know the truth "; and that they would
have replied, " What ! do we not now know the
truth ? Is then the Law and our knowledge a
lie?" But they cared for none of these things,
they are grieved at worldly things, and these
were their notions of bondage. And certainly
even now, there are many who feel shame at
indifferent matters, and at this kind of bondage,
but who feel none for the bondage of sin, and


^ The Tephillim. * iwroriaQac. * some omit " openly."


194


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIV,


who would rather be called servants to this latter
kind of bondage ten thousand times, than once to
the former. Such were these men, and they did
not even know of any other bondage, and they
say, " Bondsmen callest thou those who are of
the race of Abraham, the nobly born, who there-
fore ought not to be called bondsmen? For,
saith one, we were never in bondage to any
man." Such are the boastings of the Jews.
"We are the seed of Abraham," "we are Israel-
ites." They never mention their own righteous
deeds. Wherefore John cried out to them, say-
ing, " Think not to say that we have Abraham
to our father." (Matt. iii. 9.) And why did
not Christ confute them, for they had often been
in bondage to the Egyptians, Babylonians, and
many others? Because His words were not to
gain honor for Himself, but for their salvation,
for their benefit, and toward this object He was
pressing. For He might have spoken of the
four hundred years. He might have spoken of
the seventy, He might have spoken of the years
of bondage during the time of the Judges, at one
time twenty, at another two, at another seven ;
He might have said that they had never ceased
being in bondage. But He desired not to show
that they were slaves of men, but that they were
slaves of sin, which is the most grievous slavery,
from which God alone can deliver ; for to for-
give sins belongeth to none other. And this
too they allowed. Since then they confessed
that this was the work of God, He bringeth them
to this point, and saith,

Ver. 34. " Whosoever committeth sin is the
servant of sin."

Showing that this is the freedom of which
He speaketh, the freedom from this service.

Ver. 35. "The servant abideth not in the
house, but the Son abideth forever."

Gently too from this He casts down the
things of the Law,' alluding to former times.
For that they may not run back to them and
say, " We have the sacrifices which Moses com-
manded, they are able to deliver us," He addeth
these words, since otherwise what connection
would the saying have ? For " all have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God, being justi-
fied freely by His grace" (Rom. iii. 23, 24),
even the priests themselves. Wherefore Paul
also saith of the priest, that " he ought as for
the people so also for himself to offer for sins,
for that he also is compassed about with infirm-
ity." (Heb. V. 3, 2.) And this is signified by
His saying, "The servant abideth not in the
house." Here also He showeth His equal honor
with the Father, and the difference between
slave and free. For the parable has this mean-
ing, that is, " the servant hath no power," this
is the meaning of " abideth not."


1 Sav. ** Gently and hy help of the Law He casts them down.'


[2.] But why when speaking of sins doth He
mention a " house " ? It is to show that as a
master hath power over his house, so He over
all. And the, " abideth not," is this, " hath not
power to grant favors, as not being master of
the house " ; but the Son is master of the house.
For this is the, "abideth forever," by a metaphoi
drawn from human things. That they may not
say, "who art thou?" "All is Mine, (He saith,)
for I am the Son, and dwell in My Father's
house," calling by the name of " house " His
power. As in another place He calleth the
Kingdom His Father's house, " In My Father's
house are many mansions." (c. xiv. 2.) For since
the discourse was of freedom and bondage,
He with reason used this metaphor, telling them
that they had no power to set free.^

Ver. 36. "If the Son therefore shall make
you free."

Seest thou the consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father, and how He declareth that He
hath the same power as the Father? "If the
Son make you free, no man afterwards gain-
sayeth, but ye have firm freedom." For " it is
God that justifieth, who is He that condemn-
eth?" (Rom. viii. 33, 34.) Here He show-
eth that He Himself is pure from sin, and
alludeth to that freedom which reached only tc
a name ; this even men give, but that God alone
And so he persuaded them not to be ashamed
at this slavery, but at that of sin. And desiring
to show that they were not slaves, except b)
repudiating that liberty. He the more showetl
them to be slaves by saying,'

" Ye shall be free indeed."

This is the expression of one declaring thai
this freedom was not real. Then, that the)
might not say, "We have no sin," (for it was
probable that they would say so,) observe how
He bringeth them beneath this imputation. Fo:
omitting to convict all their life. He bringetl
forward that which they had in hand, whicl
they yet desired to do, and saith,

Ver. 37. "I know that ye are Abraham'
seed but ye seek to kill Me."

Gently and by httle doth He expel ther
from that relationship, teaching them not to b
high-minded because of it. For as freedom an
bondage depend on men's actions, so also dot
relationship. He said not directly, " Ye are nc
the seed of Abraham, ye the murderers of tl
righteous "; but for a while He even goeth alor
with them, and saith, " I know that ye are Abr
ham's seed." Yet this is not the matter
question, and during the remainder of thi
speech He useth greater vehemence. For \


* or, " forgive."

* This reading is from a Vatican MS. which has ei ^i|. Savi
is not grammatical. Ben. reads, " Then desiring to show th»'
they were not slaves, by repudiating that former slavery they
slaves the more» He straightway added."


Homily LIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


195


may for the most part observe, that when He is
about to work any great thing, after He hath
wrought it, He useth greater boldness of speech,
as though the testimony from His works shut
men's mouths. "But ye seek to kill Me."
" What of that," saith some one, " if they sought
to do so justly." But this was not so either ;
wherefore also He puts the reason ;

" Because My word hath no place in you."

"How then was it," saith some one, "that
they believed on Him?" As I before said, they
changed again. On which account He touched
them sharply. " If ye boast the relationship of
Abraham ye ought also to show forth his life."
And He said not, " Ye do not contain ' my
words," but, " My word hath no place in you,"
thus declaring the sublimity of His doctrines.
Yet not for this ought they to have slain, but
rather to have honored and waited on Him so
as to learn. " But what," saith some one, " if
thou speakest these things of thyself? " On this
account He added,

Ver. 38. " I speak that which I have seen with
My Father, and ye do that which ye have heard
from ' your father."

" As," He saith, "I both by My words and by
the truth declare the Father, so also do ye by
your actions (declare yours). For I have not
only the same Substance, but also the same
Truth with the Father."

Ver. 39, 40. "They said unto Him, Abra-
ham is our father. Jesus saith unto them. If ye
had Abraham to your father, ye would do the
works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill
Me."

He here repeatedly handleth their murderous
intention, and maketh mention of Abraham.
And this He doth desiring to draw off their at-
tention from this relationship, and to take away
their excessive boasting, and also to persuade
them no longer to rest their hopes of salvation
in Abraham, nor in the relationship which is
according to nature, but in that which is accord-
ing to the will.' For what hindered their com-
ing to Christ was this, their deeming that rela-
tionship to be sufficient for them to salvation.
But what is the " truth " of which He speaketh?
That He is equal with the Father. For it was
on this account that the Jews sought to slay
Him ; and He saith,

" Ye seek to kill Me because I have * told you
the truth, which I have heard of My Father."'

To show that these things are not opposed to
' jthe Father, He again betaketh Himself to Him.
They say unto Him,

Ver. 41. " We be not bom of fornication, we
_ ,have one Father, even God."


» yupeii
■ * sren


seen with," N. T.
' Kara npotuptiTiv,


* ** a man that hath,'
5 "ofGod,"N. r.


N. T.


[3.] " What sayest thou ? Ye have God for
your Father, and do ye blame Christ for assert-
ing this?" Seest thou that He said that God
was His Father in a special manner? When
therefore He had cast them out of their relation-
ship to Abraham, having nothing to reply, they
dare a greater thing, and betake themselves to
God. But from this honor also He expelleth
them, saying,

Ver. 42-44. "If God were your Father, ye
would love Me ; for I proceeded forth and came
from God ; neither came I of Myself, but He
sent Me. Why do ye not understand My
speech? Even because ye cannot hear My
word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the
lusts of your father ye will do : he wag a mur-
derer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth : " when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of
his own."

He had driven them out of their relationship
to Abraham, and when they dared greater things.
He then addeth a blow, telling them that they
not only are not Abraham's children, but that
they are even children of the devil, and inflict-
ing a wound which might counterbalance their
shamelessness ; nor doth He leave it unsup-
ported, but estabhsheth it by proofs. " For,"
He saith, " to murder' belongeth to the wicked-
ness of the devil." And He said not merely,
"ye do his works," but, "ye do his lusts," show-
ing that both he and they hold to murder,' and
that envy was the cause. For the devil de-
stroyed Adam, not because he had any charge
against him, but only from envy. To this also
He alludeth here.

" And abode not in the truth." That is, in
the right life. For since they continually ac-
cused Him of not ' being from God, He telleth
them that this also is from thence.' For the
devil first was the father of a lie, when he said,
" In the day that ye eat thereof your eyes shall
be opened" (Gen. iii. 5), and he first used it.
For men use a lie not as a thing proper, but
alien to their nature, but he as proper.

Ver. 45. "And because I tell you the truth, ye
believe Me not."

What kind of consequence is this ? " Having
no charge against Me, ye desire to kill Me. For
because ye are enemies of the truth, therefore
ye persecute Me. Since had this not been the
reason, ye would have named your charge."
Wherefore He added,

Ver. 46. " Which of you convinceth Me of
sin?"

Then they said, " We be not bom of fornica-
tion." Yet in fact many of them were bom of


" " because there is no truth in him," omitted.

^ al. " be murderously minded."

" al. '* are murderously minded."

' i.e. that this assertion of theirs being false is froia the deviL


196


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIV.


fornication, for they practiced unbefitting unions.
Still He doth not convict them of this, but
setteth Himself to the other point. For when
He hath proved them to be, not of God, but of
the devil, by all these signs, (for to do murder
is of the devil, and to lie is of the devil, both
which ye do,) then He showeth that to love is
the sign of being of God. " Why do ye not
understand My speech?" Since they were
always doubting, saying, " What is it that he
saith, ' Whither I go ye cannot come' ? " there-
fore He telleth them, " Ye do not understand
My speech," "because ye have not the word of
God. And this cometh to you, because that
your understanding is groveling, and because
what is Mine is far too great for you." But
what if they could not understand ? Not to be
able here means not to be willing ; for " ye have
trained yourselves to be mean, to imagine noth-
ing great." Because they said that they perse-
cuted Him as being themselves zealous for God,
on this account He everywhere striveth to show,
that to persecute Him is the act of those who
hate God, but that, on the contrary, to love
Him is the act of those who know God.

" We have one Father, even God." On this
ground they pride themselves, on their honor,
not their righteous deeds. " Therefore your not
believing is no proof that I am an enemy to
God, but your unbelief is a sign that you do not
know God. And the reason is, from your being
willing to lie and to do the works of the devil.
But this is the effect of meanness of soul ; (as
the Apostle saith, ' For whereas there is among
you envying and strife, are ye not carnal ? ')
(i Cor. iii. 3.) And why is it that ye cannot^?
Because ye will to do the lusts of your father,
ye are eager, ye are ambitious (to do them)."
Seest thou that " ye cannot " express a want of
will ? For " this did not Abraham." " What are
his works? Gentleness, meekness, obedience.
But ye set yourselves on the contrary part, being
hard and cruel."

But how came it into their thoughts to betake
themselves to God ? He had shown them un-
worthy of Abraham ; desiring therefore to escape
this charge, they mounted higher. For when
He reproached them with murder, they said
this,' making it, as it were, a kind of excuse for
themselves that they were avenging God. There-
fore He showeth that this very thing is the act
of men opposing God. And the, " I came forth,"
showeth that He was from thence.' He saith,
" I came forth," alluding to His arrival among
us. But since they would probably say to Him,
" Thou speaketh certain things strange and
new,* " He telleth them that He was come from
God. " And therefore with good reason ye hear


* i.e. cannot understand.

' i.e. that God was their Father.


■ i.e. " from God."
* al. " empty."


them not, because ye are of the devil. For on
what account would ye kill Me ? What charge
have ye to bring against Me ? If there be none,
why do ye not believe Me ?" Thus then having
proved them to be of the devil by their lying
and their murder, He showeth them also to be
alien from Abraham and from God, both because
they hated One who had done no wrong, and
because they would not hear His word ; and in
every way He proveth that He was not opposed
to God, and that it was not on this account that
they refused to believe, but because they were
aliens from God. For when One who had done
no sin, who said that He came from God and
was sent of God, who spake the truth, and so
spake it as to challenge all to the proof, after
this was not believed, it is clear that He was not
believed because of their being carnal. Since
sins do use, yea they do use to debase a soul.
Wherefore It saith, " Seeing ye are become dull
of hearing." (Heb. v. 11.) For when a man
cannot despise earthly things, how shall He ever
be wise concerning heavenly things ?

[4.] Wherefore, I exhort you, use we every
means that our life may be righteous, that our
minds may be cleansed, so that no filthiness be
a hindrance to us ; kindle for yourselves the
light of knowledge, and sow not among thorns.
For how shall one who knows not that covet-
ousness is an evil, ever know the greater good ?
how shall one who refrains not from these earthly
things ever hold fast to those heavenly? It is
good to take by violence, not the things that
perish, but the Kingdom of heaven. " The vio-
lent," it saith, " take it by force." (Matt. xi. 12.)
It is then not possible to attain to it by sluggish-
ness, but by zeal. But what meaneth " the vio-
lent"? There is need of much violence, (for
strait is the way,) there is need of a youthful
soul and a noble. Plunderers desire to outstrip
all other, they look to nothing, neither to con-
viction, nor accusation, nor punishment, but are
given up to one thing only, the getting hold ol
what they desire to seize, and they run past al
that are before them in the way. Seize we ther
the Kingdom of heaven, for here to seize is nc
fault but rather praise, and the fault is the noi
seizing. Here our wealth comes not froni
another's loss. Haste we then to seize it
Should passion disquiet us, should lust disquie
us, let us do violence to our nature, let us be
come more gentle, let us labor a little, that w*
may rest forever. Seize not thou gold, but seiz.'
that wealth which showeth gold to be but mud
For tell me, if lead and gold were laid befor
thee, which wouldest thou take? Is it not clea
that thou wouldest take the gold? Dost tho
then, where one who seizes is punished, prefe
that which is the more valuable, but where or
who seizes is honored, give up what is the moi


Homily LV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


197


valuable? If there were punishment in both
cases, wouldest thou not rather aim at this lat-
ter'? But in this case there is nothing like
punishment, but even blessedness. And, " How,"
saith some one, " may one seize it?" Cast away
the things which thou hast already in thy hands ;
for so long as thou graspest them ^ thou wilt not
be able to seize the other. For consider, I pray
you, a man with his hands full of silver, will he
be able, as long as he retains it, to seize on gold,
unless he first cast away the silver, and be free ?
Because he that seizes a thing must be well-girt
so as not to hi detained. And even now there
are adverse powers running down against us to
rob us, but let us fly them, let us fly them, trail-


ing after us nothing that may give a hold, let us
cut asunder the cords, let us strip ourselves of
the things of earth. What need of silken gar-
ments? How long shall we be unrolling this
mockery ? How long shall we be burying gold ?
I desired to cease from always saying these
things, but ye will not suffer me, continually sup-
plying me with occasions and arguments. But
now at least let us desist, that having instructed
others by our lives, we may obtain the promised
good things, through the grace and lovingkind-
ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory, now and ever and world without end.
Amen,


{lOMILY LV.

John viii. 48, 49.


" Then answered the Jews, and said unto Him, Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil ?
Jesus answered, I have not a devil ; but I honor My
Father."

[i.] A SHAMELESS and a forward^ thing is
wickedness, and when it ought to hide itself, then
is it the fiercer. As was the case with the Jews.
For when they ought to have been pricked by what
was said, admiring the boldness and conclusive-
ness* of the words, they even insult Him, call-
ing Him a Samaritan, and saying that He had a
devil, and they ask, " Said we not well that thou
art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?" Because
when He uttereth anything sublime, this is
thought among the very senseless to be mad-
ness. Yet nowhere before did the Evangelist
say that they called Him " a Samaritan " ; but
from this expression it is probable that this had
been often asserted by them.

"Thou hast a devil," saith some one. Who is
it that hath a devil? He that honoreth God,
or he that insulteth Him that honoreth Him?
What then saith Christ, who is very meekness
and gentleness ? "I have not a devil, but I
honor Him'' that sent me." Where there was
need to instruct them, to pull down their ex-
cessive insolence, to teach them not to be proud
because of Abraham, He was vehement ; but
when it was needful that He being insulted
should bear it. He used much gentleness. When
they said, " We have God and Abraham for our
Father," He touched them sharply ; but when
they called Him a demoniac. He spake submis-


' i.e. at the Kingdom.

• al. *' these present things.*'


* aKokovBiav,

' " My Father that," Ben.


sively, thus teaching us to avenge insults offered
to God, but to overlook such as are offered
to ourselves.

Ver. 50. " I seek not Mine own glory."

"These things," He saith, " I have spoken to
show that it becometh not you, being murderers,
to call God your Father ; so that I have spoken
them through honor for Him, and for His sake
do I hear these reproaches, and for His sake do
ye dishonor Me. Yet I care not for this inso-
lence'; to Him, for whose sake I now hear
these things, ye owe an account of your words.
For ' I seek not Mine own glory.' Wherefore I
omit to punish you, and betake Myself to ex-
hortation, and counsel you so to act, that ye
shall not only escape punishment, but also attain
eternal Ufe."

Ver. 51. "Verily, verily, I say unto you. If
a man keep My saying, he shall never see death."

Here He speaketh not of faith only, but of a
pure life. Above He said, " shall have everlast-
ing life," but here, " shall not see death." (c. vi.
40.) At the same time He hinteth to them that
they could do nothing against Him, for if the
man that should keep His saying should not
die, much less should He Himself. At least they
understood it so, and said to Him,

Ver. 52. "Now we know that thou hast a
devil ; Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are
dead."

That is, " they who heard the word of God
are dead, and shall they who have heard thine
not die?"

Ver. 53. "Art thou greater than our father
Abraham? "

• al. "insult." "


198


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV.


Alas for their vainglory ! Again do they betake
themselves to his relationship. Yet it would
have been suitable to say, " Art thou greater
than God ? or they who have heard thee than
Abraham ? " But they say not this, because they
thought that He was even less than Abraham.
At first, therefore. He showed that they were
murderers, and so led them away from the re-
lationship ; but when they persevered. He con-
trived this in another way, showing that they
labored uselessly. And concerning the "death,"
He said nothing to them, neither did He reveal
or tell them what kind of death He meant, but
in the meantime He would have them believe,
that He is greater than Abraham, that even by
this He may put them to shame. " Certainly,"
He saith, " were I a common man I ought not
to die, having done no wrong ; but when I speak
the truth, and have no sin, am sent from God,
and am greater than Abraham, are ye not mad,
do ye not labor in vain when ye attempt to kill
Me?" What then is their reply? "Now we
know that thou hast a devil." Not so spake the
woman of Samaria. She said not to Him, " Thou
hast a devil " ; but only, " Art thou greater than
our father Jacob ? " (c. iv. 1 2.) For these men
were insolent and accursed, while she desired
to learn ; wherefore she doubted and answered
with proper moderation, and called Him, "Lord."
For one who promised far greater things, and
who was worthy of credit, ought not to have
been insulted, but even admired ; yet these men
said that He had a devil. Those expressions
of the Samaritan woman were those of one in
doubt ; these were the words of men unbelieving
and perverse. " Art thou greater than our father
Abraham?" so that this (which He had said)
maketh Him to be greater than Abraham.
*'When therefore ye have seen Him lifted up,'
ye shall confess that He is greater." On this ac-
count He said, " When ye have lifted Me ^ up, ye
shall know that I Am." (Ver. 28.) And observe
His wisdom. Having first rent them away from
Abraham's kindred. He showeth that He is
greater than Abraham, that so He may be seen
to be very exceedingly greater than the Prophets
also. Indeed it was because they continually
called Him a prophet that He said, " My word
hath no place in you." (Ver. 37.) In that other
place" He declared that He raiseth the dead,
but here He saith, " He that believeth shall
never see death," which was a much greater
thing than not to allow believers to be holden
by death. Wherefore the Jews were the more
enraged. What then say they ?

" Whom makest thou thyself? "

And this too in an insulting manner. " Thou
art taking somewhat upon thyself," saith one of
them. To. this then Christ replieth ;

' al. " gone forth." » " The Son of Man," N. T. »c.vi.39, 40.


Ver. 54. " If I honor Myself, My honor is
nothing."

[2.] What say the heretics here? That He
heard the question, " Art thou greater than our
father Abraham ? " and dared not to say to them,
" Yea, I am greater," but did so in a covert
manner. What then i* Is His honor " nothing " ?
With respect to them* it is nothing. And as
He said, "My witness is not true " (c. v. 31),
with reference to the opinion they would form
of it, so also doth He speak here.

"There is One" that honoreth Me."

And wherefore said He not, " The Father that
sent Me," as He did before, but,

" Of whom ye say that He is your God."

Ver. 55. "Yet ye have not known Him."

Because He desired to show that they not
only knew not His Father, but that they knew
not God.

"But I know Him."

" So that to say, ' I know Him,' is not a
boast, while to say, ' I know Him not,' would
be a falsehood ; but ye when ye say that ye
know Him, lie ; as then ye, when ye say that ye
know Him, lie, so also should I, were I to say
that I know Him not."

" If I honor Myself." Since they said, " Whom
makest thou thyself?" He replieth, " If I make
(Myself anything,) My honor is nothing. As
then I know Him exactly, so ye know Him not."
And as in the case of Abraham, He did not take
away their whole assertion, but said, " I know
that ye are Abraham's seed," so as to make the
charge against them heavier ; thus here He doth
not remove the whole, but what? "Whom ye
say." ° By granting to them their boast of words.
He increaseth the force of the accusation against
them. How then do ye "not know Him"?
" Because ye insult One who saith and doeth
everything that He ' may be glorified, even when
that One is sent from Him." This assertion is
unsupported by testimony, but what follows
serves to establish it.

"And I keep His saying."

Here they might, if at least they had anything
to say, have refuted Him, for it was the strongest
proof of His having been sent by God.

Ver. 56. " Your father Abraham rejoiced to
see My day, and he saw it, and was glad."

Again, He showeth that they were aliens from
the race of Abraham, if they grieved at what he
rejoiced in. " My day," seems to me to mean
the day of the Crucifixion, which Abraham
foreshowed typically by the offering of the ram
and of Isaac. What do they reply ?

Ver. 57. "Thou art not yet forty' years old,
and hast Thou seen Abraham?"


* i.e. the Jews.

» " It is My Father," N. T.

• " that He is your God," N. T.


' i.e. the Father.
« " fifty," N. T.


Homily LV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


199


So that we conclude ' that Christ was nearly
forty.

Ver. 58, 59. "Jesus saith unto them, Before
Abraham was, I Am. Then took they up stones
to cast at Him."

Seest thou how He proved Himself to be
greater than Abraham ? For the man who re-
joiced to see His day, and made this an object
of earnest desire, plainly did so because it was a
day that should be for a benefit, and belonging
to one greater than himself. Because they had
said, "The carpenter's son" (Matt. xiii. 55),
and imagined nothing more concerning Him, He
leadeth them by degrees to an exalted notion of
Him. Therefore when they heard the words,
" Ye know not God," they were not grieved ; but
when they heard, " before Abraham was, I Am,"
as though the nobility of their descent were de-
based, they became furious, and would have
stoned Him.

" He saw My day, and was glad." He show-
eth, that not unwillingly He came to His Pas-
sion, since He praiseth him who was gladdened
at the Cross. For this was the salvation of the
world. But they cast stones at Him ; so ready
were they for murder, and they did this of their
own accord, without enquiry.

But wherefore said He not, " Before Abraham
was, I was," instead of " I Am"? As the Father
iiseth this expression, " I Am," so also doth
Christ ; for it signifieth continuous Being, irre-
spective of all time. On which account the ex-
pression seemed to them to be blasphemous.
Now if they could not bear the comparison with
\braham, although this was but a trifling one, had
He continually made Himself equal to the Father,
vould they ever have ceased casting stones at
aim?

After this, again He fleeth as a man, and con-

;ealeth Himself, having laid before them suffi-

;ient instruction : and having accomplished His

rork. He went forth from the Temple, and de-

)arted to heal the blind, proving by His actions

hat He is before Abraham. But perhaps some

ne will say, " AVhy did He not paralyze their

trength?^ So they would have believed." He

ealed the paralytic, yet they believed not ; nay,

le wrought ten thousand wonders ; at the very

'assion He cast them to the ground, and dark-

ned their eyes, yet they believed not ; and how

'ould they have believed if He had paralyzed

leir strength ? There is nothing worse than a

)ul hardened in desperation ; though it see signs

id wonders, it still perseveres in retaining the

ime shamelessness. Thus Pharaoh, who received

;n thousand strokes, was sobered only while be-

'*Tig punished, and continued of this character un-

il the last day of his life, pursuing those whom


wt Aoiirbv.


3 i.e. so that they could not stone Him.


he had let go. Wherefore Paul continually saith,
" Lest any of you be hardened by the deceitful-
ness of sin." (Heb. iii. 13.) For as the cal-
losities' of the body, when formed, become
dead, and possess no sensation ; so the soul,
when it is occupied by many passions, becomes
dead to virtue ; and apply what you will to it, it
gets no perception of the matter, but whether
you threaten punishment or anything else, con-
tinues insensible.

[3.] Wherefore I beseech you, while we have
hopes of salvation, while we can turn, to use
every means to do so. For men who have be-
come past feeling, are after that in the blind
state* of despairing pilots, who give up their
vessel to the wind, and themselves contribute no
assistance. Thus the envious man looks to one
thing only, that is, to satisfy his lust, and though
he be like to be punished or even slain, still he
is possessed solely by that passion ; and in like
manner the intemperate and avaricious. But if
the sovereignty of the passions be so great,
much greater is that of virtue ; if for them
we despise death, much more for this ; if they
(sinners) regard not their own lives, much less
ought we to do so in the cause of our salvation.
For what shall we have to say, if when they who
perish are so active about their own perdition,
we for our own salvation manifest not even an
equal activity, but ever continue wasting with
envy ? Nothing is worse than envy ; to destroy
another it destroys itself also. The eye of the
envious wastes away in grief, he lives in a con-
tinual death, he deems all men, even those who
have never wronged him, his enemies. He
grieves that God is honored, he rejoices in what
the devil rejoices in. Is any honored among
men ? This is not honor, envy him not. But is
iie honored by God ? Strive and be thou like
him. Thou wilt not? Why then dost thou de-
stroy thyself too ? Why castest thou away what
thou hast ? Canst thou not be like unto him,
nor gain any good thing? Why then dost thou
besides this take for thyself evil, when thou
oughtest to rejoice with him, that so even if
thou be not able to share his toils, thou mayest
profit by rejoicing with Him ? For often even
the will is able to effect great good. At least
Ezekiel saith, that the Moabites were punished
because they rejoiced over the Israelites,
and that certain others were saved because
they mourned over the misfortunes of their
neighbors. (Ezek. xxv. 8.) Now if there be
any comfort for those who mourn over the woes
of others, much more for those who rejoice at
the honors of others. He charged the Moabites


^ oi TiiAoi, a very happy emendation of Mr. Field's for (TtOAo*,
" pillars," of which former editors could make no sense. One MS.
gives oi rui^Aoi 701*? o<j>ffa\fxoi";, " those blind in their eyes," but the
sense even so is not perfect.

* injpovvTai, a conjecture of Dr. Heyse, for ircipufToi.


200


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV


with having exulted over the Israelites, yet it
was God that punished them ; but not even
when He punisheth will He have us rejoice
over those that are punished. For it is not
His wish to punish them. Now if we must
condole with those who are punished, much
more must we avoid envying those who are
honored. Thus, for example, Corah and Dathan
perished with their company, making those
whom they envied brighter, and giving them-
selves up to punishment. For a venomous


beast is envy , an unclean beast, a deliberal
vice which admits not of pardon, a wickedne:
stripped of excuse, the cause and mother of a
evils. Wherefore let us pluck it up by the root
that we may be freed from evil here, and ms
obtain blessings hereafter ; through the grac
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Chris
by whom and with whom, to the Father an
the Holy Ghost, be glory now and ever an
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LVI.

John ix. i, 2.


" And as Jesus passed by, He saw a man which was blind
from his birth. And His disciples asked Him, say-
ing, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents,
that he was born blind? "

[i.] " And as Jesus passed by. He saw a man
which was bUnd from his birth." Being full of
love for man, and caring for our salvation, and
desiring to stop the mouths of the foolish, He
omitteth nothing of His own part, though there
be none to give heed. And the Prophet know-
ing this saith, " That Thou mightest be justified
when Thou speakest, and be clear when Thou art
judged." (Ps. li. 4.) Wherefore here, when
they would not receive His sublime sayings, but
said that He had a devil, and attempted to kill
Him, He went forth from the Temple, and healed
the blind, mitigating their rage by His absence,
and by working the miracle softening their hard-
ness and cruelty, and establishing His assertions.
And He worketh a miracle which was no com-
mon one, but one which took place then for the
first time. " Since the world began," saith he
who was healed, " was it not heard that any man
opened the eyes of one that was born blind."
(Ver. 32.) Some have, perhaps, opened the
eyes of the blind, but of one born blind never.
And that on going out of the Temple, He pro-
ceeded intentionally to the work, is clear from
this ; it was He who saw the blind man, not
the blind man who came to Him ; and so ear-
nestly did He look upon him, that even His dis-
ciples perceived it. From this, at least, they
came to question Him ; for when they saw Him
earnestly regarding the man, they asked Him,
saying, " Who did sin, this man, or his parents? "
A mistaken question, for how could he sin before
he was born ? and how, if his parents had sinned,
would he have been punished ? Whence then
came they to put this question ? Before, when


He healed the paralytic. He said, " Behold, the
art made whole, sin no more." (c. v. 14,
They therefore, having understood that he wi
palsied on account of sin, said, " Well, that othi
was palsied because of his sins ; but concernir
this man, what wouldest Thou say? hath h
sinned? It is not possible to say so, for h
is bUnd from his birth. Have his paren
sinned? Neither can one say this, for th
child suffers not punishment for the father.
As therefore when we see a child evil entreate(
we exclaim, "What can one say of this? whi
has the child done ? " not as asking a questioi
but as being perplexed, so the disciples spak
here, not so much asking for information, i
being in perplexity. What then saith Christ ?

Ver. 3. " Neither hath this man sinned, m
his parents."

This He saith not as acquitting them of sin
for He saith not simply, " Neither hath this m;
sinned, nor his parents," but addeth, "that 1
should have been born blind ' — but that tl |
Son of God should be glorified in him." " ]
both this man hath sinned and his parents,
his blindness proceedeth not from that." Ai
this He said, not signifying that though this m
indeed was not in such case, yet that others h
been made blind from such a cause, the sins
their parents, since it cannot be that when 0
sinneth another should be punished. For if
allow this, we must also allow that he sinr
before his birth. As therefore when He declar
" neither hath this man sinned," He said not t
it is possible to sin from one's very birth, i
be punished for it ; so when He said, " nor
parents," He said not that one may be punisl
for his parents' sake. This supposition He


' not in N. T.


Homily LVl.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


201


moveth by the mouth of Ezekiel ; "As I live,
saith the Lord, this proverb shall not be, that is
used, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the children's teeth are set on edge." (Ezek.
xviii. 3, 2.) And Moses saith, "The father
shall not die for the child, neither shall the
child die for the father." (Deut. xxiv. i6.) And
of a certain king ' Scripture saith, that for this
very reason he did not this thing,^ observing the
law of Moses. But if any one argue, " How
then is it said, ' Who visiteth the sins of the
parents upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation'?" (Deut. v. 9) ; we should
make this answer, that the assertion is not uni-
versal, but that it is spoken with reference to
certain who came out of Egypt. And its mean-
ing is of this kind ; " Since these who have come
out of Egypt, after signs and wonders, have be-
come worse than their forefathers who saw none
of these things, they shall suffer," It saith, " the
same that those others suffered, since fhey have
dared the same crimes." And that it was spoken
of those men, any one who will give attention to
the passage will more certainly know. Where-
fore then was he born blind ?

"That the glory ^ of God should be made

nanifest," ■* He saith.

Lo, here again is another difficulty, if without

is man's punishment, it was not possible that

he glory of God should be shown. Certainly it

not said that it was impossible, for it was pos-

ible, but, " that it might be manifested even in

his man." " What," saith some one, " did he

uffer wrong for the glory of God?" What

irrong, tell me? For what if God had never

illed to produce him at all? But I assert that

e even received benefit from his blindness : since

e recovered the sight of the eyes within. What

rere the Jews profited by their eyes ? They in-

urred the heavier punishment, being blinded

van while they saw. And what injury had this

lan by his blindness ? For by means of it he

:covered sight. As then the evils of the pres-

t life are not evils, so neither are the good

ings good ; sin alone is an evil, but blindness

not an evil. And He who had brought this

lan from not being into being, had also power

leave him as he was.

[2.] But some say, that this conjunction' is
)t at all expressive of cause, but relates to the
msequence of the miracle ; as when He saith.
For judgment I am come into this world, that
ley which see not might see, and that they
' ich see might be made blind " (ver. 39) ;
id yet it was not for this He came, that those
lO saw might be made blind. And again Paul,


1^ Amaiiah, 3 Kings xiv. 6.
I' Le. show not the children.
I» "the works," N.T.


1 Him," N. T.

** that the glory," &c.


" Because that which may be known of God is
manifested in them, that they may be without
excuse" (Rom. i. 19, 20) ; yet He showed it
not unto them for this, that they might be de-
prived of excuse, but that they might obtain
excuse. And again in another place, " The
Law entered, that the offense might abound "
(Rom. v. 20) ; yet it was not for this that it
entered, but that sin might be checked. Seest
thou everywhere that the conjunction relates to
the consequence ? For as some excellent archi-
tect may build part of a house, and leave the
rest unfinished, so that to those who believe not
he may prove, by means of that remnant, that
he is author of the whole ; so also God joineth
together and completeth our body, as it were a
house decayed, healing the withered hand, brac-
ing the palsied limbs, straightening the lame,
cleansing the lepers, raising up the sick, making
sound the crippled, recalling the dead from death,
opening the eyes that were closed, or adding
them where before they were not ; all which
things, being blemishes * arising from the infirm-
ity of our nature. He by correcting showed
His power.

But when He said, "That the glory of God
might be manifested," He spake of Himself, not
of the Father; His' glory was already manifest.
For since they had heard that God made man,
taking the dust of the earth, so also Christ made
clay. To have said, " I am He who took the
dust of the earth, and made man," would have
seemed a hard thing to His hearers ; but this
when shown by actual working, no longer stood
in their way. So that He by taking earth, and
mixing it with spittle, showed forth His hidden
glory ; for no small glory was it that He should
be deemed the Architect of the creation.

And after this the rest also followed ; from the
part, the whole was proved, since the belief of
the greater also confirmed the less. For man is
more honorable than any created thing, and of
our members the most honorable is the eye.
This is the cause that He fashioned the eyes,
not in a common manner, but in the way that
He did. For though that member be small in
size, yet it is more necessary than any part of
the body. And this Paul showed when he said,
" If the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye,
I am not of the body ; is it therefore not of the
body?" (i Cor. xii. 16.) For all indeed that is
in us is a manifestation of the wisdom of God,
but much more the eye ; this it is that guides
the whole body, this gives beauty to it all, this
adorns the countenance, this is the light of all
the limbs. What the sun is in the world, that
the eye is in the body ; quench the sun, and you
destroy and confound all things ; quench the


' i.«. The Father's.


502


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVl


eyes, and the feet, the hands, the soul, are use-
less. When these are disabled, even knowledge
is gone, since by means of these we know God.
" For the invisible things of Him from the crea-
tion of the world are clearly seen, being under-
stood by the things that are made." (Rom. i.
20.) Wherefore the eye is not only a light to
the body, but beyond the body to the soul also.
On which account it is established as in a royal
fortress, obtaining the higher condition, and
presiding over the other senses. This then
Christ forms.

And that thou mayest not deem that He
needeth matter when He worketh, and that
thou mayest learn that He had not need at all
of clay, (for He who brought into being the
greater existences when as yet they were not,
would much more have made this without mat-
ter,) that I say thou mayest learn that He did
not this through necessity, but to show that He
was the Creator at the beginning, when He had
spread on the clay He saith, " Go, wash," " that
thou mayest know that I need not clay to create
eyes, but that My glory may be manifested
hereby." For to show that He spake of Him-
self when He said, " That the glory of God may
be manifested," He added,

Ver. 4. " I must work the works of Him that
sent Me."

That is, " I must manifest Myself, and do the
things which may show that I do the same things
with the Father"; not things "similar," but
"the same," an expression which marks greater
unvaryingness, and which is used of those who
do not differ ever so little. Who then after this
will face Him, when he seeth that He hath the
same power with the Father ? For not only did
He form or open eyes, but gave also the gift of
sight, which is a proof that He also breathed in
the soul. Since if that did not work, the eye,
though perfected, could never see anything ; so
that He gave both the energy ' which is from the
soul, and gave the member also possessing all
things, both arteries and nerves and veins, and
all things of which our body is composed.

" I must work while it is day."

What mean these words ? To what conclusion
do they lead ? To an important one. For what
He saith is of this kind. " While it is day, while
men may believe on Me, while this life lasteth,
I must work."

" The night cometh," that is, futurity, " when
no man can work."

He said not, "when I cannot work," but,
" when no man can work " : that is, when there
is no longer faith, nor labors, nor repentance.
For to show that He calleth faith, a "work,"
when they say unto Him, "What shall we do,


al. " noble birth."


that we might work the works of God?" (c. vi
28), He xeplieth, "This is the work of God, tha
ye believe on Him whom He hath sent." Hov
then can no man work this work in the futuri
world?" Because there faith is not, but all
willingly, or unwillingly, will submit. For les
any one should say that He acted as He die
from desire of honor. He showeth that He di(
all to spare them who had power to believi
" here " only, but who could no longer " there '
gain any good thing. On this account, thongl
the blind man came not to Him, He did wha
He did : for that the man was worthy to b(
healed, that had he seen he would have believe(
and come to Christ, that had he heard from an;
that He was present, he would not even so hav(
been neglectful, is clear from what follows, fron
his courage, from his very faith. For it wa:
likely that he would have considered with him
self, and have said, "What is this? He mad(
clay, and anointed my eyes, and said to me, ' (Jo
wash ; ' could he not have healed me, and thei
have sent me to Siloam ? Often have I washec
there with many others, and have gained n(
good ; had he possessed any power, he wouk
while present have healed me." Just as Naamai
spake respecting Elisha ; for he too being com
manded to go wash in Jordan, believed not, am
this too when there was such a fame abroac
concerning Elisha. (2 Kings v. 11.) But th(
blind man neither disbelieved, nor contradicted
nor reasoned with himself, " What is this ? Ough
he to have put on clay? This is rather to blinc
one the more : who ever recovered sight so ? '
But he used no such reasonings. Seest thou hi:
steadfast faith and zeal ?

"The night cometh." Next He showeth
that even after the Crucifixion He would car
for the ungodly, and bring many to Himsell
For " it is yet day." But after that. He entirel
cutteth them off, and declaring this, He saith,

Ver. 5. "As long as I am in the world, I ar
the Light of the world."

[3.] As also He said to others, " Believe whil
the light is with you." ' (c. xii. 36.) Wherefoi
then did Paul call this life "night" and that othi
" day " ? Not opposing Christ, but saying th
same thing, if not in words yet in sense ; for 1
also saith, "The night is far spent, the day
at hand." (Rom. xiii. 12.) The present tin
he calleth " night," because of those who sit
darkness, or because he compareth it with th
day which is to come. Christ calleth the futu
"night," because there sin has no power
work ; * but Paul calleth the present life nig'
because they are in darkness who continue


» ToTt. ' not verbally quoted,

* fiia TO Tiitf i^apTijjuoTo)*' avevepyr/Tov. Meaning, peril
" Because there is no place for the * work ' of repentance, faith,
obedience in the next world, when any through sin have neglecu
in this."


lOMILV LVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


203


vickedness and unbelief. Addressing himself
hen to the faithful he said, " The night is far
;pent, the day is at hand," since they should
;njoy that light ; and he calleth the old life,
light. " Let us put away," he saith, " the works
)f darkness." Seest thou that he telleth them
hat it is " night "? wherefore he saith, " Let us
valk honestly as in the day," that we may enjoy
hat light. For if this light be so good, consider
vhat that will be ; as much as the sunlight is
)righter than the flame of a candle, so much and
ar more is that light better than this. And
lignifying this, Christ saith, that " the sun shall
)e darkened." Because of the excess of that
)rightness, not even the sun shall be seen.

If now in order to have here well-lighted and

liry houses, we expend immense sums, building

md toiling, consider how we ought to spend our

'ery bodies themselves, that glorious houses may

je built for us in the heavens where is that Light

neffable. Here there are strifes and contentions

ibout boundaries and walls, but there will be

lothing of the kind there, no envy, no malice,

10 one will dispute with us about settling bounda-

(ies. This dwelling too we assuredly needs must

ave, but that abideth with us forever ; this

(lust decay by time, and be exposed to innumer-

ble injuries, but that must remain without grow-

ig old perpetually ; this a poor man cannot build,

ut that other one may build with two mites, as

id the widow. Wherefore I choke with grief,

lat when so many blessings are laid before us,

e are slothful, and despise them ; we use every

icertion to have splendid houses here, but how

gain in heaven so much as a little resting-

ace, we care not, we think not. For tell me,

here wouldest thou have thy dwelling here ?

the wilderness, or in one of the smaller cities?

think not ; but in some of the most royal and

■and cities, where the traffic is more, where the

Icndor is greater. But I will lead thee into

,ch a City, whose Builder and Maker is God ;

ere I exhort thee to found and build, at less

>st [with less labor ^]. That house the hands

the poor build, and it is most truly "building,"


^ om. in some MSS.


just as the structures made here are the work
of extreme folly. For if a man were to bring
you into the land of Persia, to behold what is
there and to return, and were then to bid you
build houses there, would you not condemn him
for excessive folly, as bidding you spend unsea-
sonably? How then dost thou this very same
thing upon the earth which thou shalt shortly
leave ? " But I shall leave it to my children,"
saith some one. Yet they too shall leave it soon
after thee ; nay, often even before thee ; and
their successors the same. And even here it is
a subject of melancholy to thee that thou seest
not thine heirs retain their possessions, but there
thou needest apprehend nothing of the sort ; the
possession remaineth immovable, to thee, to
thy children, and to their descendants, if they
imitate the same goodness. That building Christ
taketh in hand, he who buildeth that needs not
to appoint care-takers, nor be thoughtful, nor
anxious ; for when God hath undertaken the
work, what need of thought ? He bringeth all
things together, and raiseth the house. Nor is
this the only thing wonderful, but also that He
so buildeth it as is pleasing to thee, or rather
even beyond what is pleasing, beyond what thou
desirest ; for He is the most excellent Artist,
and careth greatly for thy advantage. If thou
art poor, and desirest to build this house, it
brings thee no envy, produces against thee no
malice, for none of those who know how to envy
behold it, but the Angels who know how to re-
joice at thy blessings ; none will be able to
encroach upon it, for none dwell near it of
those who are diseased with such passions. For
neighbors thou hast there the saints, Peter and
Paul with their company, all the Prophets, the
Martyrs, the multitude ^ of Angels, of Archangels.
For the sake then of all these things," letus empty
our substance upon the poor, that we may ob-
tain those tabernacles ; * which may we all obtain
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom to
the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever and world without end. Amen.


* SiiiJMv, ■ or, " for all these reasons." * al. ** those [things]."


204


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVII


HOMILY LVII.

John ix. 6, 7.


" When Jesus had thus spoken, He spat on the ground,
and made clay of the spittle, and He anointed the
eyes of the blind man with the clay, and said, Go,
wash in the pool of Siloam."

[i.] Those who intend to gain any advantage
from what they read, must not pass by even any
small portion of the words ; and on this account
we are bidden to " search " the Scriptures, because
most of the words, although at first sight ' easy,
appear to have in their depth much hidden mean-
ing. For observe of what sort is the present
case. " Having said these words," It saith, " He
spat on the ground." What words? "That the
glory of God should be made manifest," and that,
" I must work the works of Him that sent Me."
For not without a cause hath the Evangelist men-
tioned to us His words, and added that, " He
spat," but to show that He confirmed His words
by deeds. And why used He not water instead
of spittle for the clay? He was about to send
the man to Siloam : in order therefore that noth-
ing might be ascribed to the fountain, but that
thou mightest learn that the power proceeding
from His mouth, the same both formed and
opened the man's eyes, He " spat on the ground ";
this at least the Evangelist signified, when he said,
" And made clay of the spittle." Then, that the
successful issue might not seem to be of the earth,
He bade him wash. But wherefore did He not
this at once, instead of sending him to Siloam ?
That thou mayest learn the faith of the blind
man, and that the obstinacy of the Jews might be
silenced : for it was probable that they would all
see him as he departed, having the clay spread
upon his eyes, since by the strangeness of the
thing he would attract to himself all, both those
who did and those who did not know him, and
they would observe him exactly. And because
it is not easy to recognize a blind man who hath
recovered sight, He first maketh by the length
of way many to be witnesses, and by the strange-
ness of the spectacle exact observers, that being
more attentive they may no longer be able to
say, " It is he : it is not he." Moreover, by
sending him to Siloam, He desireth to prove
that He is not estranged from the Law and the
Old (Covenant), nor could it afterwards be
feared that Siloam would receive the glory, since
many who had often washed their eyes there
gained no such benefit ; for there also it was the
power of Christ that wrought all. On which ac-


' avToOtv,


count the Evangelist addeth for us the interpre
tation of the name ; for having said, " in Siloam,'
he addeth,

" Which is,2 Sent."

That thou mayest learn that there also it wai
Christ who healed him. As Paul saith, " Thei
drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them
and that Rock was Christ." (i Cor. x. 4.'
As then Christ was the spiritual Rock, so als(
was He the spiritual Siloam. To me also th(
sudden' coming in of the water seems to hin
an ineffable mystery. What is that ? The un
looked for (nature) of His appearance, beyonc
all expectation.

But observe the mind of the blind man, obe
dient in everything. He said not, " If it is reall;
the clay or the spittle which gives me eyes, wha
need of Siloam ? Or if there be need of Siloam
what need of the clay ? Why did he anoint me
Why bid me wash?" But he entertained n(
such thoughts, he held himself prepared for oni
thing only, to obey in all things Him who gavi
the command, and nothing that was done of
fended him. If any one ask, " How then di(
he recover his sight, when he had removed thi
clay ? " he will hear no other answer from u
than that we know not the manner. And wha
wonder if we know it not, since not even thi
Evangelist knew, nor the very man that wa
healed? What had been done he knew, but th
manner of doing it he could not comprehend
So when he was asked he said, that " He pu
clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see "
but how this took place he cannot tell then
though they ask ten thousand times.

Ver. 8, 9. "The neighbors therefore, an
they which * had seen him, that he was a bej
gar,^ said. Is not this he that sat and begged
Some said, This is he."

The strangeness of what had been brought
pass led them even to unbelief, though so mm
had been contrived* that they might not di
believe. They said, " Is not this he that s
and begged ? " O the lovingkindness of Go(
Whither did He descend, when with great kin
ness He healed even beggars, and so silenc
the Jews, because He deemed not the illustrioi
nor the distinguished, nor the rulers, but m


' " is being interpreted," N. T. * " which before," N.

' TO aQpoov T^« Trapoyffia?.

" '* was blind," N. T. Vulgate, tnendicus erat.

* lit. " dispensed."


lOMILY LVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


205


f no mark to be fit objects of the same Prov-
lence. For He came for the salvation of all.

And what happened in the case of the para-
ftic, happened also with this man, for neither
id the one or the other know who it was that
ealed him. And this was caused by the re-
irement of Christ, for Jesus when He healed
Iways retired, that all suspicion might be re-
loved from the miracles. Since how could
liey who knew not who He was flatter Him, or
iin in contriving what had been done? Neither
ras this man one of those who went about, but
if those who sat at the doors of the Temple,
iow when all were doubting concerning him,
?hat saith he?
" I am he."

He was not ashamed of his former blindness,
lor did he fear the wrath of the people, nor did
,e decline showing himself that he might pro-
laim his Benefactor.

Ver. 10, II. "They said unto him. How
'ere thine eyes opened? He answered and
lid, A man that is called Jesus."
What sayest thou ? Doth " a man " work
jch deeds? As yet he knew nothing great
oncerning Him.
" A man that is called Jesus made clay, and
lointed mine eyes."
[2.] Observe how truthful he is. He saith
ot whence He made it, for he speaks not of
hat he doth not know ; he saw not that He
5at on the ground, but that He spread it on
J knew from sense and touch.
" And said unto me. Go, wash in the pool of
loam."

This too his hearing witnessed to him. But
3w did he recognize His voice? From His
)nversation with the disciples. And saying
1 this, and having received the witness by
e works, the manner (of the cure) he cannot
11. Now if faith is needed in matters which
e felt and handled, much more in the case of
ings invisible.

Ver. 12. " They said unto him, Where is he?
e said, I know not."

They said, " Where is he ? " having already

urderous intentions against Him. But observe

e modesty ' of Christ, how He continued not

th those who were healed ; because He neither

•sired to reap glory, nor to draw a multitude,

yr to make a show of Himself. Observe too

W truthfully the blind man maketh all his

iiswers. The Jews desired to find Christ to

ling Him to the priests, but when they did not

111 Him, they brought the blind man to the

1 irisees, as to those who would question him

1 >re severely. For which reason the Evan-

{list remarks, that it was "the Sabbath " (ver.


TO OKOfXiraffTov.


14), in order to point out their wicked thoughts,
and the cause for which they sought Him, as
though forsooth they had found a handle, and
could disparage the miracle by means of what
appeared to be a transgression of the Law.
And this is clear from their saying immediately
on seeing him nothing but, " How opened he
thine eyes?"'' Observe also the manner of
their speech ; they say not, " How didst thou
receive thy sight?" but, " How opened he thine
eyes? " thus affording him an excuse for slander-
ing Jesus, because of His having worked. But
he speaks to them shortly, as to men who had
already heard ; for without mentioning His
name, or that " He said unto me. Go, wash," he
at once saith,

Ver. 15. " He put clay upon my eyes, and I
washed, and do see."

Because the slander was now become great,
and the Jews had said, " Behold what work
Jesus doth on the Sabbath day, he anointeth
with clay ! " But observe, I pray you, how the
blind man is not disturbed. When being ques-
tioned he spake in the presence of those others
without danger, it was no such great thing to
tell the truth, but the wonder is, that now when
he is placed in a situation of greater fear, he
neither denies nor contradicts what he had said
before. What then did the Pharisees, or rather
what did the others also? They had brought
him (to the Pharisees), as being about to deny;
but, on the contrary, that befell them which they
desired not, and they learned more exactly.
And this they everywhere have to endure, in the
case of miracles ; but this point we will more
clearly demonstrate in what follows. What said
the Pharisees?

Ver. 16. "Some said," (not all, but the more
forward,) " This man is not of God, because he
keepeth not the Sabbath day ; others said, How
can a man that is a sinner do such miracles ? "

Seest thou that they were led up ' by the mir-
acles ? For hear what they say now, who before
this had sent to bring Him. And if all did not
so, (for being rulers through vainglory they fell
into unbelief,) yet still the greater number even
of the rulers believed on Him, but confessed
Him not. Now the multitude was easily over-
looked, as being of no great account in their
synagogue, but the rulers being more conspicu-
ous had the greater difficulty in speaking boldly,
for some the love of rule restrained, others cow-
ardice, and the fear of the many. Wherefore
also He said, " How can ye believe who receive
honor from men ? " * (c. v. 44.) And these who
were seeking to kill Him unjustly said that they


* These words occur later, ver. 36. The account of the jirst ex-
amination of the blind man is different; ver. 15. '* Then again the
Pharisees asked him how he had received his sight.**

' al. " taught.** * " one of another/* N. T.


206


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVII


were of God, but that He who healed the blind
could not be of God, because He kept not the
Sabbath ; to which the others objected, that a
sinner could not do such miracles. Those first,
maliciously keeping silence about what had taken
place, brought forward the seeming transgres-
sion ; for they said not, " He healeth on the
Sabbath day," but, " He keepeth not the Sab-
bath." These, on the other hand, replied weakly,
for when they ought to have shown that the
Sabbath was not broken, they rely only upon
the miracles ; and with reason, for they still
thought that He was a man. If this had not
been the case, they might besides have urged
in His defense, that He was Lord of the Sabbath
which Himself had made, but as yet they had
not this opinion. Anyhow, none of them dared
to say what he wished openly, or in the way of
an assertion, but only in the way of doubt, some
from not having boldness of speech, others
through love of rule.

"There was therefore a division among them."
This division first began among the people,
then later among the rulers also, and some said,
"He is a good man"; others, "Nay, but he
deceiveth the people." (c. vii. 12.) Seest thou
that the rulers were more void of understanding
than the many, since they were divided later
than they? and after they were divided, they
did not exhibit any noble feeling, when they saw
the Pharisees pressing upon them. Since had
they been entirely separated from them, they
would soon have known the truth. For it is
possible to do well in separating. Wherefore
also Himself hath said, " I am come not to bring
peace upon the earth but a sword." (Matt. x.
34.) For there is an evil concord, and there is
a good disagreement. Thus they who built the
tower (Gen. xi. 4), agreed together to their
own hurt ; and these same again were separated,
though unwillingly, yet for their good. Thus
also Corah and his company agreed together for
evil, therefore they were separated for good ;
and Judas agreed with the Jews for evil. So
division may be good, and agreement may be
evil. Wherefore It saith, " If thine eye offend
thee, smite it out,' if thy foot, cut it off." (Matt.
v. 29, and xviii. 8.) Now if we must separate
ourselves from an ill-joined limb, must we not
much more from friends united to us for evil ^ ?
So that agreement is not in all cases a good, just
as division is not in all cases an evil.

[3.] These things I say, that we may shun
wicked men, and follow the good ; for if in the
case of our limbs we cut off that which is rotten
and incurable, fearing lest the rest of the body
should catch the same disease, and if we do this
not as having no care for that part, but rather


» "pluck it out," N.T.


* KOXUf rjvmiJiivwv.


as desiring to preserve the remainder, how much
more must we do this in the case of those whc
consent with us for evil ? If we can set therr
right without receiving injury ourselves, we ought
to use every means to do so ; but if they remair
incorrigible and may injure us, it is necessar)
to cut them off and cast them away. For sc
they will often be^ gainers rather (than losers),
Wherefore also Paul exhorted, saying, "And
ye shall put away from among yourselves thai
wicked person " ; and, " that he that hath done
this deed may be put away from among you.'
(i Cor. V. 13, 2.) A dreadful thing, dreadful
indeed, is the society of wicked men ; not sc
quickly doth the pestilence seize or the itch
infect those that come in contact with such as
are under the disease, as doth the wickedness
of evil men. For " evil communications corrupt
good manners." (i Cor. xv. 33.) And agair
the Prophet saith, "Come out from among them,
and be ye separate." (Isa. lii. 11.) Let no one
then have a wicked man for his friend. For if
when we have bad sons we publicly disclaim
them, without regarding nature or its laws, 01
the constraint which it lays upon us, much more
ought we to fly from our companions and ac-
quaintances when they are wicked. Because
even if we receive no injury from them, we shaL
anyhow not be able to escape ill report, foi
strangers search not into our lives, but judge us
from our companions. This advice I address
to young men and maidens. " Providing," * l\
saith, " things honest," not only in the sight o(
the Lord, but also " in the sight of all men.'
(Rom. xii. 17.) Let us then use every means
that our neighbor be not offended. For a life
though it be very upright, if it offend otheri
hath lost all. But how is it possible for the lif(
that is upright to offend? When the society ol
those that are not upright invests it with an evi
reputation ; for when, trusting in ourselves, w
consort with bad men, even though we be no
harmed, we offend others. These things I sa
to men and women and maidens, leaving it t
their conscience to see exactly how many evil
are produced from this source. Neither I, pel
haps, nor any of the more perfect, suspect an
ill ; but the simpler brother is harmed by occ;
sion of thy perfection ; and thou oughtest to l
careful also for his infirmity. And even if h
receive no injury, yet the Greek is harmei
Now Paul biddeth us be " without offense, boi
to Jews and Greeks, and to the Church of God
(i Cor. X. 32.) (I think no evil of the virgi
for I love virginity, and " love thinketh no evil
(i Cor. xiii. 5) ; I am a great admirer of th
state of life," and I cannot have so much as
unseemly thought about it.) How shall we ps

» al. " often are." « " proyide," N. T. » iroXiTfiat.


Homily LVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


207


suade those that are without? For we must
take forethought for them also. Let us then so
order what relates to ourselves, that none of the
unbelievers may be able even to find a just
handle of accusation against us. For as they
who show forth a right life glorify God, so they
who i} > the contrary cause Him to be blas-
phemed. May no such persons be among ' us ;


but may our works so shine, that our Father
which is in Heaven may be glorified, and that
we may enjoy the honor which is from Him.
To which may we all attain, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be glory forever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LVIII.


John ix. 17, 18.


"They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou
of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said,
He is a Prophet. The Jews then did not believe."

[i.] We must go over the Scriptures not in a
chance way or carelessly, but with all exactness,
that we be not entangled. Since even now in
this place one might with show of reason ques-
tion, how, when they had asserted, " This man
is not of God, because he keepeth not the
Sabbath," they now say to the man, "What
sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine
eyes? " and not, " What sayest thou of him, that
he hath broken the Sabbath ? " but put now that
(vhich was the ground of the defense, not that
of the accusation. What then have we to reply?
That these (who speak) are not the men who
said, " This man is not of God," but those who
separated themselves from them, who also said,
' A man that is a sinner cannot ^ do such mira-
:les." For desiring to silence their opponents
:he more, in order that they may not seem to
ae partisans of Christ, they bring forward the
man who had received proof of His power, and
question him. Observe now the wisdom of the
)00r man, he speaketh more wisely than them
ill. First he saith, " He is a Prophet " ; and
ihrank not from the judgment' of the perverse
ews who spake against Him and said, " How
:an this man be of God, not keeping the Sab-
)ath? " but replied to them, " He is a Prophet."
" And they * did not believe that he had been
)lind, and received his sight, until they had
ailed his parents." '

Observe in how many ways they attempt to
)bscure and take away the miracle. But this is
he nature of truth, by the very means by which
\t seems to be assailed by men, by these it
lecomes stronger, it shines by means of that by
hich it is obscured. For if these things had


' Morel. '* from among." ' " How can a man," &c., N. T.
• al. " the judgment amazed him not."

"the Jews," N. T. » " the parents of him," &c., N. T.


not taken place, the miracle might have been
suspected by the many ; but now, as if desiring
to lay bare the truth, so do they use all means,
and would not have acted otherwise, supposing
they had done all in Christ's behalf. For they
first attempted to cast Him down by occasion
of this mode (of cure), saying, "How opened
he thine eyes?" that is, "was it by some sor-
cery ? " In another place also, when they had
no charge to bring against Him, they endeav-
ored to insult the mode of the cure, saying, " He
doth not cast out devils save by Beelzebub."
(Matt. xii. 24.) And here again, when they
have nothing to say, they betake themselves to
the time (of cure), saying, " He breaketh the
Sabbath " ; and again, " He is a sinner." Yet
He asked you, who would slay* Him, and who
were ready to lay hold of His actions, most
plainly, saying, " Which of you convinceth Me
of sin?" (c. viii. 46) ; and no man spake, nor
said, " Thou blasphemest, because thou makest
thyself without sin." But if they had had it in
their power to say so, they would not have held
their peace. For they who because they heard
that He was before Abraham would have stoned
Him, and said that He was not of God, who
boasted that they, murderers as they were, were
of God, but who said that 'One who did such
wonders, after that He had wrought a cure, was
not of God,' because He kept not the Sabbath,
if they had had but a shadow of a charge against
Him, would never have let it pass. And if they
call Him a sinner because He seemed to break
the Sabbath, this charge also is shown to be
unsound, when those who are ranked with them
condemn their great coldness and littleness of
soul.* Being therefore entangled on every side,
they afterwards betake themselves to something
else more shameless and impudent. What is
that? They "did not believe," It saith, "that


* al. " who envied."


' al. '


was a sinner.


* ^LiKpoifivx^aV' The Bened. editor observes, that by the Fathers
the word is used to signify *' grudging "; " quarreling."


208


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVIII,


he had been blind, and received his sight."
How then did they charge Christ with not keep-
ing the Sabbath? Plainly, as having believed.
But why gave ye not heed to the great number
of people? to the neighbors who knew him?
As I said, falsehood everywhere defeats itself
by the very means by which it seems to annoy
the truth, and makes the truth to appear more
bright. Which was now the case. For that no
one might say that his neighbors and those who
had seen him did not speak with precision, but
guessed from a likeness,' they bring forward his
parents, by whom they succeeded against their
will in proving that what had taken place was
real,' since the parents best of all knew their
own child. When they could not terrify the
man himself, but beheld him with all boldness
proclaim his Benefactor, they thought to wound
the miracle by means of his parents. Observe
the malice of their questioning. For what saith
it? Having placed them in the midst so as to
throw them into distress,' they apply the ques-
tioning with great severity and anger,

Ver. 19. "Is this your son?" (and they said
not, " who once was blind," but) " of whom ye
say that he was born blind?"

As if they were acting deceitfully, and plotting
on behalf of* Christ. O ye accursed, utterly
accursed ! What father would choose to invent
such falsehoods against his child? For they
almost say, " Whom ye have made out blind,
and not only so, but have spread abroad the
report everywhere."

" How then doth he now see ? "

[2.] O folly ! " Yours," saith one, " is the
trick' and the contrivance." For by these two
things do they attempt to lead the parents to a
denial ; by using the words, " Whom ye say,"
and, "How then doth he now see?" Now
when there were three questions asked, whether
he was their son, whether he had been blind,
and how he received his sight, the parents only
acknowledged two of them, but do not add the
third. And this came to pass for the sake of
the truth, in order that none other save the man
that was healed, who was also worthy' of credit,
should acknowledge this matter. And how
would the parents have favored (Christ), when
even of what they knew some part they spake
not through fear of the Jews ? What say they ?

Ver. 20, 21. " We know that this is our son,
and that he was born blind ; but by what means
he now seeth we know not, or who hath opened
his eyes we know not ; he is of age, he shall
speak for himself."

By making him to be worthy of credit, they
begged off themselves ; " He is not a child, say


' ver. 9, " He is like him."

' al. *' esublishing what had been done.'*

> ayuviav. * rk rov Xptvroi) avyKporovvrtMtv, al-Kard rov X.

' (rxoiwpif^*. * al. *' a witness worthy."


they, nor incapable,' but able to testify for
himself"

Ver. 22. "These words spake they,' because
they feared the Jews."

Observe how the Evangelist again brings for-
ward their opinion and thoughts. This I say
because of that speech which they before uttered,
when they said, " He maketh Himself equal tc
God." (c. V. 18.) For had that also been the
opinion of the Jews but not the judgment 01
Christ, he would have added and said, that " i1
was a Jewish opinion."' When therefore the
parents referred them to him that had beer
healed, they called him again the second time
and did not say openly and shamelessly, " Denj
that Christ healed thee," but would fain effecl
this under a pretense of piety.

Ver. 24. " Give," '" saith one, " the glory tc
God."

For to have said to the parents, " Deny thai
he is your son, and that he was bom " blind,'
would have seemed very ridiculous. And again
to have said this to himself would have beer
manifest shamelessness. Wherefore they saj
not so, but manage the matter in another way
saying, " Give God the glory," that is, " confesi
that this man hath wrought nothing."

" We know that this man is a sinner."

" Why then did ye not convict Him when H(
said, ' Which of you convinceth Me of sin ?
(c. viii. 46.) Whence know ye that He is i
sinner?" After that they had said, "Give Goc
the glory," and the man had made no reply
Christ meeting praised him, and did not rebuk(
him, nor say, " Wherefore hast thou not givei
glory to God ? " But what said He ? " Dost thoi
believe on the Son of God?""' (ver. 35), tha
thou mayest learn that this is " to give glory tt
God." Now had He not been equal in honor t
the Father, this would not have been giving glory
but since he that honoreth the Son honoreth th
Father also, the blind is with good reason nc
rebuked. Now while they expected that th
parents would contradict and deny the miracl<
the Pharisees said nothing to the man himsel
but when they saw that they profited nothing t
this, they again return to him, saying, "Th
man is a sinner."

Ver. 25. "He answered and said, Whethn
he be a sinner or no, I know not ; one thing
know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see."

Surely the blind man was not terrified ? Thf
be far from him. How then doth he who sai


' ireAij?. * "his parents," N.T.

* Another reading has this sense; " For ahhouph that was
opinion of the Jews, yet he hath also added the judgment of Chrii
and hath said that the sentence of the Jews was to ptit out of
synagogue those who confessed Him to be the Christ."

'^ N. T. ver, 22-24. " For the Jews had agreed already, ths>
any man did confess that He was Christ, he should be put ow
the synagogue. Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask I
Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto hi

" lit. "that ye begot him." >' al. " Son of Man."


Homily LVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


209


" He is a Prophet " (ver. 17), now say, " Whether
he be a sinner, I know not " ? He said so, not
as being in such a state of mind, nor as having
persuaded himself of this thing, but desiring to
clear Him from their charges by the testimony
of the fact, not by ' his own declaration, and to
make the defense credible, when the testimony
of the good deed done should decide the matter
against them. Since if after many words when
the blind man said, " Except this were a right-
eous man he could not do such miracles " (ver.
33), they were so enraged as to reply, "Thou
wast altogether born in sin, and dost thou teach
us?" what would they not have said, if he had
spoken so from the beginning ; what would they
not have done ? " Whether he be a sinner or
not, I know not " ; as though he had said, " I
say nothing in this man's favor, I make no
declaration at present, yet this I certainly know
and would affirm, that if he were a sinner he
could not have done such things." Thus he
kept himself free from suspicion, and his testi-
mony uncorrupted, as not speaking from par-
tiality, but as bearing witness according to the
fact. When therefore they could neither upset
nor remove what had been done, they again
return to their former plan, making trifling
enquiries about the manner of the cure, like
men^ who search on every side about a prey
which is before them, and cannot be hurt,**
hastening round now in one direction, now in
another ; and they recur to the man's former
assertions, in order now to make them unsound
by continual questions, and say,

Ver. 26. " What did he to thee ? How opened
he thine eyes? "

What was his reply ? Having conquered and
cast them down, he no longer speaks to them
submissly. As long as the matter needed en-
quiry and arguments he spake guardedly, while
he supplied the proof; but when he had con-
quered and gained, a splendid victory, he then
takes courage, and tramples upon them. What
saith he?

Ver. 27. "I have told you once,'' and ye
lid not hear ; wherefore would ye hear it
igain?"

Seest thou the bold-speaking of a beggar
awards Scribes and Pharisees? So strong is
ruth, so weak is falsehood. TnUh, though she
.ke hold but of ordinary men, maketh them to
.ppear glorious ; the other, even though it be
: jvith the strong, shows them weak.* What he
•.aith is of this kind : " Ye give no heed to my
'■ mis, therefore I will no longer speak or an-
wcr you continually, who question^ me to no
)urpose, and who do not desire to hear in


Mor. " and by.'*
■ al. " dogs."
' al. " surely enclosed."


* " already," N.

* al. " weaker."

* al. *' trouble."


order to learn, but that you may insult over my
words."

"Will ye also be His disciples?"

[3.] Now he hath ranked' himself among
the band of disciples, for the "will ye also?" is
the expression of one who is declaring himself
to be a disciple. Then he mocked and annoyed
them abundantly. For since he knew that this
stnick them hard, he said it, wishing to upbraid
them with exceeding severity ; the act of a soul
courageous, soaring on high and despising their
madness, pointing out the greatness of this dig-
nity, in which he was very confident, and show-
ing that they insulted him who was a man
worthy to be admired, but that he took not the
insult to himself, but grasped as an honor what
they offered as a reproach.

Ver. 28. "Thou art his disciple, but we are
Moses' disciples."

" But this cannot be. Ye are neither Moses'
nor this Man's ; for were ye Moses', ye would
become this Man's also." Wherefore Christ
before said unto them, because they were con-
tinually betaking themselves to these speeches,
" Had ye believed Moses, ye would have be-
lieved Me, for he wrote of Me." (c. v. 46.)

Ver. 29. " We know that God spake unto
Moses.'"

By whose word, whose report? "That of
our forefathers," saith one. Is not He then
more to be believed than your forefathers, who
confirmeth by miracles that He came from God,
and that He speaketh things from above ? They
said not, " We have heard that God spake to
Moses," but, "We know." Do ye affirm, O
Jews, what ye have by hearing, as knowing it,
but deem what ye have by sight as less certain
than what ye have by hearing? Yet the one ye
saw not, but heard, the other ye did not hear,
but saw. What then saith the blind man ?

Ver. 30. " Why herein is a marvelous thing,
that ye know not whence He is, and He doeth
such miracles." "

" That a Man, who is not one of the distin-
guished or noble or illustrious among you, can
do such things ; so that it is in every way clear
that He is God, needing no human aid."

Ver. 31. "We know that God heareth not
sinners."

Since they had been the first to say, " How
can a man that is a sinner do such miracles ? "
(ver. 16), he now brings forward even their
judgment, reminding them of their own words.
" This opinion," saith he, " is common to me
and you. Stand fast now to it." And observe,
I pray you, his wisdom. He turns about the
miracle in every way, because they could not


' al. " reckoned."

* " as for this fellow, we know not whence He is,*

• " and yet He hath opened mine eyes,** N. T.


N. T.


2IO


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVin.


do away with it, and from it he draws his in-
ferences. Seest thou that at first he said,
" Whether he be a sinner or not, I know not "?
not doubting (God forbid !) but knowing that
He was not a sinner. At least now, when he
had an opportunity, see how he defended Him.
" We know that God heareth not sinners " :

" But if any man be a worshiper of God, and
doeth His will.'"

Here he not only hath cleared Him from sin,
but declareth that He is very pleasing to God,
and doeth all His will. For since they called
themselves^ worshipers of God, he added, "and
doeth His will " ; " since," saith he, " it is not
sufficient to know God : men must also do His
will." Then he magnifies what had been done,
saying,

Ver. 32. "Since the world began was it not
heard that any man opened the eyes of one that
was bom blind." '

" If now ye acknowledge ■* that God heareth
not sinners, and this Person hath wrought a
miracle, and such a miracle as no man ever
wrought, it is clear that He hath surpassed all
things in ° virtue, and that His power is greater
than belongeth to man." What then say they?

Ver. 34. " Thou wast altogether bom in sins,
and dost thou teach us? "

As long as they expected that he would deny
Christ, they deemed him trustworthy, calUng
upon him once and a second time. If ye ^
deemed him not trustworthy, why did ye call
and question him a second time ? But when he
spake the trath, unabashed, then, when they
ought most to have admired, they condemned
him. But what is the, "Thou wast altogether
bom in sins " ? They here unsparingly reproach
him with his very blindness, as though they had
said, " Thou art in sins from thy earliest age " ;
insinuating that on this account he was born
blind ; which was contrary to reason. On this
point at least Christ comforting him said, " For
judgment I am come into the world, that they
which see not might see, and that they which
see might be made blind." (c. ix. 39.)

" Thou wast altogether bom in sins, and dost
thou teach us ? " Why, what had the man said ?
Did he set forth his private opinion? Did he
not set forth a common judgment, saying, " We
know that God heareth not sinners " ? Did he
not produce your own words ?

" And they cast him out."

Hast thou beheld the herald of the truth, how
poverty was no hindrance to his true wisdom ?
Seest thou what reproaches, what sufferings he

' " him He heareth," N T.

' al. '* he (al. they) said thai Christ was a worshiper of God."

* ver. 3^. " If this Man were not of God, He could do nothing."

* al. " Then he draws an inference also. ' If this Man were not
of God, He could do nothing.* If therefore it is acknowledged," &c.

■ or, '* prevailed in all by." * al. " if they," &c.


bare from the beginning, and how by word and
by deed he testified ?

[4.] Now these things are recorded, that we
too may imitate them. For if the blind man,
the beggar, who had not even seen Him, straight-
way showed such boldness even before he was
encouraged by Christ, standing opposed to a
whole people, murderous, possessed, and raving,
who desired by means of his voice to condemn
Christ, if he neither yielded nor gave back, but
most boldly stopped their mouths, and chose
rather to be cast out than to betray the truth ;
how much more ought we, who have lived so
long in the faith, who have seen ten thousand
marvels wrought by faith, who have received
greater benefits than he, have recovered the
sight of the eyes witliin, have beheld the ineffa-
ble Mysteries, and have been called to such
honor, how ought we, I say, to exhibit all bold-
ness of speech towards those who attempt to
accuse, and who say anything against the Chris-
tians, and' to stop their mouths, and not to ac-
quiesce without an effort. And we shall be able
to do this, if we are bold,^ and give heed to the
Scriptures, and hear them not carelessly. For
if one should come in here regularly, even
though he read not at home, if he attends to
what is said here, one year even is sufficient to
make him well versed in them ; because we do
not to-day read one kind of Scriptures, and to-
morrow another, but always and continually the
same. Still such is the wretched disposition of
the many, that after so much reading, they do
not even know the names of the Books, and are
not ashamed nor tremble at entering so care-
lessly into a place where they may hear God's
word. Yet if a harper, or dancer, or stage-
player call the city, they all run eagerly, and feel
obliged to him for the call, and spend the half
of an entire day in attending to him alone ; but
when God speaketh to us by Prophets and
Apostles, we yawn, we scratch ourselves, we are
drowsy. And in summer, the heat seems too
great, and we betake ourselves to the market!
place ; and again, in winter, the rain and mire
are a hindrance, and we sit at home ; yet at
horse races, though there is no roof over then
to keep off the wet, the greater number, whik
heavy' rains are falling, and the wind is dashinj
the water into their faces, stand like madmen
caring not for cold, and wet, and mud, am
length of way, and nothing either keeps them a
home, or prevents their going thither. But here
where there are roofs over head, and where tb
warmth is admirable, they hold back instead (
running together ; and this too, when the gain
that of their own souls. How is this tojerabk
tell me? Thus it happens, that while we a»

^ i.e. through a good conscience, • at. *' heavy and violent


Homily LVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


211


more skilled than any in those matters, in things
necessary we are more ignorant than children.
If a man call you a charioteer, or a dancer, you
say that you have been insulted, and use every
means to wipe ofif the affront ; but if he draw
you to be a spectator of the action, you do not
start away, and the art whose name you shun,
you almost in every case pursue. But where
you ought' to have both the action and the
name, both to be and to be called a Christian,
you do not even know what kind of thing the
action is. What can be worse than this folly ?^
These things I have desired continually to say
to you, but I fear lest I gain hatred in vain and
unprofitably. For I perceive that not only the
young are mad, but the old also ; about whom I
am especially ashamed, when I see a man vener-
able from his white hairs, disgracing those white
hairs, and drawing a child after him. What is
worse than this mockery? What more shame-
ful than this conduct ? The child is taught by
the father to act unseemly.

[5.] Do the words sting? This is what I
desire, that you should suffer the pain caused by
the words, in order to be delivered from the
disgrace caused by the actions. For there are
some too far colder than tnese, who are not even
ashamed at the things spoken of, nay, who even
put together' a long argument in defense of the
action. If you ask them who was Amos or
Obadiah, or what is the number of the Prophets
or Apostles, they cannot even open their mouth ;
but for horses and charioteers, they compose
excuses more cleverly than sophists or rhetori-
cians, and after all this, they say, " What is the
harm? what is the loss?" This is what I groan
for, that ye do not so much as know that the
action is a loss, nor have a sense of its evils.
God hath given to thee an appointed space of
life for serving Him, and dost thou while thou
spendest it vainly, and at random, and on noth-
ing useful, still ask, "What loss is there?" If
thou hast spent a little money to no purpose,
thou callest it a loss : when thou spendest whole
days of thine upon the devil's pageants, think-
est thou that thou art doing nothing wrong?
rhou oughtest to spend all thy life in supplica-
tions* and prayers, whereas thou wastest thy life
and substance '^ heedlessly, and to thine own
liurt, on shouts, and uproar, and shameful
words, and fighting, and unseasonable pleasure,
md actions performed by trickery, and after all
;his thou askest, "What is the loss?" not know-
ng thou shouldest be lavish of anything rather
;han time." Gold, if thou shalt have spent, thou


i


* al. "desire." ' al. " lawlessness."

• al. " arc not even ashamed at what takes place at the theaters,
il raise."

* al. "alms-deeds." ^ ^iov.

• al. " that thou wilt rather have required of thee the husbandry
time than any other thing."


mayest get again ; but if thou lose time, thou
shalt hanlly recover that. Little is dealt out to
us in this present life ; if therefore we employ
it not as we ought, what shall we say when we
depart "there"? For tell me, if thou hadst
commanded one of thy sons to learn some art,
and then he had continually stayed at home, or
even passed his time somewhere else, would not
the teacher reject him? Would he not say to
thee, " Thou hast made an agreement with me,
and appointed a time ; if now thy son will nol
spend this time with me but in other places,
how shall I produce him to thee as a scholar?"'
Thus also we must speak. For God will say
also to us, " I gave you time to learn this art of
piety, wherefore have ye foolishly and uselessly
wasted that time? Why did ye neither go con-
stantly to the teacher, nor give heed to his
words? " For to show that piety is an art, hear
what the Prophet saith, " Come, ye children,
hearken unto me ; I will teach you the fear of
the Lord." (Ps. xxxiv. 11.) And again, "Blessed
is the man whom Thou instructest. Lord, and
teachest him out of Thy Law." (Ps. xciv. 12.)
When therefore thou hast spent this time in vain,
what excuse wilt thou have ? " And why," saith
some one, " did He deal out to us but little
time ? " O senselessness and ingratitude ! That
for which thou wert most bounden to give thanks
to Him, for that He hath cut short thy labors
and abridged thy toils, and made the rest long
and everlasting, for this dost thou find fault, and
art discontented ?

But I know not how we have brought our dis-
course to this point, and have made it so long ;
we must therefore shorten it now. For this too
is a part of our wretchedness, that here if the
discourse be long, we all become careless, while
there* they begin at noon, and retire by torch
and lamp light. However, that we be not al-
ways chiding, we now entreat and beseech you,
grant this favor to us and^ to yourselves; and
getting free from all other matters, to these
let us rivet ourselves. So shall we gain from you
joy and gladness, and honor on your account,
and a recompense for these labors ; while ye will
reap all the reward, because having been afore-
time so madly riveted to the stage, ye tore
yourselves away, through fear of God, and by
our exhortations, from that malady, and brake
your bonds, and hastened unto God. Nor is it
"there" alone that ye shall receive your reward,
but " here " also ye shall enjoy pure pleasure.
Such a thing is virtue ; besides giving us crowns
in heaven, even here it maketh life pleasant to
us. Let us then be persuaded by what has been


^ al. " an artist."

' i.e. in the theater.

* al. " or rather, both to us and."


212


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIX


said, that we may obtain the blessings both here
and hereafter, through the grace and lovingkind-


ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with Amen.


whom,
glory.


to the Father and the Holy Ghost b«
now and ever and world without end


HOMILY LIX.

John ix. 34-36.


"And they cast him out. And Jesus heard that they had
cast him out; and when He had found him, He said
unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God? He
answered and said, Who is He, Lord, that I might
believe on Him? " And the rest.

[i.] They who for the sake of the truth and
the confession of Christ suffer anything terrible
and are insulted, these are especially honored.
For as he who loseth his possessions for His
sake, the same it is who most findeth them ; as
he who hateth his own life, the same it is who
most loveth it ; so too he who is insulted, is the
same who is most honored. As fell out in the
case of the blind man. The Jews cast him out
from the Temple, and the Lord of the Temple
found him ; he was separated from that pesti-
lent company, and met with the Fountain of
salvation ; he was dishonored by those who dis-
honored Christ, and was honored by the Lord
of Angels. Such are the prizes of truth. And
so we, if we leave our possessions in this world,
find confidence in the next ; if here we give to
the afflicted, we shall have rest in heaven ; if
we be insulted for the sake of God, we are hon-
ored both here and there.

When they had cast him out from the Temple,
Jesus found him. The Evangelist shows, that
He came for the purpose of meeting him. And
observe how He recompenseth him, by that
which is the chiefest of blessings. For He made
Himself known to him who before knew Him not,
and enrolled him into the company of His own
disciples. Observe also how the Evangelist de-
scribes the exact circumstances ; for when Christ
had said, " Dost thou believe on the Son of God ? "
the man replied, "Lord, who is He?" For as
yet he knew Him not, although he had been
healed ; because he was blind before he came
to his Benefactor, and after the cure, he was
being worried by those dogs. Therefore, like
some judge at the games. He receiveth the
champion who had toiled much and gained the
crown. And what saith He ? " Dost thou be-
lieve on the Son of God?" What is this, after
so much arguing against the Jews, after so many
words. He asketh him, "Dost thou believe?"

> lit. " to."


He spake it not from ignorance, but desiring tc
make Himself known, and showing that Hf
greatly valued the man's faith. " This grea
multitude," He saith, " hath insulted Me, but oi
them I make no account ; for one thing I care
that thou shouldest believe. For better is onf
who doeth the will of God, than ten thousanc
transgressors." " Dost thou believe on the Soi
of God ? " As having both been present, and ai
approving what had been said by him. He asketl
this question ; and first,- He brought him to i
state of longing for Himself. For He said no
directly, " Believe," but in the way of an en
quiry. What then said the man ? " Lord, whc
is He, that I might believe on Him ? " The ex
pression is that of a longing and enquiring soul
He knoweth not Him in whose defense he hac
spoken so much, that thou mayest learn his lov*
of truth. For he had not yet seen Him.

Ver. 37. "Jesus saith unto him. Thou has
both seen Him, and it is He that talketh witl
thee."

He said not, " I am He," but as yet in an in
termediate ' and reserved manner, " Thou has
both seen Him." This was still uncertain ; there
fore He addeth more clearly, " It is He tha
talketh with thee."

Ver. 38. " He saith, Lord, I believe ; and h
worshiped Him " (straightway ■*) . 1

He said not, " I am He that healed thee, ths
bade thee. Go, wash in Siloam " ; but keepin
silence on all these points, He saith, " Dost the
believe on the Son of God? " and then the mai
showing his great earnestness, straightway wc
shiped ; which few of those who were heale
had done ; as, for instance, the lepers, and son
others ; by this act declaring His divine powf
For that no one might think that what had be'
said by him was a mere expression, he add
also the deed. When he had worshiped, Chr
said,

Ver. 39. " For judgment I am come into t
world, that they which see not might see, a
that they which see might be made blind."

So also saith Paul ; " What shall we say the


' i.e. before revealing Himself.
' fjLtaw^, al. jiieVof.


* not in G. T.


Homily LIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


213


That the Gentiles which followed not after right-
eousness have attained to righteousness, even
the righteousness which is of the faith of Jesus ;
but Israel, which followed after the law of right-
eousness, hath not attained to the law of right-
eousness." (Rom. ix. 30, 31.) By saying, " For
judgment I am come into this world," He both
made the man stronger respecting the faith, and
aroused those who followed Him ; for the Phari-
sees were following Him. And the, " For judg-
ment," He spake with reference to a greater
punishment ; showing that they who had given
sentence against Him, had received sentence
against themselves ; that they who had con-
demned Him as a sinner, were themselves the
persons condemned. In this passage He speak-
eth of two recoveries of sight, and two blind-
nesses ; one sensible, the other spiritual.

Ver. 40. " Some of them that followed Him,
say unto Him,' Are we also blind ? "

As in another place they said, " We were never
[servants to any man " ; and, " VVe be not born
of fornication" (c. viii. 33, 41) ; so now they
gape on material things alone, and are ashamed
of this kind of blindness. Then to show that it
was better for them to be blind than seeing. He
>aith,

Ver. 41. " If ye were blind, ye should have
10 sin."

Since they deemed the calamity a matter to

36 ashamed of, He turneth this back upon their

)wn head, telling them, that "this very thing

vould have rendered your punishment more

olerable " ; cutting away on every side their

mman thoughts, and leading them to a notion

ligh and marvelous.

" But now ye say, We see."

As He saith in that other place, " Of whom ye

aid that He was your God " (c. viii. 54) ; so too

lere, " Now ye say that ye see,' but ye see not."

le showeth that what they deemed a great

Mtter for praise, brought punishment upon

hem. He also comforted him who was blind

rom his birth, concerning his former maimed

tate, and then speaketh concerning their blind-

icss. For He directeth His whole speech to

lis end, that they may not say, " We did not

efuse to come to thee owing to our blindness,

ut we turn away and avoid thee as a deceiver."

[2.] And not without a cause hath the Evan-

elist mentioned, that they of the Pharisees who

•ere with Him heard these things, and said,

Are we blind also ?" but to remind thee that

ese were the men who first withdrew from and

en stoned Him, for they were persons who

ollowed Him superficially, and who easily

hanged to the contrary opinion. How then


" And some of the Pharisees which were with Him heard these
'1, and said unto Him," N. T.
"ye say, We see, therefore your sin remaineth," N. T.


doth He prove that He is not a deceiver, but a
Shepherd? By laying down the distinguishing
marks both of the shepherd, and of him who is
a deceiver and a spoiler, and from these afford-
ing them opportunity of searching into the tnith
of the matter. And first He showeth who is a
deceiver and a spoiler, calling him so from the
Scriptures, and saying.

Chap. X. ver. i . " Verily, verily, I say unto
you, he that entereth not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the
same is a thief and a robber."

Observe the marks of a robber ; first, that he
doth not enter openly ; secondly, not according
to the Scriptures, for this is the, " not by the
door." Here also He referreth to those who
had been before, and to those who should be
after Him, Antichrist and the false Christs, Judas
and Theudas, and whatever others there have
been of the same kind. And with good cause
He calleth the Scriptures "a door," for they
bring us to God, and open to us the knowledge
of God, they make the sheep, they guard them,
and suffer not the wolves to come in after them.
For Scripture, like some sure door, barreth the
passage against the heretics, placing us in a state
of safety as to all that we desire, and not allow-
ing us to wander; and if we undo it not, we
shall not easily be conquered by our foes. By
it we can know all, both those who are, and those
who are not, shepherds. But what is " into the
fold " ? It refers to the sheep, and the care of
them. For he that useth not the Scriptures,
but " climbeth up some other way," that is, who
cutteth out for himself another and an unusual '
way, " the same is a thief." Seest thou from
this too that Christ agreeth with the Father, in
that He bringeth forward the Scriptures? On
which account also He said to the Jews, " Search
the Scriptures" (c. v. 39); and brought forward
Moses, and called him and all the Prophets wit-
nesses, for "all," saith He,'* "who hear the
Prophets shall come to Me " ; and, " Had ye be-
lieved Moses, ye would have believed Me." But
here He hath put the same thing metaphorically.
And by saying, " climbeth up some other way,"
He alluded to the Scribes, because they taught
for commandments the doctrines of men, and
transgressed the Law (Matt. xv. 9) ; with which
He reproached them, and said, " None of you
doeth the Law." (c. vii. 19.) Well did He say,
" cHmbeth up," not " entereth in," since to climb
is the act of a thief intending to overleap a wall,
and who doeth all with danger. Hast thou seen
how He hath sketched the robber? now observe
the character of the shepherd. What then is it ?

Ver. 2-4. " He that entereth in by the door,
the same is the shepherd of the sheep ; to him


' or, " unlawful."


* or, " It saith."


214


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI>


the doorkeeper openeth, and the sheep hear
his voice, and he calleth his own by name.'
And when he hath brought them out, he goeth
before them."

[3.] He hath set down the marks of the shep-
herd, and of the evil doer ; let us now see how He
hath fitted to them what foUoweth. "To him,"
He saith, " the doorkeeper openeth " ; He con-
tinueth in the metaphor to make the discourse
more emphatic. But if thou shouldest be minded
to examine the parable word by word, there is
nothing to hinder thee from supposing Moses to
be the doorkeeper, for to him were entrusted
the oracles of God. " Whose voice the sheep
hear, and he calleth his own by name." Be-
cause they everywhere said that He was a de-
ceiver, and confirmed this by their own unbelief,
saying, "Which* of the rulers hath believed
on him?" (c. vii. 48.) He showeth that they
ought not on account of the unbelief of those
persons to call Him a spoiler and deceiver, but
that they, because they gave no heed to Him,
were consequently even excluded from the rank
of sheep. For if a shepherd's part is to enter
through the usual door, and if He entered
through this, all they who followed Him might
be sheep, but they who rent themselves away,
hurt not the reputation of the Shepherd, but
cast themselves out from the kindred of the
sheep. And if farther on He saith that He is
" the door," we must not again be disturbed,
for He also calleth Himself "Shepherd," and
" Sheep," and in different ways proclaimeth His
dispensations. Thus, when He bringeth us to
the Father, He calleth Himself " a Door," when
He taketh care of us, " a Shepherd " ; and it is
that thou mayest not suppose, that to bring us
to the Father is His only office, that He calleth
Himself a Shepherd. " And the sheep hear his
voice, and he calleth his own sheep, and leadeth
them out, and goeth before them." Shepherds
indeed do the contrary, for they follow after
them ; but He to show that He will lead all men
to the truth, doeth differently ; as also when He
sent the sheep, He sent them, not out of the
way of wolves, but " in the midst of wolves."
(Matt. X. 16.) For far more wonderful is this
manner of keeping sheep than ours. He seemeth
to me also to allude to the blind man, for him
too, having " called," He " led out " from the
midst of the Jews, and the man heard " His
voice," and " knew " it.

Ver. 5. " And ^ a stranger will they not follow,
for they know not the voice of strangers."

Certainly here He speaketh of Theudas and
Judas, (for " all, as many as believed on them,
were scattered" [Acts v. 36], It saith,) or of the
false Christs who after that time should deceive.


" and leadeth them out," N. T. ' " Hath any,'

' ver. 4. " for they know his voice, and," N. T.


N. T.


For lest any should say that He was one of thes(
He in many ways separateth Himself from then
And the first difference He setteth down is H
teaching from the Scriptures ; for He by meai
of these led men to Him, but the others did n(
from these draw men after them. The secori
is, the obedience of the sheep ; for on Him the
all believed, not only while He lived, but whe
He had died ; the others they straightway lei
With these we may mention a third differenc
no trifling one. They did all as rebels,^ and '
cause revolts, but He placed Himself so far fro
such suspicion, that when they would have ma(
Him a king. He fled ; and when they asked, "
it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar? " He ba<
them pay it, and Himself gave the two drach
piece. (Matt. xvii. 27.) Besides this. He inde<
came for the saving of the sheep, "That thi
might have life, and that they might have mo
abundantly" (ver. 10), but the others depriv(
them even of this present life. They betray(
those who were entrusted to them and fled, b
He withstood so nobly as even to give up E
life. They unwillingly, and by compulsion, ai
desiring to escape, suffered what they suffere
but He willingly and by choice endured all.

Ver. 6. " This parable spake Jesus unto thei
but they understood not what things they we
which He spake unto them."

And wherefore spake He obscurely ? Becau
He would make them more attentive ; when F
had effected this. He removes the obscurity, sa
ing,

Ver. 9. " I am' the door, by Me if any man e
ter in, he' shall go in and out, and find pasture

As though He had said, " shall be in safe
and security," (but by "pasture," He he
meaneth His nurturing and feeding the shee
and His power'^ and Lordship,) that is, "sh
remain within, and none shall thrust him oui
Which took place in the case of the Apostle
who came in and went out securely, as havi
become lords of all the world, and none \^'
able to cast them out.

Ver. 8. "All that ever came before Me £J
thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not ht
them."

He doth not here speak of the Prophets,
the heretics assert,) for as many as believed
Christ did hear them also, and were persuac
by them; but of Theudas and Judas, and
other exciters of sedition. Besides, He sa.
"the sheep did not hear them," as prais
them ; now nowhere is He seen to praise tb
who refused to hearken to the Prophets, but,
the contrary, to reproach and accuse them ve


* Tvpavvot, assuming royalty.

* ** Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am,'
'^ " he shall be saved, and," &c., N. T.

' or, " power over them."


"c, N. T.


flOMILV LIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


215


Tiently ; whence it is evident that the, " did not
lear," refers to those leaders of sedition.

Ver. 10. "The thief cometh not but for to
iteal, and to kill, and to destroy."

Which then took place when all (their fol-
owers) were slain and perished.

" But I am come that they might have life,
ind that they might have more." '

And what is "more" than life, tell me? The
dngdom of heaven. But He doth not as yet
;ay this, but dwelleth on the name of " hfe,"
vhich was known to them.
Ver. II. "I am the good Shepherd."
Here He next speaketh concerning the Passion,
ihowing that this should be for the salvation of
he world, and that He came to it not unwillingly.
rhen again He mentioneth the character of the
ihepherd and the hireling.
"For the shepherd^ layeth down his life."'
Ver. 12. "But he that is an hireling and not a
hepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth
he wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep and
leeth, and the wolf cometh and catcheth them."*
Here He declareth Himself to be Master even
s the Father, if so be that He is the Shepherd,
nd the sheep are His. Seest thou how He
peaketh in a more lofty tone in His parables,
'here the sense is concealed ; and giveth no
pen handle to the listeners ? What then doth
lis hireling ? He " seeth the wolf coming, and
;aveth the sheep, and the wolf cometh, and
;attereth them." This those false teachers did,
ut He the contrary. For when He was taken,
[e said, " Let these go their way, that the say-
ig might be fulfilled" (c. xviii. 8, 9), that not
ae of them was lost. Here also we may sus-
ect a spiritual" wolf to be intended ; for neither
id Christ allow him to go and seize the sheep.
ut he is not a wolf only, but a lion also. " Be-
luse our* adversary the devil," It saith, " walketh
jout as a roaring lion." (i Pet. v. 8.) He is
so a serpent, and a dragon; for, "Tread ye^
1 serpents and scorpions." (Luke x. 19.)
£4.] Wherefore, I beseech you, let us remain
isturing beneath this Shepherd ; and we shall
main, if we obey Him, if we hear His voice,
we follow not a stranger. And what is His
)ice ? " Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed
e the pure in heart, blessed are the merciful."
" tt. v. 3, 8, 7.) If thus we do, we shall re-
in beneath the Shepherd, and the wolf will not
able to come in ; or if he come against us, he
11 do so to his own hurt. For we have a Shep-
rdwho so loveth us, that He gave even His life
)r us. When therefore He is both powerful and
veth us, what is there to hinder us from being


cpMTffbi' cxwtrt. E. V. " have (it) more abundantly."
' " good shepherd." ' '* Hfe for the sheep."

]' •' them, and scattereth the sheep," N. T.

1* FoijToc. * *' your," N. T.

' " I give you power to tread," N. T»


saved? Nothing, unless we ourselves revolt from
Him. And how can we revolt ? Hear Him say-
ing, " Ye cannot serve two masters, God and mam-
mon." (Matt. vi. 24.) If then we serve God,
we shall not submit to the tyranny of mammon.
And tnily a bitterer thing than any tyranny is the
desire of riches ; for it brings no pleasure, but
cares, and envyings, and plottings, and hatred,
and false accusations, and ten thousand impedi-
ments to virtue, indolence, wantonness, greedi-
ness, drunkenness, which make even freemen
slaves, nay, worse than slaves bought with
money, slaves not to men, but even to the
most grievous of the passions, and maladies of
the soul. Such a one dares many things dis-
pleasing to God and men, dreading lest any
should remove from him this dominion. O
bitter slavery, and devlish tyranny ! For this
is the most grievous thing of all, that when
entangled in such evils we are pleased and hug
our chain, and dwelling in a prison house full of
darkness, refuse to come forth to the light, but
rivet evil upon ourselves, and rejoice in our
malady. So that we cannot be freed, but are
in a worse state than those that work the mines,
enduring labors and affliction, but not enjoying
the fruit. And what is in truth worse than all,
if any one desire to free us from this bitter cap-
tivity, we do not suffer it, but are even vexed
and displeased, being in this respect in no better
case than madmen, or rather in a much more
miserable state than any such, inasmuch as we
are not even willing to be delivered from our
madness. What? was it for this, O man, that
thou wast brought into the world ? Was it for
this that thou wast made a man, that thou
mightest work in these mines, and gather gold ?
Not for this did God create thee in His Image,
but that thou mightest please Him, that thou
mightest obtain the things to come, that thou
mightest join the choir of Angels. Why now
dost thou banish thyself from such a relation-
ship, and thrust thyself into the extreme of
dishonor and meanness?* He who came by
the same birth pangs with thee, (the spiritual
birth pangs I mean,) is perishing with hunger,
and thou art bursting with fullness : thy brother
goeth about with naked body, but thou providest
garments even for thy garments, heaping up all
this clothing for the worms. How much better
would it have been to put them on the bodies
of the poor ; so would they have remained unde-
stroyed, would have freed thee from all care,
and have won for thee the life to come. If thou
wilt not have them to be moth-eaten, give them
to the poor, these are they who know how to
shake these garments well. The Body of Christ
is more precious and more secure than the coffer,
for not only doth It keep the garments safe, not


» lit. " low birth."


2l6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L)


only doth It preserve them unconsumed, but
even rendereth them brighter. Oftentimes the
coffer taken with the garments causeth thee the
utmost loss, but this place of safety not even
death can harm. With It we need neither
doors nor bolts, nor wakeful servants, nor any
other such security, for our possessions are free
from all treacherous attacks, and are laid up
under guard, as we may suppose things laid up
in heaven would be ; for to all wickedness that
place is inaccessible. These thing we cease not
continually to say to you, and you hearing are
not persuaded. The reason is, that we are of a
soul which is mean, gaping upon the earth,
groveling on the ground. Or rather, God
forbid that I should condemn you all of wicked-
ness, as though all were incurably diseased.
For even if those who are drunk with riches
stop their ears against my words, yet they who
live in poverty will be able to look clearly to
what I say. "But what," saith some one, "hath
this to do with the poor? for they have no gold,
or any such garments." No, but they have bread
and cold water, but they have two obols, and
feet to visit the sick, but they have a tongue and
speech to comfort the bedridden, but they have
house and shelter to make the stranger their
inmate. We demand not from the poor such
and such a number of talents of gold, these we
ask from the rich. But if a man be poor, and
come to the doors of others, our Lord is not


ashamed to receive even an obol, but will sa
that He hath received more from the giver, tha
from those who cast in much. How many (
those who now stand here would desire to ha\
been born at that time, when Christ went aboi
the earth in the flesh, to have conversed and si
at meat with Him ? Lo, this may be done no\
we may invite Him more than then to a mea
and feast with Him, and that to greater profi
For of those who then feasted with Him mar
even perished, as Judas and others like hiir
but every one of those who invite Him to the
houses now, and share with Him table and roc
shall enjoy a great blessing. "Come," it saitl
"ye blessed of My Father, inherit the Kingdoi
prepared for you from the foundation of tl
world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave W
meat : I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink :
was a stranger, and ye took Me in ; sick, and )
visited Me ; I was in prison, and and ye can
unto Me." (Matt. xxv. 34-36.) That then w
may hear these words, let us clothe the nakei
let us bring in the stranger, feed the hungr
give the thirsty drink, let us visit the sick, an
look upon him that is in prison, that we mi
have boldness and obtain remission of our sin
and share those good things which transcer
both speech and thought. Which may we i
obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness 1
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory an
the might' forever. Amen.


HOMILY LX.


John x. 14, 15.


" I am the Good Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am
known of Mine. As the Father knoweth Me, even
so know I the Father; and I lay down My life for
the sheep."

[ I .] A GREAT matter, beloved, a great matter
it is to preside over a Church : a matter needing
wisdom and courage as great as that of which
Christ speaketh, that a man should lay down his
life for the sheep, and never leave them deserted
or naked ; that he should stand against the wolf
nobly. For in this the shepherd differs from the
hireling ; the one always looks to his own safety,
caring not for the sheep ; the other always seeks
that of the sheep, neglecting his own. Having
therefore mentioned the marks of a shepherd,
Christ hath put two kinds of spoilers ; one, the
thief who kills and steals ; the other, one who
doth not these things, but who when they are
done doth not give heed nor hinder them. By
the first, pointing to Theudas and those like


him ; by the second, exposing the teachers
the Jews, who neither cared for nor thoug
about the sheep entrusted to them. On whit
account Ezekiel of old rebuked them, and sai
" Woe,^ ye shepherds of Israel ! Do the she
herds feed themselves ? Do not the shepher
feed the sheep?" (Ezek. xxxiv. 2, LXX.) B
they did the contrary, which is the worst kii
of wickedness, and the cause of all the re I
Wherefore It saith, " They have not turned ba
the strayed, nor sought the lost, nor bound
the broken, nor healed the sick, because th
fed themselves and not the sheep." (Ezt
xxxiv. 4.) As Paul also hath declared in anotl
passage, saying, "For all seek their own, r
the things which are Jesus Christ's " (Phil.
21); and again, " Let no man seek his ov
but every man his neighbor's." (i Cor. x. 2.

1 al. " with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be g\on
' al. " O."


:OMILY LX.]


HOMIL,IES ON ST. JOHN.


217


rom both Christ distinguisheth Himself; from
lose who came to spoil, by saying, " I am come
lat they might have life, and that they might
ave more abundantly" (ver. 10); and from
lose who cared not for the sheep being carried
ivay by wolves, by never deserting them, but
ven laying down His life for them, that the
leep might not perish. For when they desired
) kill Him, He neither altered His teaching,
or betrayed those who believed on Him, but
;ood firm, and chose to die. Wherefore He
Dntinually said, " I am the good Shepherd."
'hen because His words appeared to be unsup-
orted by testimony, (for though the, " I lay
own My life," was not long after proved, yet
le, " that they might have life, and that they
light have more abundantly," was to come to
iss after their departure hence in the life to
jme,) what doth He? He proveth one from
le other; by giving His mortal life^ (He prov-
;h) that He giveth life immortal.^ As Paul
so saith, " If when we were enemies we were
conciled to God by the death of His Son,
uch more being reconciled we shall be saved."
iom. v. 10.) And again in another place, " He
at spared not His own Son, but delivered Him
for us all, how shall He not with Him also
ely give us all things? " (Rom. viii. 32.)
But wherefore do they not now bring against
im the charge which they did before, when
ey said, " Thou bearest witness of thyself, thy
tness is not true?" (c. viii. 13.) Because
had often stopped their mouths, and because
is boldness towards them had been increased
His miracles. Then because He said above,
Vnd the sheep hear his voice, and follow
Ti," lest any should say, "What then is this
those who believe not?" hear what He addeth,
Vnd I know My sheep, and am known of
ne." As Paul declared when he said, "God
th not rejected His people whom He fore-
ew " (Rom. xi. 2) ; and Moses, " The Lord
ew those that were His" (2 Tim. ii. 19;
up. Num. xvi. 5); "those," He saith, "I
an, whom He ^ foreknew." Then that thou
yest not deem the measure of knowledge to
equal, hear how He setteth the matter right
adding, " I know My sheep, and am known
Mine." But the knowledge is not equal,
/here is it equal? " In the case of the Father
i Me, for there, " As the Father knoweth Me,
n so know I the Father." Had He not
hed to prove this, why should He have added
t expression? Because He often ranked
nself among the many, therefore, lest any
; should deem that He knew as a man know-
He added, "As the Father knoweth Me,
n so know I the Father." " I know Him as


♦•xi".


' ^Wl)!'.


9 Ben "I."


exactly as He knoweth Me." Wherefore He
said, "No man knoweth the Son* save the
Father, nor the Father save the Son " (Luke x.
22), speaking of a distinct kind of knowledge,
and such as no other can possess.

[2.] " I lay down My life." This He saith
continually, to show that He is no deceiver.
So also the Apostle, when he desired to show
that he was a genuine teacher, and was arguing
against the false apostles, established his author-
ity by his dangers and deaths, saying, " In stripes
above measure, in deaths oft." (2 Cor. xi. 23.)
For to say, " I am light," and " I am life," seemed
to the foolish to be a matter of pride ; but to say,
" I am willing to die," admitted not any malice
or envy. Wherefore they do not say to Him,
" Thou bearest witness of thyself, thy witness is
not true," for the speech manifested very tender
care for them, if indeed He was willing to give
Himself for those who would have stoned Him.
On this account also He seasonably introduceth
mention of the Gentiles ;

Ver. 16. " For other sheep also I have," He
saith, " which are not of this fold, them also
must I bring."

Observe again, the word " must," here used,
doth not express necessity, but is declaratory of
something which will certainly come to pass.
As though He had said, " Why marvel ye if these
shall follow Me, and if My sheep shall hear My
voice ? When ye shall see others also following
Me and hearing My voice, then shall ye be as-
tonished more." And be not confounded when
you hear Him say, "which are not of this fold "
(Gal. V. 6), for the difference relateth to the
Law only, as also Paul saith, " Neither circum-
cision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision."

"Them also must I bring." He showeth that
both these and those were scattered and mixed,
and without shepherds, because the good Shep-
herd had not yet come. Then He proclaimeth
beforehand their future union, that,

" They shall be one fold." "

Which same thing also Paul ' declared, saying,
" For to make in Himself of twain one new
man." (Eph. ii. 15.)

Ver. 17." Therefore doth My Father love Me,
because I lay down My life, that I might take it
again."

What could be more full of humanity than this
saying, if so be that on our account our Lord
shall be beloved, because He dieth for us?
What then ? tell me, was He not beloved during
the time before this ; did the Father now begin
to love Him, and were we the causes of His love ?
Seest thou how He used condescension? But
what doth He here desire to prove? Because


* " who the Son is," &c., N. T.

* " and there shall be one fold, one shepherd," N. T.
« al. " Which Paul also himself."


2l8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L


they said that He was alien from the Father, and
a deceiver, and had come to ruin and destroy.
He telleth them, " This if nothing else would
persuade Me to love you, namely, your being so
beloved by the Father, that I also am beloved
by Him, because I die for you." Besides this.
He desireth also to prove that other point, that
He came not to the action unwillingly, (for if
unwillingly, how could what was done cause
love ?) and that this was especially known to the
Father. And if He speaketh as a man, marvel
not, for we have often mentioned the cause of
this, and to say again the same things is super-
fluous and unpleasant.

" I lay down My life, that I might take it
again."

Ver. 1 8. "No man taketh it from Me, but I
lay it down of Myself. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again."

Because they often took counsel to kill Him,
He telleth them, " Except I will, your labor is
unavailing." And by the first He proveth the
second, by the Death, the Resurrection. For
this is the strange and wonderful thing. Since
both took place in a new way, and beyond ordi-
nary custom. But let us give heed exactly to
what He saith, " I have power to lay down My
life." And who hath not " power to lay down
his life " ? Since it is in the power of any that
will, to kill himself. But He saith it not so, but
how ? "I have in such a way the power to lay
it down, that no one can effect this against My
will." And this is a power not belonging to
men ; for we have no power to lay it down in any
other way than by killing ourselves. And if we
fall into the hands of men who plot against us,
and have the power to kill us, we no longer are
free to lay it down or not, but even against our
will they take it from us. Now this was not the
case with Christ, but even when others plotted
against Him, He had power not to lay it down.
Having therefore said that, " No man taketh it
from Me," He addeth, " I have power to lay
down My life," that is, " I alone can decide as
to laying it down," a thing which doth not rest
with us,' for many others also are able to take it
from us. Now this He said not at first, (since
the assertion would not have seemed credible,)
but when He had received the testimony of facts,
and when, having often j^lotted against Him, they
had been unable to lay hold on Him, (for
He escaped from their hands ten thousand
times,) He then saith, " No man taketh it from
me." But if this be true, that other point fol-
lows, that He came to death voluntarily. And
if this be true, the next point is also certain, that
He can " take it again " when He will. For if
the dying ^ was a greater thing than man could
do, doubt no more about the other. Since the


Ben. '* you.'


' i.e. as He died.


fact that He alone was able to let go His li
showeth that He was able by the same power
take it again. Seest thou how from the first I
proved the second, and from His death show
that His Resurrection was indisputable ?

"This commandment have I received of J
Father."

What commandment was this? To die i
the world. Did He then wait first to hear, ai
then choose, and had He need of learning i
Who that had sense would assert this ? But
before when He said, " Therefore doth J
Father love Me," He showed that the first m
tion was voluntary, and removed all suspicion
opposition to the Father ; so here when He sai
that He received a commandment from t
Father, He declared nothing save that, " tl
which I do seemeth good to Him," in order tt
when they should slay Him, they might r
think that they had slain Him as one desert
and given up by the Father, nor reproach Hi
with such reproaches as they did, " He sav
others, himself he cannot save " ; and, " If th
be the Son of God, come down from the crosi
(Matt, xxvii. 42, 40) ; yet the very reason of F
not coming down was, that He was the Son
God.

[3.] Then lest on hearing that, " I ha
received a command from the Father," th
shouldest deem that the achievement'' doth r
belong to Him, He hath said preventing tl
"The good Shepherd layeth down His life I
the sheep " ; showing by this that the she
were His, and that all which took place was F
achievement, and that He needed no commaii
For had He needed a commandment, how con
He have said, " I lay it down of Myself"? i
He that layeth it down of Himself needeth ;
commandment. He also assigneth the cause I
which He doeth this. And what is that? Tl
He is the Shepherd, and the good Shephe:
Now the good Shepherd needeth no one
arouse him to his duty ; and if this be the c;
with man, much more is it so with God. Whe
fore Paul said, that "He emptied Himse j
(Phil. ii. 7.) So the " commandment " put "
means nothing else, but to show His unan:
ity with the Father ; and if He speaketh in
humble and human a way, the cause is the
firmity of His hearers.

Ver. 19. "There was a division therefc
among the Jews." And some ^ said. He hat
devil (and is mad'^). Others said, These
not the words of him that hath a devil : ca
devil open the eyes of the bUnd?"

For because His words were greater
belonged to man, and not of common use.


* TO KaTOpBujtxa.


' the Jews for these sayings," N. T.
•^ " many of them," N. T._
' " is mad, why hear ye him?" N. T-


* " therefore again," N. '


lOMILY LX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


219


aid that He had a devil, caUing Him so now
Dr the fourth time. For they before had said,
Thou hast a devil, who seeketh to kill thee?"
c. vii. 20) ; and again, " Said we not well that
dou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?" (c. viii.
8) ; and here, " He hath a devil and is mad,
rhy hear ye him?" Or rather we should say,
hat He heard this not for the fourth time, but
requently. For to ask, " Said we not well that
liou hast a devil? " is a sign that they had said
0 not twice or thrice, but many times. " Others
aid. These are not the words of him that hath a
evil : can a devil open the eyes of the blind ? "
or since they could not silence their opponents
y words, they now brought proof from His
orks. " Certainly neither are the words those
f one that hath a devil; yet if ye are not per-
laded by the words, be ye shamed by the
orks. For if they are not the acts of one that
ath a devil, and are greater than belong to
lan, it is quite clear that they proceed from
)me divine power." Seest thou the argument?
hat they were greater than belonged to man is
ain, from the Jews saying, " He hath a devil" ;
at He had not a devil. He showed by what
e did.

What then did Christ ? He answered nothing
these, things. Before this He had replied,
I have not a devil " ; but not so now ; for
rice He had afforded proof by His actions. He
terwards held His peace. For neither were
ey worthy of an answer, who said that He was
)ssessed of a devil, on account of those actions
r which they ought to have admired and
emed Him to be God. And how were any
ther refutations from Him needed, when they
posed and refuted each other? Wherefore
e was silent, and bore all mildly. And not for
is reason alone, but also to teach us all meek-
ss and long-suffering.

[4.] Let us now imitate Him. For not only
1 He now hold His peace, but even came
ong them again,' and being questioned an-
ered and showed the things relating to His
eknowledge ; and though called "demoniac"
d " madman," by men who had received from
m ten thousand benefits, and that not once
twice but many times, not only did He refrain
m avenging Himself, but even ceased not to
Qefit them. To benefit, do I say? He laid
vm His life for them, and while being crucified
ike in their behalf to His Father. This then
us also imitate, for to be a disciple of Christ,
he being gentle and kind. But whence can
s gendeness come to us? If we continually
;kon up our sins, if we mourn, if we weep ;
neither doth a soul that dwelleth in the com-
ly of so much grief endure to be provoked


iraAii/ ciriVrij.


or angered. Since wherever there is mourning,
it is impossible that there should be anger;
where grief is, all anger is out of the way ; where
there is brokenness of spirit, there is no provo-
cation. For the mind, when scourged by sorrow,
hath not leisure to be roused, but will groan'
bitterly, and weep yet more bitterly. I know
that many laugh on hearing these things, but I
will not cease to lament for the laughers. For
the present is a time for mourning, and waitings,
and lamentations, since we do many sins both
in word and deed, and hell awaiteth those who
commit such transgressions, and the river boiling
with a roaring stream of fire, and banishment
from the Kingdom, which is the most grievous
thing of all. When these things then are threat-
ened, tell me, dost thou laugh and bear thee
proudly? And when thy Lord is angered and
threatening, dost thou stand careless,' and fear-
est thou not lest by this thou light for thyself
the furnace to a blaze ? Hearest thou not what
He crieth out every day ? " Ye saw Me * an
hungered, and gave Me no meat ; thirsty, and
ye gave Me no drink ; depart ye into the fire
prepared for the devil and his angels." (Matt.
XXV.) And these things He threatened every
day. " But," saith some one, " I did give Him
meat." When, and for how many days? Ten
or twenty? But He willeth it not merely for so
much time as this, but as much as thou spendest
upon earth. For the virgins also had oil, yet
not sufficient for their salvation ; they too lighted
their lamps, yet they were shut out from the
bridechamber. And with reason, since the lamps
had gone out before the coming of the Bride-
groom. On this account we need much oil, and
abundant lovingkindness. Hear at least what
the Prophet saith, " Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to Thy great mercy." (Ps. li. i.)
We therefore must so take pity upon our neigh-
bor, according to His great mercy towards us.
For such as we are towards our fellow-servants,
such shall we find our Lord towards ourselves.
And what kind of " mercy " is " great " ? When
we give not of our abundance, but of our defi-
ciency. But if we give not even of our abun-
dance, what hope shall there be for us ? Whence
shall we have deliverance from those woes?
Where shall we be enabled to flee and to find
salvation ? For if the virgins after so many and
so great toils found no comfort anywhere, who
shall stand forth for us when we hear those fear-
ful words of the Judge Himself, addressing and
reproaching us, because " I was an hungered,
and ye gave Me no meat ; for inasmuch," It
saith, " as ye did it not unto one of the least of
these, ye did it not unto Me " ; saying this not

' al. *' groans.**

* avantnTMKu^, lit. "reclined,** or '* despondent."

• " I WM,** &c., N. T.


220


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily l:


merely of His disciples, nor of those who have
taken upon themselves the ascetic life, but of
every faithful man. For such an one though he
be a slave, or one of those that beg in the
market-place, yet if he believeth in God, ought
by right to enjoy all our good will. And if we
neglect such an one when naked or hungry, we
shall hear those words. With reason. For what
difficult or grievous thing hath He demanded
of us? What that is not of the very lightest
and easiest ? He saith not, " I was sick, and ye
restored Me not," but, " and ye visited Me not."
He saith not, " I was in prison, and ye delivered
Me not," but, " and ye came not unto Me." In
proportion therefore as the commands are easy,
so is the punishment greater to them that dis-
obey. For what is easier, tell me, than to walk
forth and enter into a prison ? And what more
pleasant? For when thou seest some bound,
others covered with filth, others with uncut hair
and clothed in rags, others perishing with hun-
ger, and running like dogs to your feet, others
with deep ploughed sides,' others now returning
in chains from the market-place, who beg all
day and do not collect even necessary suste-
nance, and yet at evening are required by those
set over them to furnish that wicked and savage
service ; ' though thou be like any stone, thou
wilt certainly be rendered kinder ; though thou
livest a soft and dissipated life, thou wilt cer-
tainly become wiser, when thou observest the
nature of human affairs in other men's misfor-
tunes ; for thou wilt surely gain an idea of that
fearful day, and of its varied punishments. Re-
volving and considering these things, thou wilt
certainly cast out both wrath and pleasure, and
the love of worldly things, and wilt make thy
soul more calm than the calmest harbor ; and
thou wilt reason concerning that Judgment seat,
reflecting that if among men there is so much
forethought, and order, and terror, and threat-
enings, much more will there be with God.
"For there is no power but from God." (Rom.
xiii. I.) He therefore who permitteth rulers to
order these things thus, will much more do the
same Himself.

[5.] And certainly were there not this fear,
all would be lost, when though such punishments
hang over them, there are many who go over
to the side of wickedness. These things if thou
wisely observe, thou wilt be more ready-minded
towards alms-doing, and wilt reap much pleas-
ure, far greater than those who come down from
the theater. For they when they remove from
thence are inflamed and burn with desire. Hav-
ing seen those women hovering^ on the stage,


^ irAcvpaf Suopvyuivov^.

2 KtiTovpyiav seems to mean a daily contribution demanded by
the keepers out of the sum which prisoners gained by begging,
* Ut. ** winged,'*


and received from them ten thousand wound
they will be in no better condition than a tossii
sea, when the image of the faces, the gesture
the speeches, the walk, and all the rest, star
before their eyes and besiege their soul. Bi
they who come forth from a prison will suff
nothing of this kind, but will enjoy great cal
and tranquillity. For the compunction arisir
from the sight of the prisoners, quenches all th
fire. And if a woman that is an harlot and
wanton meet a man coming forth from amor
the prisoners, she will work him no mischie
For becoming for the time to come, as it wer
incapable of molding,* he will thus not I
taken by the nets of her countenance, becaui
instead of that wanton countenance there w
then be placed before his eyes the fear of tl
Judgment. On this account, he who had goi
over every kind of luxury said, " It is better I
go into the house of mourning than into tl
house of mirth." (Eccl. vii. 2.) And so "here
thou wilt show forth great wisdom, and " there
wilt hear those words which are worth ten thoi
sand blessings. Let us then not neglect sue
a practice and occupation. For although we 1
not able to bring them food, nor to help the
by giving money, yet shall we be able to cor
fort them by our words, and to raise up tl
drooping spirit, and to help them in many oth(
ways by conversing with those who cast thei
into prison, and by making their keepers kinde
and we certainly shall effect either small or gre
good. But if thou sayest that the men there ai
neither men of condition," nor good, nor gentl
but man-slayers, tomb-breakers, cut-purses, adu
terers, intemperate, and full of many wickec
nesses, by this again thou showest to me
pressing reason for spending time there. Fi
we are not commanded to take pity on the goc
and to punish the evil, but to manifest this lo
ingkindness to all men. "Be ye," It saith, "lil
to My Father" which is in heaven, for i
maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on t-
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on t
unjust." (Matt. v. 45.) Do not then accu
other men's faults bitterly, nor be a severe judj
but mild and merciful. For we also, if we ha
not been adulterers, or tomb-breakers, or c
purses, yet have we other transgressions whi
deserve infinite punishment. Perchance we hi
called our brother " fool," which prepares'
us the pit ; we have looked on women with t
chastened eyes, which constitutes absolute ad
tery ; and what is more ' grievous than all,
partake not worthily of the Mysteries, wh
maketh us guilty of the Body and Blood


* affAaffToy, possibly a corrupt form for dweAao-Tot. Dr. H
conjectures aTrXcLTo?, *' unapproachable."

" " That ye may be the children of," Sec, N. T.
' npo^evei, ■ al, '* most."


:OMILY LX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


221


hrist. Let us then not be bitter enquirers into
le conduct of others, but consider our own
ate, so shall we desist from this inhumanity and
■uelty. Besides this, it may be said that we
lall there find many good men, and often men
orth as much as all the city. Since even that
rison-house in which Joseph was had in it many
dl men, yet that just man had the care of them
1, and was, with the rest, concealed as to his
lal character ; for he was worth as much as
1 the land of Egypt, yet still he dwelt in the
rison-house, and no one knew him of those
lat were within it. Thus also even now it is
cely that there are ' many good and virtuous
en, though they be not visible to all men, and
le care thou takest of such as these gives thee
return for thy exertions in favor of the whole,
r if there be none such, still even in this case
eat is thy recompense ; for thy Lord con-
Tsed not with the just only, while He avoided
e unclean, but received with kindness both the
iinaanitish woman, and her of Samaria, the
iiominable and impure ; another also who was
harlot, on whose account the Jews reproached
im. He both received and healed, and allowed
is feet to be washed by the tears of the pol-
led one, teaching us to condescend to those
it are in sin, for this most of all is kindness,
bat sayest thou? Do robbers and tomb-
;akers dwell in the prison? And, tell me, are
they just men that dwell in the city ? Nay,
; there not many worse even than these, rob-
ig with greater shamelessness ? For the one
t, if there be no other excuse for them, at
St put before themselves the veil of solitude
i darkness, and the doing these things clan-
itinely ; but the others throw away the mask,
i go after their wickedness with uncovered
id, being violent, grasping, and covetous,
rd it is to find a man pure from injustice.
6.] If we do not take by violence gold, or
h and such a number of acres of land, yet we
ig about the same end by deceit and robbery
Bsser matters, and where we are able to do so.
• when in making contracts, or when we must
■ or sell anything, we dispute and strive to
less than the value, and use our utmost en-
vors to have it so, is not the action robbery?
,t not theft and covetousness ? Tell not me
; thou hast not wrested away houses or slaves,
injustice is judged not by the measure of the
taken, but by the intention of those who
mit the robbery. Since "just" and "unjust"
the same force in great and in little things ;
I call cut-purses alike the man who cuts
lUgh a purse and takes the gold, and him
buying from any of the market people
cts something from the proper price ; nor


.e. " in prison,'


is he the only house-breaker who breaks through
a wall and steals anything within, but that man
also who corrupts justice, and takes anything
from his neighbor.

Let us not then pass by our own faults, and
become judges of other men's ; nor let us, when
it is time for lovingkindness, be searching out
their wickedness ; but considering what our own
state was once, let us now be gentle and kind.
What then was our state ? Hear Paul say ;
" For we ourselves also were sometime foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and
pleasures, hateful, and hating one another "
(Tit. iii. 3) ; and again, " AVe were by nature
children of wrath." (Eph. ii. 3.) But God see-
ing us as it were confined in a prison-house,
and bound with grievous chains, far more griev-
ous than those of iron, was not ashamed of us,
but came and entered the prison, and, though
we deserved ten thousand punishments, both
brought us out from hence, and brought us to
a kingdom, and made us more glorious than the
heaven, that we also might do the same accord-
ing to our power. For when He saith to His
disciples, " If I, your Lord and Master, have
washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one
another's feet ; for I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done to you " (c. xiii.
14), He writeth this law not merely for the
washing the feet, but also in all the other acts
which He manifested towards us. Is it a man-
slayer who inhabits the prison ? Yet let not
us be weary in doing Him good. Is it a tomb-
breaker, or an adulterer ? Let us pity not his
wickedness, but his calamity. But often, as I
before said, one will be found there worth ten
thousand ; and if thou goest continually to the
prisoners, thou shalt not miss so great a prize.
For as Abraham, by entertaining even common
guests, once met with Angels, so shall we meet
with great men too, if we make the action a
business. And if I may make a strange asser-
tion, he who entertains a great man is not so
worthy of praise as he who receives the wretched
and miserable. For the former hath, in his
own life, no slight occasion of being well treated,
but the other, rejected and given up by all, hath
one only harbor, the pity of his benefactor ; so
that this most of all is pure kindness. He,
moreover, who shows attention to an admired
and illustrious man, doth it often for ostentation
among men, but he who tends the abject and
despairing, doth it only because of the command
of God. Wherefore, if we make a feast, we are
bidden to entertain the lame and halt, and if
we do works of mercy, we are bidden to do
them to the least and meanest. "For," It saith,
" inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these, ye have done it unto Me." (Matt.
XXV. 45.) Knowing, therefore, the treasure which


I


222


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L]


is laid up in that place,' let us enter contin-
ually, and make it our business, and turn" there
our eager feelings about theaters. If thou hast
nothing to contribute, contribute the comfort
of thy words. For God recompenseth not only
him that feedeth, but him also who goeth in.
When thou enterest and arouseth the trembling
and fearful soul, exhorting, succoring, promis-
ing assistance, teaching it true wisdom, thou
shalt thence reap no small reward. For if thou
shouldest speak in such manner outside the
prison, many will even laugh, being dissipated ^
by their excessive luxury : but those who are in
adversity, having their minds humbled, shall
meekly attend to thy words, and praise them,
and become better men. Since even when
Paul preached, the Jews often derided him, but


the prisoners listened with much stillness. P
nothing renders the soul so fit for heavenly w
dom as calamity and temptation, and the pn
sure of affliction. Considering all these thin
and how much good we shall work both
those within the prison, and to ourselves,
being continually mixed* up with them, let
there spend the time we used to spend in t
market-place, and in unseasonable occupatio
that we may both win them and gladden O'
selves, and by causing God to be glorified, m
obtain the everlasting blessings, through t
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jei
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Fatl
and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ev
Amen.


HOMILY LXI.

John x. 22-24.


"And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the dedication,
and it was winter. And Jesus wall^ed in the temple in
Solomon's porch. Then came the Jews round about
Him, and said unto Him, How long dost thou make
us to doubt?"

[i.] Every virtue is a good thing, but most of
all gentleness and meekness. This showeth us
men ; this maketh us to differ from wild beasts ;
this fitteth us to vie with Angels. Wherefore
Christ continually expendeth many words about
this virtue, bidding us be meek and gentle.
Nor doth He merely expend words about it, but
also teacheth it by His actions ; at one time
buffeted and bearing it, at another reproached
and plotted against ; yet again coming to those
who plotted against Him. For those men who
had called Him a demoniac, and a Samaritan,
and who had often desired to kill Him, and had
cast stones at Him, the same surrounded and
asked Him, "Art thou the Christ?" Yet not
even in this case did He reject them after so
many and so great plots against Him, but an-
swered them with great gentleness.

But it is necessary rather to enquire into the
whole passage from the beginning.

" It was," It saith, " at Jerusalem, the Feast
of the dedication, and it was winter." This
feast was a great and national one. For they
celebrated with great zeal the day on which the
Temple was rebuilt, on their return from their
long captivity in Persia. At this feast Christ
also was present, for henceforth He continually


* i.e. the prison. * al. ** feed," al. ** bury." • iiaxtj^ytiivoi.


abode in Judaea, because the Passion was nig
" Then came the Jews round about Him, a
said. How long dost thou make us to doubt ? '
" If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly."
He did not reply, " What enquire ye ° of M
Often have ye called Me demoniac, madrai
and Samaritan, and have deemed me an enei
of God, and a deceiver, and ye said but nc
Thou bearest witness of thyself, thy witness
not true ; how is it then that ye seek and des
to learn from Me, whose witness ye reject
But He said nothing of the kind, although '.
knew that the intention with which they mi
the enquiry was evil. For their surround
Him and saying, " How long dost thou make
to doubt?" seemed to proceed from a cert
longing and desire of learning, but the intent
with which they asked the question was con
and deceitful. For since His works admit
not of their slander and insolence, while t
might attack His sayings by finding out in tl
a sense other than that in which they
spoken, they continually proposed questions
siring to silence Him by means of His sayii
and when they could find no fault with
works, they wished to find a handle in
words. Therefore they said, " Tell us " ;
He had often told them. For He said tc
woman of Samaria, " I Am that speak
thee " (c. iv. 26) ; and to the blind
" Thou hast both seen Him, and it is He


* al. '
» lit. ■


we mix.

at the doors."


« or, " What seek y^


[OMILY LXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


223


Jketh with thee." (c. ix. 37.) And He had
)ld them also, if not in the same, at least in
ther words. And indeed, had they been wise,
ad had they desired to enquire aright, it re-
tained for them to confess Him by words, since
y works He had often proved the point in
uestion. But now observe their perverse and
isputatious temjjer. When He addresseth them,
nd instructeth them by His words, they say,
What sign showest thou us?" (c. vi. 30.)
ut when He giveth them proofs by His works,
ley say to Him, "Art thou the Christ? Tell
3 plainly " ; when the works cry aloud, they
;ek words, and when the words teach, then
ley betake themselves to works, ever setting
lemselves to the contrary. But that they en-
uired not for the sake of learning, the end
lowed. For Him whom they deemed to be
) worthy of credit, as to receive His witness of
(imself, when He had spoken a few words they
raightway stoned ; so that their very surround-
g and pressing upon Him was done with ill
tent.

And the mode of questioning was full of much
itred. " Tell us plainly. Art thou the Christ?"
t He spake all things openly, being ever pres-
it at their feasts, and in secret He said noth-
g ; but they brought forward words of deceit.
How long dost thou make us to doubt?" in
der that having drawn Him out, they might
ain find some handle against Him. For that
every case they questioned Him not in order
learn, but to find fault with His words, is
ar, not from this passage only, but from many
tiers also. Since when they came to Him and
Iced, " Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or
t?" (Matt. xxii. 17), when they spake about
tting away a wife (Matt. xix. 3), when they
quired about her who, they said, had had
ren husbands (Matt. xxii. 23), they were con-
ted of bringing their questions to Him, not
m desire of learning, but from an evil inten-
But there He rebuked them, saying,
Vhy tempt ye Me, ye hypocrites?" showing
it He knew their secret thoughts, while here
! said nothing of the kind ; teaching us not
ays to rebuke those who plot against us, but
bear many things with meekness and gentle-

since then it was a sign of folly, when the
rks proclaimed Him aloud, to seek the wit-
iS of words, hear how He answereth them, at
:e hinting to them that they made these en-
ries superfluously, and not for the sake of
ming, and at the same time showing that He
sred a voice plainer than that by words,
nely, that by works.
i^er. 25. " I told you often," ' He saith, " and


-


I told you," N. T.


ye believe not : the works that I do in My
Father's Name, they are they that bear witness
of Me."

[2.] A remark which the more tolerable
among them continually made to one another ;
" A man that is a sinner cannot ' do such mira-
cles." And again, " A devil cannot open the eyes
of the blind" : and, "No man can do such mira-
cles except God be with him." (c. iii. 2.) And
beholding the miracles that He did, they said,
" Is not this the Christ ? " Others said, " When
Christ Cometh, will He do greater miracles than
those which this Man hath done?" (c. vii. 31.)
And these very persons as many as then desired
to believe on Him, saying, " What sign showest
thou us, that we may see, and believe thee?"
(c. vi. 30.) When then they who had not been
persuaded by such great works, pretended that
they should be persuaded by a bare word. He
rebuketh their wickedness, saying, " If ye be-
lieve not My works, how will ye believe My
words? so that your questioning is superfluous."

Ver. 26. " But," He saith, " I told you, and
ye' believe not, because ye are not of My sheep."*

" For I on My part have fulfilled all that it
behooved a Shepherd to do, and if ye follow Me
not, it is not because I am not a Shepherd, but
because ye are not My sheep."

Ver. 27-30. "For My sheep hear My voice,*
and follow Me ; and I give unto them eternal
life * ; neither can ^ any man pluck them out of
My hand. The Father,* which gave them Me,
is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of My Father's hand. I and the
Father are One."

Observe how in renouncing He exciteth them
to follow Him. " Ye hear Me not," He saith,
" for neither are ye sheep, but they who follow,
these are of the flock." This He said, that they
might strive to become sheep. Then by men-
tioning what they should obtain. He maketh
these men jealous, so as to rouse them, and
cause them to desire such things.

" What then ? Is it through the power of the
Father that no man plucketh them away, and
hast thou no strength, but art too weak to guard
them ? " By no means. And in order that thou
mayest learn that the expression, " The Father
which gave them to Me," is used on their account,
that they might not again call Him an enemy of
God, therefore, after asserting that, " No man
plucketh them out of My hand," He proceedeth
to show, that His hand and the Father's is One.
Since had not this been so, it would have been
natural for Him to say, "The Father which gave
them to Me is greater than all, and no man can


' *' How can," &c., N. T.
' " But ye," &c.

* " as I said unto you."

* " and I know them."


" " and they shall never perish.'

' "shall."

• " My Father," N. T.


224


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L


pluck them out of My hand." But He said not
so, but, "out of My Father's hand." Then
that thou mayest not suppose that He indeed is
weak, but that the sheep are in safety through
the power of the Father, He addeth, " I and
the Father are One." As though He had said,
" I did not assert that on account of the Father
no man plucketh them away, as though I were
too weak to keep the sheep. For I and the
Father are One." Speaking here with reference
to Power, for concerning this was all His dis-
course ; and if the power ^ be the same, it is
clear that the Essence is also. And when the
Jews used ten thousand means, plotting and
casting men out of their synagogues. He telleth
them that all their contrivances are useless and
vain ; " For the sheep are in My Father's
hand " ; as the Prophet saith, " Upon My hand
I have pictured thy walls." (Isa. xlix. i6.) Then
to show that the hand is One, He sometimes
saith that it is His own, sometimes the Father's.
But when thou hearest the word " hand," do
not understand anything material, but the power,
the authority. Again, if it was on this account
that no one could pluck away the sheep, because
the Father gave Him power, it would have been
superfluous to say what follows, " I and the
Father are One." Since were He inferior to
Him, this would have been a very daring saying,
for it declares nothing else than an ecjuality of
power ; of which the Jews were conscious, and took
up stones to cast at Him. (Ver. 31.) Yet not even
so did He remove this opinion and suspicion ;
though if their suspicion were erroneous. He
ought to have set them right, and to have said,
"Wherefore do ye these things? I spake not
thus to testify that my power and the Father's
are equal " ; but now He doth quite the
contrary, and confirmeth their suspicion, and
clencheth it, and that too when they were exas-
perated. For He maketh no excuse for what
had been said, as though it had been said ill,
but rebuketh them for not entertaining a right
opinion concerning Him. For when they said,

Ver. 33-36.° " For a good work we stone
thee not, but for blasphemy ; and because that
thou being a man makest thyself God " ; hear
His answer;' "If the Scripture called* them
gods unto whom the word of God came,' how
say ye that I blaspheme, because I said, I am
the Son of God?"

What He saith is of this kind : " If those who


* i.e. of the Father and the Son.

* Ver. 31, 32, omitted. '* Then the Jews took up stones aj;ain to
stone Him. Jesus answered them, Many good works have I
showed you from My Father; for which of those works do ye
stone Me? **

* Ver. 34, omitted. '* Jesus answered them, Is it not written in
your Law, I said, Vc are gods? "

* " It called."

* " And the Scripture cannot he hroken: say ye of Him whom
the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphem-
Mt,*' &c., N. X. Th« comment looks as if this had been read.


have received this honor by grace, are not fou
fault with for calling themselves gods, how c
He who hath this by nature deserve to be
buked?" Yet He spake not so, but proved
at a later time, having first relaxed and yield
somewhat in His discourse, and said, " Wht
the Father hath sanctified and sent." A
when He had softened their anger. He bringt
forward the plain assertion. For a while, tl
His speech might be received. He spoke
a humbler strain, but afterwards He raised
higher, saying,

Ver. 37, 38. " If I do not the works of 1
Father, believe Me not ; but if I do, though
believe not Me, believe the works."

Seest thou how He proveth what I said, tl
He is in nothing inferior to the Father, but
every way equal to Him? For since it was i
possible to see His Essence, from the equal
and sameness of the works He affordeth a pr<
of unvaryingness as to Power. And what, t
me, shall we believe ?

[3.] " That I am in the Father, and the Fatl
in Me.""

" For I am nothing other than what t
Father is, yet still Son ; He nothing other th
what I am, yet still Father. And if any m
know Me, he knoweth the Father, and if
knoweth the Father,"^ he hath learnt also I
Son." Now were the power inferior, then a
what relateth to the knowledge would be fal
for it is not possible to become acquainted w
one substance or power by means of another.

Ver. 39-41. "Therefore they sought agi
to take Him, but He escaped out of their hani
and went away again beyond Jordan, into 1
place where John at first baptized.' And ma
resorted unto Him, and said, John did no mi
cle, but all things that John spake of this n
were true."

When He hath uttered anything great a
sublime. He quickly retireth, giving way to tV
anger, so that the passion may abate and eel
through His absence. And thus He acted
that time. But wherefore doth the Evang«
mention the place ? That thou mayest le
that He went there to remind them of the thi
there done and said by John, and of his te
mony ; at least when they came there,
straightway remembered John. Wherefore
they said, "John indeed did no miracle," si
how did it follow that they should add
unless the place had brought the Baptist to t
memory, and they had come to remember
testimony. And observe how they form inc
trovertible syllogisms. " John indeed did


" " that ye may know and believe that the Father is in Md
in Him," N. T.
' Ben. omits, " if He knoweth the Father."
» " and there He abode," N. T.


)MILY LXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


225


racle," " but this man doth," saith some
e ; " hence therefore his superiority is shown,
therefore men' believed him who did no mir-
les, much more must they believe this man."
len, since it was John who bore the witness,
it his having done no miracle might seem to
3ve him unworthy of being a witness,^ they
ded, " Yet if he did no miracle, still he spake
things tnily concerning this man " ; no longer
Dving Christ to be trustworthy by means of
hn, but John to be so by what Christ had
ne.

Ver. 42. " Many therefore believed on Him."^

There were many things that attracted them.

ley remembered the words which John had

oken, calling Christ " mightier than himself,"

d "light," and "life," and "truth," and all

; rest. They remembered the Voice which

me down from heaven, and the Spirit which

peared in the shape of a dove, and pointed

im out to all ; and with this they recollected

i demonstration afforded by the miracles,

bking to which they were for the future estab-

led. " For," saith some one, " if it was right

It we should believe John, much more ought

to believe this man ; if him without miracles,

ich Hiore this man, who besides the testimony

John, hath also the proof* from miracles."

;st thou how much the abiding in this place,

i the being freed from the presence of evil

n, profited them? wherefore Jesus continually

deth and draweth them away from the com-

ly of those persons ; as also He seemeth to

'e done under the old Covenant, forming and

lering the Jews in all points, in the desert, at

istance from the Egyptians.

Vnd this He now adviseth us also to do, bid-

g us avoid public places, and tumults, and

xirbances, and pray peacefully in the chamber.

• the vessel which is free from confusion, sails

1 a fair wind, and the soul which is separated

n worldly matters rests in harbor. Wherefore

nen ought to have more true wisdom than

1, because they are for the most part riveted

ceeping at home. So, for instance, Jacob

a plain' man, because he dwelt at home,

was free from the bustle of public life ; for

without a cause hath Scripture put this, vifhen

lith, " dwelling in a house." (Gen. xxv. 27.)

It," saith some woman, " even in a house

e is great confusion." Yes, when thou wilt

: it so, and bringest about thyself a crowd

ares. For the man who spends his time in

midst of the market-places and courts of

ice is overwhelmed, as if by waves, by exter-

troubles : but the women who sits in her


.- wc." * a!. " the testimony unworthy.*

■ on Hira there," N. T.

tl. " after the proof of his testimony and," &c.


house as in some school of true wisdom, and
collects her thoughts within herself, will be
enabled to apply herself to prayers, and readings,
and other heavenly wisdom, .^nd as they who
dwell in deserts have none to disturb them, so
she being continually within can enjoy a per-
petual calm. Nor even if at any time she need
to go forth, is there then any cause for confusion.
For the necessary occasions for a women to leave
her house are, either for the purpose of coming
hither, or when the body need to be cleansed
in the bath ; but for the most part she sits at
home, and it is possible for her both to be her-
self truly wise, and receiving her husband when
agitated to calm and compose him, to abate the
excess and fierceness of his thoughts, and so to
send him forth again, having put off all the mis-
chiefs which he collected from the market-place,
and carrying with him whatever good he learnt
at home. For nothing, nothing is more power-
ful than a pious and sensible women to bring a
man into proper order, and to mould his soul
as she will. For he will not endure friends, or
teachers, or rulers, as he will his partner advis-
ing and counseling him, since the advice carries
even some pleasure with it, because she who
gives the counsel is greatly loved. I could tell
of many hard and disobedient men who have
been softened in this way. For she who shares
his table, his bed, and his embraces, his words
and secrets, his comings in and goings out, and
many other things, who is entirely given up ° and
joined to him, as it is Hkely that a body would
be joined to a head, if she happen to be discreet
and well attuned, will go beyond and excel all
others in the management of her husband.

[4.] Wherefore I exhort women to make this
their employment, and to give fitting counsel.
For as they have great power for good, so have
they also for evil. A women destroyed Absalom,
a woman destroyed Amnon, a woman was like
to have destroyed Job, a woman rescued Nabal
from the slaughter. Women have preserved
whole nations ; for Deborah and Judith ex-
hibited successes worthy of men ; so also do
ten thousand other women. Wherefore Paul
saith, " For what knowest thou, O wife, whether
thou shalt save thy husband?" (i Cor. vii. 16.)
.\nd in those times we see Persis and Mary and
Priscilla taking part in the labors^ of the Apostles
(Rom. 16) ; whom we ' also needs must imitate,
and not by words only, but also by actions, bring
into order him that dwelleth with us. But how
shall we instruct him by our actions ? When he
sees that thou art not evilly disposed, not fond
of expense or ornament, not demanding extrava-
gant supplies of money, but content with what


* al. "bound."

^ iTKafift.aTa}yt " the arena," hence any severe Ubor.

* Ben. " you."


226


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX


thou hast, then will he endure thee counseling
him. But if thou art wise in word, and in actions
doest the contrary, he will condemn thee for very
foolish talking. But when together with words
thou affordest him also instruction by thy works,
then will he admit thee and obey thee the more
readily ; as when thou desirest not gold, nor
pearls, nor costly clothing, but instead of these,
modesty, sobriety, kindness ; when thou exhibit-
est these virtues on thy part and requirest them
on his. For if thou must needs do somewhat
to please thy husband, thou shouldest adorn thy
soul, not adorn and so spoil thy person. The
gold which thou puttest about thee will not make
thee so lovely and desirable to him, as modesty
and kindness towards himself, and a readiness
to die for thy partner ; these things most subdue
men. Indeed, that splendor of apparel even
displeases him, as straitening his means, and
causing him much expense and care ; but those
things which I have named will rivet a husband
to a wife ; for kindness and friendship and love
cause no cares, give rise to no expense, but
quite the contrary. That outward adornment
becomes palling by use, but that of the soul
blooms day by day, and kindles a stronger flame.
So that if thou wouldest please thy husband,
adorn thy soul with modesty, piety, and manage-
ment of the house. These things both subdue
him more, and never cease. Age destroys not
this adornment, sickness wastes it not. The
adornment of the body length of time is wont
to undo, sickness and many other things to waste,
but what relates to the soul is above all this.
That adornment causes envy, and kindles jeal-
ousy, but this is pure from disease, and free from
all vainglory. Thus will matters at home be
easier, and your income without trouble, when
the gold is not laid on about your body or
encircling your arms, but passes on ' to necessary
uses, such as the feeding of servants, the neces-
sary care of children, and other useful purposes.
But if this be not the case, if the (wife's) face be
covered with ornaments, while the (husband's)
heart is pressed by anxiety, what profit, what

* ai. " goes forward."


kind of advantage is there? The one beir
grieved allows not the marvelous beauty of th
other to be seen. For ye know, ye know th
though a man see the most beautiful of all womei
he cannot feel pleasure at the sight while h
soul is sorrowful, because in order to feel plea
ure a man must first rejoice and be glad. An
when all his gold is heaped together to adorn
woman's body, while there is distress in his dwel
ing, her partner can have no pleasure. So th;
if we desire to be agreeable to our husbands, l
us give them pleasure ; and we shall give the;
pleasure, if we remove our ornaments and fine
ies. For all these things at the actual time i
marriage appear to afford some delight, but th
afterwards fades by time. Since if when tl
heaven is so beautiful, and the sun, to which the
canst not name any body that is equal, so brigh
we admire them less from habitually seeing thee
how shall we admire a body tricked out wi(
gewgaws? These things I say, desiring th
you should be adorned with that wholeson
adornment which Paul enjoined ; " Not wi(
gold, or pearls, or costly array ; but (whic
becometh women professing godliness) wil
good works." . (i Tim. ii. 9, 10.) But dost the
wish to please strangers, and to be praised I
them? Then assuredly this is not the desire 1
a modest woman. However, if thou wishest i
by doing as I have said, thou wilt have strange
also to love thee much, and to praise thy modest
For the woman who adorns her person no vi
tuous and sober person will praise, but the inten
perate and lascivious ; nay, rather neither w
these praise her, but will even speak vilely ■
her, having their eyes inflamed by the wanto)
ness displayed about her ; but the other all w
approve, both the one sort and the other, becau
they receive no harm from her, but even instru
tion in heavenly wisdom. And great shall 1
her praise from men, and great her reward wi
God. After such adornment then let us stri\
that we may live here without fear, and m
obtain the blessings which are to come ; whi
may we all obtain through the grace and lovir
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
glory for ever and ever. Amen.


>MILV LXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


227


HOMILY LXII.

John xi. i, 2.


fow a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Beth-
any, of the town of Mary and her sister Martha. It
was that Mary which anointed the Lord with oint-
ment." 1

[i.] Many men, when they see any of those

0 are pleasing to God suffering anything terri-
:, as, for instance, having fallen into sickness,
poverty, and any other the like, are offended,
t knowing that to those especially dear to
id it belongeth to endure these things ; since
zarus also was one of the friends of Christ,
i was sick. This at least they who sent said,
iehold, he whom Thou lovest is sick." But
us consider the passage from the beginning,
i certain man," It saith, " was sick, Lazarus
Bethany." Not without a cause nor by chance
;h the writer mentioned whence Lazarus was,
; for a reason which he will afterwards tell us.
present let us keep to the passage before us.

also for our advantage informeth us who
■e Lazarus' sisters ; and, moreover, what Mary

1 more (than the other), going on to say,
was that Mary which anointed the Lord with

tment." Here some doubting^ say, "How
the Lord endure that a woman should do
In the first place then it is necessary to
erstand, that this is not the harlot mentioned
►latthew (Matt. xxvi. 7), or the one in Luke
ike vii. 37), but a different person ; they were
ots full of many vices, but she was both grave
earnest ; for she showed her earnestness
ut the entertainment of Christ. The Evan-
it also means to show, that the sisters too
d Him, yet He allowed Lazarus to die. But
did they not, like the centurion and the
leman, leave their sick brother, and come
hrist, instead of sending ? They were very
ident in Christ, and had towards Him a
ig famili3.r feeling. Besides, they were weak
en, and oppressed with grief; for that they
d not in this way as thinking slightly of
, they afterwards showed. It is then clear,
this Mary was not the harlot. " But where-
" saith some one, "did Christ admit that
t?" That He might put away her iniquity ;
He might show His lovingkindness ; that
mightest learn that there is no malady
h prevaileth over His goodness. Look not
fore at this only, that He received her, but
jider the other point also, how He changed
But, (to return,) why doth the Evangelist


relate this history to us ? Or rather, what doth
he desire to show us by saying,

Ver. 5.' "Jesus loved Martha, and her sister,
and Lazarus."

That we should never be discontented or vexed
if any sickness happen to good men, and such
as are dear to God.

Ver. 3.* " Behold, he whom thou lovest is
sick."

They desired to draw on Christ to pity, for
they still gave heed to Him as to a man. This
is plain from what they say, " If thou hadst been
here, he" had not died," and from their saying,
not, " Behold, Lazarus is sick," but " Behold, he
whom thou lovest is sick." What then said
Christ?

Ver. 4. " This sickness is not unto death, but
for the glory of God, that the Son of God might
be glorified thereby."

Observe how He again asserteth that His
glory and the Father's is One ; for after saying
" of God," He hath added, " that the Son of
God might be glorified."

" This sickness is not unto death." Since He
intended to tarry two days where He was. He
for the present sendeth away the messengers
with this answer. Wherefore we must admire
Lazarus' sisters, that after hearing that the sick-
ness was " not unto death," and yet seeing him
dead, they were not offended, although the event
had been directly contrary. But even so they
came to Him,° and did not think that He had
spoken falsely.

The expression " that " in this passage denotes
not cause, but consequence ; the sickness hap-
pened from other causes, but He used it for the
glory of God.

Ver. 6. " And having said this, He tarried two
days.'"

Wherefore tarried He? That Lazarus might
breathe his last, and be buried ; that none might
be able to assert that He restored him when not
yet dead, saying that it was a lethargy, a faint-
ing, a fit,' but not death. On this account He
tarried so long, that corruption began, and they
said, " He now stinketh."

Ver. 7. "Then saith He to his disciples. Let
us go into Judea." '


and wiped His feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
:k."] N. T. ' al. " make a question."


^ Transposed.

* *' Therefore his sisters sent unto Him, saying," &c., N. T.
' " our brother," N. T. " .il. " to the Lord."

^ V. 6. " When He had heard therefore that he was sick, Ho
abode two days still in the same place where He was." N. T.
" Karayayii, ' ["again"] N. T.


328


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX;


Why, when He never in other places told
them beforehand where He was going, doth He
tell them here? They had been greatly terri-
fied, and since they were is this way disposed,
He forewarneth them, that the suddenness might
not trouble them. What then say the disciples ?

Ver. 8. "The Jews of late sought to stone
Thee, and goest Thou thither again?"

They therefore had feared for Him also, but
for the more part rather for themselves ; for
they were not yet perfect. So Thomas, shaking
with fear, said, " Let us go, that we also may
die with Him" (ver. i6), because Thomas was
weaker and more unbelieving' than the rest.
But see how Jesus encourageth them by what
He saith.

Ver. 9. " Are there not twelve hours of the
day?" 2

He either saith this,^ that " he who is con-
scious to himself of no evil, shall suffer nothing
dreadful ; only he that doeth evil shall suffer, so
that we need not fear, because we have done noth-
ing worthy of death " ; or else that, " he who
' seeth the light of this world ' is * in safety ; and if
he that seeth the light of this world is in safety,
much more he that is with Me, if he separate
not himself from Me." Having encouraged them
by these words, He addeth, that the cause of
their going thither was pressing, and showeth
them that they were about to go not unto Jeru-
salem, but unto Bethany.

Ver. II, 12. "Our friend Lazarus," He saith,
" sleepeth, but I go that I may awake him out
of sleep."

That is, " I go not for the same purpose as
before, again to reason and contend with the
Jews, but to awaken our friend."

Ver. 12. "Then said His disciples. Lord, if
he sleep he shall do well."

This they said not without a cause, but desir-
ing to hinder the going thither. " Sayest Thou,"
asks one of them, "that he sleepeth? Then
there is no urgent reason for going." Yet on
this account He had said, " Our friend," to show
that the going there was necessary. When there-
fore their disposition was somewhat reluctant,
He said,

[2.] Ver. 14.^ " He is dead."

The former word He spake, desiring to prove
that He loved not boasting ; but since they un-
derstood not. He added, " He is dead."

Ver. 15. "And I am glad for your sakes."


' al. " more cowardly.'*

' ver. q, 10. " If any man walk in the day, he stumhieth not, be-
cause he seeth the light of this world. But if a man walk in the
night, he stumhieth, l^cause there is no light in him." N. T.

8 al. " and this He said desiring to show.*'

« al. " shall be.*'

• ver. 13-15. " Howbeit, Jesus spake of his death, but they
thought that He had spoken of taking of rest in sleep. Then said
Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your
Bakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe ; neverthe-
less, let us go to him." N. T.


Why " for your sakes " ? " Because I ha
forewarned you of his death, not being there, ai
because when I shall raise him again, there w
be no suspicion of deceit." Seest thou how t!
disciples were yet imperfect in their dispositic
and knew not His power as they ought? ai
this was caused by interposing terrors, whi
troubled and disturbed their souls. When I
said, " He sleepeth," He added, " I go to awa
him " ; but when He said, " He is dead," I
added not, " I go to raise him " ; for He wou
not foretell in words what He was about to esta
lish certainly by works, everywhere teaching
not to be vainglorious, and that we must n
make promises without a cause. And if He d
thus in the case of the centurion when sui
moned, (for He said, " I will come and h(
him — Matt. viii. 7,) it was to show the faith
the centurion that He said this. If any one as
" How did the disciples imagine sleep ? How d
they not understand that death was meant fro
His saying, 'I go to awake him ? ' for it w
folly if they expected that He would go fiftei
stadia to awake him " ; we would reply, that th^
deemed this to be a dark saying, such as I
often spake to them.

Now they all feared the attacks of the Jew
but Thomas above the rest ; wherefore also I
said,

Ver. 16. " Let us go, that we also may d
with Him."

Some say that he desired himself to die ; b
it is not so ; the expression is rather one
cowardice. Yet he was not rebuked, for Chri
as yet supported his weakness, but afterwards 1
became stronger than all, and invincible.'' F
the wonderful thing is this ; that we see one wl
was so weak before the Cnicifixion, become aft
the Crucifixion, and after having believed in tl
Resurrection, more zealous than any. So gre
was the power of Christ. The very man wl
dared not go in company with Christ to Bethar
the same while not seeing Christ ran' well ni
through the inhabited world, and dwelt in t
midst of nations that were full of murder, a j
desirous to kill him. I

But if Bethany was " fifteen furlongs of
which is two miles, how was Lazarus " dead f(
days "?' Jesus tarried two days, on the day 1
fore those two one had come with the messaf
(on which same day Lazarus died,) then in
course of the fourth day He arrived. He wai
to be summoned, and came not uninvited
this account, that no one might suspect w
took place ; nor did those women who were
loved by Him come themselves, but others w
sent.


" aAijjrTos. ' al. " alone ran."

* ver. 17. " Then when Jesus came, He found that he hat '
in the grave four days alreat^.** ' i.e. that Lazarus was si(


lOMILY LXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


229


Ver. 18. "Now Bethany was' about fifteen
urlongs off."

Not without cause doth he mention this, but
lesires to inform us that it was near, and that it
i^as probable on this account that many would
)e there. He therefore declaring this adds,

Ver. 19. "Many of the Jews came''' to com-
brt them.'"

But how should they comfort women beloved
)f Christ, when* they had agreed, that if any
hould confess Christ, he should be put out of
he synagogue? It was either because of the
grievous nature of the calamity, or that they
espected them as of superior birth, or else these
vho came were not the wicked sort, many at
east even of them believed. The Evangelist
nentions these circumstances, to prove that
!^zarus was really dead.

[3.] But why did not [Martha,] when she went
o meet Christ,' take her sister with her? She
llesired to meet with Him apart, and to tell
ilim what had taken place. But when He had
irought her to good hopes, she went and called
lary, who met Him while her grief was yet at
height. Seest thou how fervent her love was ?
'his is the Mary of whom He said, " Mary hath
hosen that good part." (Luke x. 42.) " How
len," saith one, " doth Martha appear more

alous ? " She was not more zealous, but it was
ecause the other had not yet been informed,"

nee Martha was the weaker. For even when
le had heard such things from Christ, she yet
Deaks in a groveling manner, " By this time he

inketh, for he hath been dead four days."

Ver. 39.) But Mary, though she had heard

athlng, uttered nothing of the kind, but at once

lieving,' saith,*

Ver. 21." Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my

■other had not died."

See how great is the heavenly wisdom of the

omen, although their understanding be weak.

or when they saw Christ, they did not break

Jt into mourning and wailing and loud crying,
we do when we see any of those we know

ming in upon our grief; but straightway they

verence their Teacher. So then both these

Iters believed in Christ, but not in a right way ;
they did not yet certainly know' either that
was God, or that He did these things by His
[» power and authority ; on both which points
taught them. For they showed their igno-
re of the former, by saying, " If thou hadst


' " nigh unto Jerusalem," N. T.
W ["To Martha and Mary"] N. T.
f r* concerning their brother "] N. T.
j* Ben. has a different readine, with no variety of sense.

* Ver. 20. " Then Martha, wnensheheardthat Jesus was coming,
*it and met Him, but Mary sat in the house."

^ ai. " had not yet heard.
'^ al. " but believed, saying."

f The words are used by Martha also; but she afterwards im-
Its want of faith.

* al, '* they know not yet.'*


been here, our brother had not died " ; and of
the latter, by saying,'"

Ver. 22. " Whatsoever" thou wilt ask of God,
He will give it thee."

As though they spoke of some virtuous and
approved mortal. But see what Christ saith ;

Ver. 23. "Thy brother shall rise again."

He thus far refuteth the former saying, " What-
soever thou wilt ask " ; for He said not, " I ask,"
but what? " Thy brother shall rise again." To
have said, " Woman, thou still lookest below, I
need not the help of another, but do all of My-
self," would have been grievous, and a stum-
blingblock in her way, but to say, " He shall rise
again," was the act of one who chose a middle
mode of speech. "^ And by means of that which
follows, He alluded to the points I have men-
tioned ; for when Martha saith,

Ver. 24. "I know that he shall rise again" in
the last day," to prove more clearly His author-
ity. He replieth,

Ver. 25. "I am the Resurrection and the
Life."

Showing that He needed no other to help
Him, if so be that He Himself is the Life ; since
if He needed another," how could He be " the
Resurrection and the Life " ? Yet He did not
plainly state this, but merely hinted it. But
when she saith again, " Whatsoever thou wilt
ask," He repHeth,

" He that believeth in Me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live."

Showing that He is the Giver of good things,
and that we must ask of Him.

Ver. 26. " And whosoever liveth and believeth
in Me, shall never die."

Observe how He leadeth her mind upward ;
for to raise Lazarus was not the only thing
sought ; it was necessary that both she and they
who were with her should learn the Resurrec-
tion. Wherefore before the raising of the dead
He teacheth heavenly wisdom by words. But if
He is " the Resurrection," and " the Life," He
is not confined by place, but, present everywhere,
knoweth how to heal. If therefore they had
said, as did the centurion, " Speak the word, and
my servant shall be healed " (Matt. viii. 8), He
would have done so ; but since they summoned
Him to them, and begged Him to come. He
condescendeth in order to raise them from the
humble opinion they had formed of Him, and
Cometh to the place. Still while condescend-
ing. He showed that even when absent He had
power to heal. On this account also He de-
layed, for the mercy would not have been appar-


"■ al. and that they knew not, is manifest from their saying, " H
Thou," &c., and from their adding, " Whatsoever," &c.
It " But 1 know that even now, whatsoever," &c., N. T.
ts Ben. '* fitly made the saying of a middle character."
" [" in the Resurrection "] N. T.
1* al. " other help," al, " helper."


I


2 30


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXII.


ent as soon as it was given, had there not been
first an ill savor (from the corpse). But how
did the woman know that there was to be a Res-
urrection? They' had heard Christ say many
things about the Resurrection, yet still she now
desired to see Him. And observe how she still
lingers below ; for after hearing, " I am the Res-
urrection and the Life," not even so did she say,
" Raise him," but,

Ver. 27. "I believe that Thou art the Christ,
the Son of God."

What is Christ's reply? " He that believeth on
Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live," -
(here speaking of this death which is common to
all.^) "And whosoever liveth and believeth on
Me, shall never die" (ver. 26), signifying that
other death. " Since then I am the Resurrection
and the Life, be not thou troubled, though thy
brother be already dead, but believe, for this is
not death." For a while He comforted her on
what had happened, and gave her glimpses of
hope, by saying, " He shall rise again," and, " I
am the Resurrection " ; and that having risen ■*
again, though he should again die, he shall suf-
fer no harm, so that it needs not to fear this
death. What He saith is of this kind : " Neither
is this man dead, nor shall ye die." " BeUevest
thou this?" She saith, "I believe that Thou
art the Christ, the Son of God."

"Which should come into the world."

The woman seems to me not to understand
the saying ; she was conscious that it was some
great thing, but did not perceive the whole
meaning, so that when asked one thing, she
answered another. Yet for a while at least she
had this gain, that she moderated her grief;
such was the power of the words of Christ. On
this account Martha went forth first, and Mary
followed. For their affection to their Teacher
did not allow them strongly to feel their present
sorrow ; so that the minds of these women were
truly wise as well as loving.

[4.] But in our days, among our other evils
there is one malady very prevalent among
our women ; they make a great show in their
dirges and wailings, baring^ their arms, tearing
their hair, making furrows down their cheeks.
And this they do, some from grief, others from
ostentation and rivalry, others from wantonness ;
and they bare their arms, and this too in the
sight of men. Why doest thou, woman ? Dost
thou strip thyself in unseemly sort, tell me, thou
who art a member of Christ, in the midst of
the market-place, when men are present there ?
Dost thou pluck thy hair, and rend thy gar-
ments, and wail loudly," and join the dance, and
keep throughout a resemblance to Bacchanalian


• al. " she,"
' from ver. 25.
' or, " of this death."

* al. "and raise loud wailings, and leap."


* or, " one who has risen.'*

* al. " making bloody."


women, and dost thou not think that thou art
offending God? What madness is this? Will'
not the heathen' laugh? Will they not deem
our doctrines fables? They will say, "There is
no resurrection — the doctrines of the Christians
are mockeries, trickery, and contrivance. For
their women lament as though there were noth-
ing after this world ; they give no heed to the
words engraven in their books ; all those words
are fictions, and these women show that they
are so. Since had they believed that he who
hath died is not dead, but hath removed to a
better life, they would not have mourned him
as no longer being, they would not have thus
beaten themselves,* they would not have uttered
such words as these, full of unbelief, * I shall
never see thee more, I shall never more regain
thee,' all their religion is a fable, and if the
very chief of good things is thus wholly disbe-
lieved by them, much more the other things
which are reverenced among them." The
heathen' are not so womanish, among them
many have practiced heavenly wisdom ; and
a woman hearing that her child had fallen in
battle, straightway asked, "And in what state
are the affairs of the city?" Another truly
wise, when being garlanded '" he heard that his
son had fallen for his country, took off the gar-
land, and asked which of the two ; then when
he had learnt which it was, immediately put the
garland on again. Many also gave their sons
and their daughters for slaughter in honor of
their evil deities ; and Lacedaemonian women
exhort their sons either to bring back their
shield safe from war, or to be brought back
dead upon it. Wherefore I am ashamed that
the heathen show true wisdom in these matters,
and we act unseemly. Those who know nothing
about the Resurrection act the part of those
who know ; and those who know, the part of
those who know not. And ofttimes many do
through shame of men what they do not for the
sake of God. For women of the higher class
neither tear" their hair nor bare their arms;
which very thing is a most heavy charge against
them, not because they do not strip themselves,
but because they act as they do not through i
piety, but that they may not be thought to dis-
grace themselves. Is their shame stronger than
grief, and the fear of God not stronger? And
must not this deserve severest censure ? What
the rich women do because of their riches, the
poor ought to do through fear of God ; but
at present it is quite the contrary ; the rich act
wisely through vainglory, the poor through little-
ness of soul act unseemly. What is worse than
this anomaly? We do all for men, all for the ,


' lit. " Greeks."

' al. " have been thus inflamed.'

» lit. " Greeks."


>•> i.e. about to sacrifice*
^^ at. "loosen."


Homily LXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


231


things of earth. And these people utter words
full of madness and much ridicule. The Lord
saith indeed, " Blessed are they that mourn "
(Matt. V. 4), speaking of those who mourn' for
their sins ; and no one mourneth that kind of
mourning, nor careth for a lost soul ; but this
other we were not bidden to practice, and we
practice it.^ "What then?" saith some one,
" Is it possible being man not to weep?" No,
neither do P forbid weeping, but I forbid the
beating yourselves, the weeping immoderately.*

I am neither brutal nor cniel. I know that our
nature asks ^ and seeks for its friends and daily
companions ; it cannot but be grieved. As also
Christ showed, for He wept over Lazarus. So do
thou ; weep, but gently, but with decency, but with
the fear of God. If so thou weepest, thou dost so
not as disbelieving the Resurrection, but as not
enduring the separation. Since even over those
who are leaving us, and departing to foreign
lands, we weep, yet we do this not as despairing.

[5 .] And so do thou weep, as if thou wert send-
pg one on his way to another land. These things

II say, not as giving a rule of action, but as con-
Jescending (to human infirmity). For if the
dead man have been a sinner, and one who hath in
iiany things offended God, it behooveth to weep ;

or rather not to weep only, since that is of no
ivail to him, but to do what one can to pro-
ure° some comfort for him by almsgivings and
)ffcrings ; ") but it behooveth also to rejoice at
his, that his wickedness hath been cut short.
f he have been righteous, it again * behooveth
o be glad, that what is his is now placed
a security, free from the uncertainty of the
uture ; if young, that he hath been quickly
lelivered from the common evils of life ; if old,
hat he hath departed after taking to satiety
dat which is held desirable. But thou, neglect-
ig to consider these things, incitest thy hand-
laidens to act as mourners, as if forsooth thou
'ert honoring the dead, when it is an act of
xtreme dishonor.' For honor to the dead is,
ot wailings and lamentings, but hymns and
salmodies and an excellent life. The good
lan when he departeth, shall depart with an-
2ls, though no man be near his remains ; but
le corrupt, though he have a city to attend his
neral, shall be nothing profited. Wilt thou


j * al. " bewail."

• al. ** to mourn, and we mourn it."

• al. " why, do I."

• al. " I forbid not to grieve, but I forbid to act unseemly.'*

• or, " is overcome." • al. " give."
' see Horn. Xll. p. 43, and note.

• al. *' more." » al. " folly/' al. " madness."


honor him who is gone? Honor him in an-
other way, by alms-deeds, by acts of benefi-
cence and public service.'" What avail the
many lamentations? And I have heard also
another grievous thing, that many women at-
tract lovers by their sad cries, acquiring by the
fervor of their wailings a reputation for affection
to their husbands. O devilish purpose ! O
Satanic invention ! " How long are we but dust
and ashes, how long but blood and flesh ? Look
we up to heaven, take we thought of spiritual
things.'^ How shall we be able to rebuke the
heathen," how to exhort them, when we do such
things? How shall we dispute with them con-
cerning the Resurrection? How about the rest
of heavenly wisdom? How shall we ourselves
live without fear? Knowest not thou that of
grief" Cometh death ? for grief darkening ^ the
seeing part of the soul not only hindereth it from
perceiving anything that it ought, but also work-
eth it great mischief. In one way then we offend
God, and advantage neither ourselves nor him
who is gone ; in the other we please God, and
gain honor among men. If we sink not down
ourselves. He will soon remove the remains of
our despondency ; if we are discontented. He
permitteth us to be given up to grief. If we are
thankful, we shall not despond. " But how,"
saith some one, " is it possible not to be grieved,
when one has lost a son or daughter or wife ? "
I say not, " not to grieve," but " not to do so
immoderately." For if we consider that God
hath taken away, and that the husband or son
which we had was mortal, we shall soon receive
comfort. To be discontented is the act of those
who seek for something higher than their nature.
Thou wast born man, and mortal ; why then
grievest thou that what is natural hath come to
pass? Grievest thou that thou art nourished
by eating ? Seekest thou to live without this ? "
Act thus also in the case of death, and being
mortal seek not as yet for immortality. Once
for all this thing hath been appointed. Grieve
not therefore, nor play the mourner, but sub-
mit to laws laid on all alike. Grieve for thy
sins ; this is good mourning, this is highest wis-
dom. Let us then mourn for this cause contin-
ually, that we may obtain the joy which is there,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


** A«tToupYt'o9.

" al. " tliought."

^2 al. ''consider the spiritual.'

" lit. " Greeks."


'* al. " for of grief."
^^ al. " it darkens."
^* al. " without meat."


232


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIII.


HOMILY LXIII.

John xi. 30, 31.


" Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in
that place where Martha met Him. The Jews then
which were with her," and what follows.'


[i.] A GREAT good is philosophy; the phi-
losophy, I mean, which is with us. For what
the heathen have is words and fables only ; nor
have these fables anything truly wise * in them ;
since everything among those men is done for
the sake of reputation. A great good then is
true wisdom, and even here^ returns to us a
recompense. For he that despises wealth, from
this at once reaps advantage,* being delivered
from cares which are superfluous and unprofit-
able ; ' and he that tramples upon glory from
this at once receives his reward, being the slave
of none, but free with the real freedom ; and he
that desires heavenly things hence receives his
recompense, regarding present things as nothing,
and being easily superior to every grief. Behold,
for example, how this woman by practicing true
wisdom even here received her reward. For
when all were sitting by her as she mourned
and lamented, she did not wait that the Master
should come to her, nor did she maintain what
might have seemed her due, nor was she re-
strained by her sorrow, (for, in addition to the
other wretchedness, mourning women have this
malady, that they wish to be made much of on
account of their case,) but she was not at all
so affected ; as soon as she heard, she quickly
came to Him.* " Jesus was not yet come into
the town." ' He proceeded somewhat slowly,
that He might not seem to fling Himself upon
the miracle, but rather to be' entreated by
them. At least, it is either with an intention of
implying this that the Evangelist has said the,
" riseth up quickly," or else he showeth that she
ran so as to anticipate Christ's arrival. She
came not alone, but drawing after her the Jews
that were in the house. Very wisely did her
sister call' her secretly, so as not to disturb
those who had come together, and not mention
the cause either ; for assuredly many would have
gone back, but now as though she were going
to weep, all followed her. By these means again
it is proved '" that Lazarus was dead.


* ver. 31. " The Jews then which were with her, when they saw
Mary that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying,
She goeth unto the grave to weep there."

* al. '* any real wisdom." * al. " good."

* ivTtv6fv. 5 al. '* senseless.'*

* al. " but rising straightway went to meet Him."

' al. " the place." » al. " speak to."

* al. " being." "> al. " perhaps it is proved."


Ver. 32. "And she fell at His feet.""
She is more ardent than her sister. She
regarded not the multitude, nor the suspicion
which they had concerning Him, for there were
many of His enemies, who said, " Could not this
man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have
caused that even this man should not have
died?" (ver. 37) ; but cast out all mortal thing;
in the presence of her Master, and was given uf
to one thing only, the honor of that Master. Anc
what saith she ?

" Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my brothei
had not died."

What doth Christ? He converseth not at al
with her for the present, nor saith to her wha
He said to her sister, (for a great multitude wa:
by, and this was no fit time for such words,) H(
only acteth measurably and condescendeth ; an(
to prove His human nature, weepeth in silence
and deferreth the miracle for the present. Fo
since that miracle was a great one, and such a
He seldom wrought, and since many were t<
believe '^ by means of it, lest to work it withou
their presence should prove a stumbling-blocl
to the multitude, and so they should gain noth
ing by its greatness, in order that He might no
lose the quarry,"^ He draweth to Him many wit
nesses by His condescension, and showeth proo
of* His human nature. He weepeth, and i
troubled ; for grief is wont to stir up the feelings
Then rebuking those feelings, (for He " groaned '
in spirit " meaneth, " restrained His trouble,"]
He asked,
Ver. 34. " Where have ye laid him? "
So that the question might not be attendee
with lamentation. But why doth He ask ? Be
cause He desired not to cast Himself on (th
miracle), but to learn all from them, to do all a
their invitation, so as to free the miracle fror
any suspicion.

" They say unto Him, Come and see." j

Ver. 35. "Jesus wept." !

Seest thou that He had not as yet shown an
sign of the raising, and goeth not as if to rais j
Lazarus, but as if to weep ? For the Jews sho j
that He seemed to them to be going to bewaij
not to raise him ; at least they said, |


I* Ver. 32, 33. " Then when Mary was come where Jesus wi
and saw Him, she fell down at His feet, saying unto Him, Lord
Thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. When Jesus the
fore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came w
her, He groaned in the spirit, and troubled Himself."

" al. " they were about to gain much." " rT]v Sripav.

" al. " showeth for a tio».' " 'Eve^fniiijiroT


Homily LXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


233


Ver. 36, 37. "Behold how he loved him ! And
some of them said, Could not this man, which
opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that
even this man should not have died? "

Not even amid calamities did they relax their
wickedness. Yet what He was about to do was
a thing far more wonderful ; for to drive away
death when it hath come and conquered, is far
more than to stay it when coming on. They
therefore slander Him by those very points
through which they ought to have marveled at
His power. They allow for the time that He
opened the eyes of the blind, and when they
ought to have admired Him on account of that
miracle, they, by means of this latter case, cast
a slur upon it, as though it had not even taken
place. And not from this only are they shown
to be all corrupt, but because when He had not
yet come, nor exhibited any action, they prevent
Him with their accusations without waiting the
end of the matter. Seest thou how corrupt was
their judgment?

[2.] He Cometh then to the tomb ; and
again' rebuketh His feehngs. Why doth the
Evangelist carefully in several places mention
that "He wept," and that, "He groaned"?"
That thou mayest learn that He had of a truth
put on our nature. For when this Evangelist is
remarkable for uttering great things concerning
Christ more than the others, in matters relating
to the body, here he also speaketh much more
humbly than they.^ For instance, concerning
His death he hath said nothing of the kind ; the
other Evangelists declare that He was exceed-
ingly sorrowful, that He was in an agony ; but
John, on the contrary, saith, that He even cast
the officers backwards. So that he hath made up
here what is omitted there, by mentioning His
grief. When speaking of His death, Christ saith,
"I have power to lay down My life" (c. x. 18),
and then He uttereth no lowly word ; therefore
at the Passion they^ attribute to Him much that
human, to show the reality of the Dispensation.
,d Matthew proves this by the Agony, the
rouble, the trembling,' and the sweat ; but John
y His sorrow. For had He not been of our
ature, He would not once and again have been
astered by grief. What did Jesus ? He made
lO defense with regard to their charges ; for
■hy should He silence by words those who were
m to be silenced by deeds? a means less
oying, and more adapted to shame them.
Ver. 39. " He saith. Take ye away the stone."
Why did not He when at a distance summon
;arus, and place him before their eyes ? Or
lather, why did He not cause him to arise while


' Ver. 38. " Jesus therefore, again groaning in Himself, com-
h to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it."
* al. " rebuked." * i.e. the other Evangelists.

■ al. " all things more humble." * Ben. omits " the trembling."


the stone yet lay on the grave ? For He who
was able by His voice to move a corpse, and to
show it again endowed with life, would much
more by that same voice have been able to move
a stone ; He who empowered by His voice one
bound and entangled in the grave-clothes to
walk, would much more have been able to move
a stone ; why then did He not so ? In order to
make them witnesses of the miracle ; that they
might not say as they did in the case of the
blind man, " It is he," " It is not he." For
their hands * and their coming to the tomb testi-
fied that it was indeed he. If they had not
come, they might have deemed that they saw a
vision, or one man in place of another. But
now the coming to the place, the raising the
stone, the charge given them to loose the dead
man bound in grave-clothes from his bands ; the
fact that the friends who bore him from the
tomb, knew from the grave-clothes ' that it was
he ; that his sisters were not left behind ; that
one of them said, " He now stinketh, for he
hath been dead four days " ; all these things, I
say, were sufficient to silence the ill-disposed, as
they were made witnesses of the miracle. On
this account He biddeth them take away the
stone from the tomb, to show that He raiseth
the man. On this account also He asketh,
" Where have ye laid him ? " that they who said,
" Come and see," and who conducted Him,
might not be able to say that He had raised
another person ; that their voice and their hands
might bear witness, (their voice by saying, " Come
and see," their hands by hfting the stone, and
loosing the grave-clothes,) as well as their eyes
and ears, (the one by hearing His voice, the
other by seeing Lazarus come forth,) and th ,ir
smell also by perceiving the ill-odor, for Martha
said, " He now stinketh, for he hath been dead
four days."

Therefore I said with good reason, that the
<voman did not at all understand Christ's words,
"Though he were dead, yet shall he live." At
least observe, that she speaketh as though the
thing were impossible on account of the time
which had intervened. For indeed it was a
strange thing to raise a corpse which had been
dead four days, and was corrupt. To the dis-
ciples Jesus said, " That the Son of Man may
be glorified," referring to Himself; but to the
woman, " Thou shalt see the glory of God," speak-
ing of the Father. Seest thou that the weakness
of the hearers is the cause of the difference of
the words ? He therefore remindeth her of what
He had spoken unto her, well nigh rebuking her,
as being forgetful. Yet He did not wish at pres-
ent to confound the spectators, wherefore He
saith,*


* i.e. which raised the stone.
' ai. ** garments,"


• al. " saith gently."


234


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIII.


Ver. 40. " Said I not unto thee, that if thou
wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory
of God?"

[3.] A great blessing truly is faith, great, and
one which makes great those who hold it rightly
with (good) living.' By this men (are enabled)
to do the things of God in His" name. And
well did Christ say,' " If ye have faith ye shall say
unto this mountain. Remove, and it shall re-
move " (Matt. xvii. 20) ; and again, " He that
believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he do
also, and greater works than these shall he do."
(c. xiv. 12.) What meaneth He by "greater"?
Those which the disciples are seen after this to
work. For even the shadow of Peter raised a
dead man ; and so the power of Christ was the
more proclaimed. Since it was not so wonder-
ful that He while alive should work miracles, as
that when He was dead others should be en-
abled to work in His name greater than He
wrought. This was an indisputable proof of the
Resurrection ; nor if (that Resurrection) had
been seen by all, would it have been equally be-
lieved. For men might have said that it was an
appearance, but one who saw that by His name
alone greater miracles were wrought than when
He conversed with men, could not disbelieve
unless he were very senseless. A great blessing
then is faith when it arises from glowing feelings,
great love,* and a fervent soul ; it makes us truly
wise, it hides our human meanness, and leaving
reasonings beneath, it philosophizes about things
in heaven ; or rather what the wisdom of men
cannot discover,'' it abundantly comprehends
and succeeds in. Let us then cling to this, and
not commit to reasonings ° what concerns our-
selves. For tell me, why have not the Greeks
been able to find out anything ? Did they not
know all the wisdom of the heathen ? '' Why then
could they not prevail against fishermen and
tentmakers, and unlearned persons ? Was it not
because the one committed all to argument, the
others to faith ? and so these last were victorious
over Plato and Pythagoras, in short, over all that
had gone astray ; and they surpass those whose
lives had been worn out in * astrology and geome-
try, mathematics and arithmetic, and who had
been thoroughly instructed in° every sort of
learning, and "* were as much superior to them
as true and real philosophers are superior to
those who are by nature foolish and out of their
senses." For observe, these men asserted that
the soul was immortal, or rather, they did not
merely assert this, but persuaded others of it.


1 Ben. " great and causing many blessings."

'"Jesus." _ _ * al. " discover, but slips off."

• *' If yc believe," It saith, &c. * al. " strip offby."

• al. " who were familiar with." * al. " had got together."
^^ al. '* these they cast as dust, and."

'* at. " so that these appeared henceforward to be truly philoso-
phers, but those fools by nature aud out of their senses."


The Greeks, on the contrary, did not at first
know what manner of thing the soul was, and
when they had found out, and had distinguished
it from the body, they were again in the same
case, the one asserting that it was incorporeal,
the other that it was corporeal and was dissohed
with the body. Concerning heaven again, the
one said that it had life and was a god, but the
fishermen both taught and persuaded that it was
the work and device '" of God. Now that the
Greeks should use reasonings is nothing wonder-
ful, but that those who seem to be believers, that
" they " should be found carnal,'^ this is what may
justly be lamented." And on this account they
have gone astray, some saying that they know
God as He knoweth Himself, a thing which not
even any of those Greeks have dared to assert ;
others that God cannot beget without passion,
not even allowing Him any s'.iperiority over
men;" others again, that a righteous life and
exact'" conversation avail nothing. But it is not
the time to refute these things now. [4.] \\ t
that a right faith availeth nothing if the life be
corrupt, both Christ and Paul declare, having
taken the more care for this latter part ; Christ
when He teacheth,'" " Not every one that saith
unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven" (Matt. vii. 21) ; and again, " Many
will say unto Me in that day, Lord, have we not
prophesied in Thy Name? And I will profess
unto them, I never knew you ; depart from Me,
ye that work iniquity " " (Matt. xxii. 23) ; (for
they who take not heed to themselves, easily slip
away '^ into wickedness, even though they have a
right faith ;) and Paul, when in his letter to the
Hebrews he thus speaks and exhorts them ;
" Follow peace with all men, and holiness, with-
out which no man shall see the Lord." (Heb.
xii. 14.) By " holiness," meaning chastity, so
that it behooved each to be content with his own
wife, and not have to do with ^ any other woman ;
for it is impossible that one not so contented
should be saved ; he must assuredly perish
though he have ten thousand right actions, since
with fornication it is impossible to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Or rather, this is hence-
forth "' not fornication but adultery ; for as a
woman who is bound to a man, if she come to-
gether with^ another man, then hath committed
adultery, so he that is bound to a woman, if he
have another, hath committed adultery. Such
an one shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven,
but shall fall into the pit. Hear what Christ


'* al. " devices."

^' lit. " having only the natural life," ^vx*-Ko^t opposed in G. T.
to ffceuftaTcicbi. 1" al. " tiie many."

" al. " is the ridiculous thing." " al. " right."

*^ al. '* Christ discourseth the more about this, and saith."

*' al. *' I never knew you "; and again, " Rejoice not that the
devils are subject to you ": for, &c.

^* al. " often turn aside." ^l i.e. after marriage.

"> al. " attend to." " al. " lie with."


Homily LXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


235


saith concerning these,' " Their worm shall not
die," and the fire shall not be quenched." (Mark
ix. 44.) For he can have no pardon, who after
(possessing) a wife, and the comfort of a wife,
then acts shamelessly towards another worAan ;
since this is henceforth wantonness.^ And if
the many abstain even from their wives when it
be a season of fast or prayer, how great a fire
doth he heap up for himself who is not even
content with his wife, but mingleth with another ;
and if it is not permitted one who has put away
and cast out his own wife to mingle with another,
(for this is adultery,) how great evil doth he
commit who, while his wife is in his house, brings
in another. Let no one then allow this malady
to dwell in his soul ; let him tear it up by the
root. He doth not so much wrong his wife as
himself. For so grievous and unpardonable is
this offense, that if a woman separate herself
from a husband which is an idolater without his
consent, God punisheth her ; but if she separate
herself from a fornicator, not so. Seest thou
how great an evil this is ? " If," It saith, " any
faithful woman have ■* a husband that believeth
not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let
her not leave him." (i Cor. vii. 13.) Not so
concerning a harlot ; but what? " If any man'
put away his wife, saving for the cause of forni-
cation, he causeth her to commit adultery."
(Matt. V. 32.) For if the coming together
maketh one body, he who cometh together with
a harlot must needs become one body with her.
How then shall the modest woman, being a
member of Christ, receive such an one, or how
shall she join to herself the member of an harlot.
And observe the excess of the one (fornication)
over the other (idolatry). The woman who
jdwelleth with an unbeUever is not impure;
(("for," It saith, "the unbeHeving husband is
I sanctified by the wife " — t Cor. vi. 15 ;) not so
I with the harlot ; but what? " Shall I then make
I the members of Christ the members of an har-
llot?" In the one case sanctification remains,
and is not removed though the unbeliever dwell-


' al. " for of such saith God."
' "dieth not," &c.
■'* al. '* stupidity."


' the woman which hath."
* whosoever shall."


eth with his wife ; but in the other case it de-
parteth. A dreadful, a dreadful thing is fornica-
tion, and an agent for ' everlasting punishment ;
and even in this world it brings with it ten thou-
sand woes. The man so guilty is forced to lead
a life of anxiety and toil ; he is nothing better
off than those who are under punishment, creep-
ing' into another man's house with fear and
much trembling, suspecting all alike " both slave
and free. Wherefore I exhort you to be ' freed
from this malady, and if you obey '" not, step not
on the sacred threshold." Sheep that are cov-
ered with the scab, and full of disease, may not
herd with those that are in health ; we must
drive them from the fold until they get rid of
the malady. We have been made members of
Christ ; let us not, I entreat, become members
of an harlot. This place is not a brothel but a
church ; if then thou hast the members of an
harlot, stand not in the church, lest thou insult
the place. If there were no hell, if there were
no punishment, yet, after those contracts, those
marriage torches, the lawful bed, the procreation
of children, the intercourse, how couldest thou
bear to join " thyself to another? How is it that
thou art not ashamed nor blushest? Knowest
thou not that they who after the death of their
own wife, introduce another into their own house,
are blamed by many? yet this action hath no
penalty attached to it : but thou bringest in
another while thy wife is yet alive. What lust-
fulness is this ! Learn what hath been spoken
concerning such men, "Their worm," It saith,
" shall not die, and the fire shall not be
quenched." (Mark ix. 44.) Shudder at the
threat, dread the vengeance. The pleasure here
is not so great as the punishment there, but may
it not came to pass that any one (here) become
liable to that punishment, but that exercising
holiness they may see Christ, and obtain the
promised good things, which may we all enjoy,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


•* ITpo^tvovaa, al. ennyovtra,

' al. " introducing himself."

' al. " everywhere."

• al. " give diligence to be."


i» al. " will."

" al. '* sanctuary.*

t2 al. " place."


236


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIV.


HOMILY LXIV.

John xi. 41, 42.


" Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said, Father, I thank Thee
that Thou hast heard Me; and I knew that Thou
hearest Me always, but because of the people which
stand by, I said it." And what follows.

[i.] What I have often said, I will now say,
that Christ looketh not so much to His own honor
as to our salvation ; not how He may utter some
subUme saying, but how something able to draw
us to Him. On which account His sublime and
mighty sayings are few, and those also hidden,
but the humble and lowly are many, and abound ^
through His discourses. For since by these
men were the rather brought over, in these He
continueth ; and He doth not on the one hand
utter these ^ universally, lest the men that should
come after should receive damage, nor, on the
other hand, doth He entirely withhold those,^
lest the men of that time should be offended.
Since they who have passed from lowmindedness
unto perfection,* will be able from even a single
sublime doctrine to discern the whole, but those
who were ever lowminded, unless they had often
heard these lowly sayings,' would not have come
to Him* at all. In fact, even after so many
such sayings they do not remain firm, but even
stone and persecute Him, and try to kill Him,
and call Him blasphemer. And when He maketh
Himself equal with God, they say, " This man
blasphemeth " (Matt. ix. 3) ; and when He saith,
"Thy sins be forgiven thee" (c. x. 20), they
moreover call Him a demoniac. So when He
saith that the man who heareth His words is
stronger than death, or, " I am in the Father
and the Father in Me" (c. viii. 51), they leave
Him ; and again, they are offended when He
saith that He came down from heaven, (c. vi.
33, 60.) If now they could not bear these say-
ings, though seldom uttered, scarcely, had His
discourse been always sublime, had it been of
this texture, would they have given heed to Him ?
When therefore He saith, " As the Father com-
manded Me, so I speak " ' (c. xiv. 31) ; and, " I
am not come* of Myself" (c. vii. 28), then they
believe. That they did believe then is clear,
from the Evangelist signifying this besides, and
saying, " As He spake these words, many believed
on Him." (c. v. 30.) If then lowly speaking
drew men to ' faith, and high speaking scared


* lit, *' overflow." ' auTa._ ' auTo, i.e. higher sayings.
^ * al. '* have passed to perfection," al. " have passed from low-
mindedness." * TttiJTa. « al. " have been held."

' " so I do," N. T. • al. '* I speak nothing."

• al. "caused."


them away,'" must it not be a mark of extreme
folly not to see at a glance how to reckon " the
sole reason of those lowly sayings, namely, that
they were uttered because of the hearers. Since
in another place when He had desired to say
some high thing. He withheld it, adding this
reason, and saying, " Lest we should offend them,
cast a hook into the sea." (Matt. xvii. 27.)
Which also He doth here ; for after saying, " I
know that Thou hearest Me always," He addeth,
" but because of the multitude which standeth
around I said it, that they might beheve." Are
these words ours? Is this a human conjecture?
When then a man will not endure to be per-
suaded by what is written, that '^ they were
offended at sublime things, how, when he heareth
Christ saying that He spake in a lowly manner
that they might not be offended, how, after that,
shall he suspect that the mean sayings belonged
to His nature, not to His condescension ? '^ So
in another place, when a voice came down from
heaven, He said, " This voice came not because
of Me, but for your sakes." (c. xii. 30.) He
who is exalted may be allowed to speak lowly
things of himself, but it is not lawful for the
humble to utter concerning himself anything
grand or sublime. For the former ariseth from
condescension, and has for its cause the weak-
ness of the hearers ; or rather (it has for its
cause) the leading them to " humblemindedness,
and His being clothed in flesh, and the teaching
the hearers to say nothing great concerning
themselves, and His being deemed an enemy of
God, and not being believed to have come from
God, His being suspected of breaking the Law,
and the fact that the hearers looked on Him
with an evil eye, and were ill disposed towards
Him, because He said that He was equal to
God." But that a lowly man should say any
great thing of Himself, hath no cause either
reasonable or unreasonable ; '* it can only be
folly, impudence, and unpardonable boldness.
Wherefore then doth Christ speak humbly, being
of that ineffable and great Substance ? For the
reasons mentioned, and that He might not be
deemed unbegotten ; for Paul seems to have


"* aTTtaofit^. 't al. " not to reckon." ^^ or. "because."

'* al. for when we are persuaded from the actions that the men
are offended at high sayings, and when He saith Himself, ihM
" on this account 1 speak in a lowly way, lest they should be
offended," who will yet suspect, &c.

'* al. " to look to."

^^ al. and the maliciousness of the hearers, and its being contin-
ually said in the Old (Covenant) , " The Lord thy God is One Lord."

'^ al. " hath no cause at all that is specious.


Homily LXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


237


feared some such thing as this ; wherefore he
saith, " Except Him who did put all things under
Him." (i Cor. xv. 27.) This it is impious
even to think of. Since if being less than Him
who begat Him, and of a different Substance,
He had been deemed equal, would He not have
ased every means that this might not be thought ?
But now He doth the contrary, saying, " If I do
not the works of Him that sent Me,' believe Me
not." (c. X. 37.) Indeed His saying, that " I
im in the Father and the Father in Me " (c.
xiv. 10), intimateth to us the equality. It would
have behooved, if He had been inferior, to refute
this opinion with much vehemence, and not at
all to have said, " I am in the Father and the
Father in me" (c. x. 30), or that, "We are One,"
or that, " He that hath seen Me, hath seen
the Father." (c. xiv. 9.) Thus also, when His
discourse was concerning power. He said, " I
and the Father are One " ; and when His dis-
course was concerning authority. He said again,
" For as the Father raiseth up the dead and
quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth
tvhom He wilt" (c. v. 21) ; which it would be
mpossible that He should do were He of a dif-

Jerent substance ; or even allowing that it were
)ossible, yet it would not have behooved to say
fhis, lest they should suspect that the substance
ijvas one and the same. Since if in order that
lihey may not suppose Him to be an enemy of
I jrod. He often even uttereth words unsuited to
^ira, much more should He then have done so ;
)ut now. His saying, "That they should honor
he Son even as they honor the Father " (c. v.
3) ; His saying, "The works which He doeth,
do also" (c. V. 19) ; His saying that He is
the Resurrection, and the Life, and the Light
f the world" (c. xi. 25 ; c. viii. 12), are the
xpressions of One making Himself equal to Him
lio begat Him, and confirming the suspicion
hich they entertained. Seest thou^ how He
jaketh this speech and defense, to show that
le broke not the Law, and that He not only
oth not remove, but even confirmeth the opinion
f His equahty with the Father? So also when
\ey said, " Thou blasphemest, because thou
lakest thyself God" (c. x. 33), from equality
" works He established this thing.
I [2.] And why say I that' the Son did this,
hen the Father also who took not* the flesh
nth the same thing? For He also endured
at many lowly things should be said concern-
k Him for the salvation of the hearers. For
ie, "Adam, where art thou?" (Gen. iii. 9), and,
Uhat I may know whether they have done
together according to the cry of it " (Gen.
^iii. 21); and, " Now I know that thou fearest
^d " (Gen. xxii. 12); and, " If they will hear "
4-


' My Father," N. T.
' al. now to show that," &c.


a al. " if."

* al. " put not on."


(Ezek. iii. 11); and, " If they will understand "
(Deut. V. 29) ; and, "Who shall give the heart
of this people to be so?" and the expression,
" There is none like unto Thee among the gods,
O Lord " (Ps. Ixxx. 29) ; these and many other
like sentences in the Old Testament, if a man
should pick them out, he will find to be un-
worthy of the dignity of God. In the case of
Ahab it is said, " Who shall entice Ahab for
Me?" (2 Chron. xviii. 19.) And the contin-
ually preferring Himself to the gods of the
heathen in the way of comparison, all these
things are unworthy of God. Yet in another
way they are made worthy of Him, for He is so
kind, that for our salvation He careth not for
expressions which become His dignity. Indeed,
the becoming man is unworthy of Him, and the
taking the form of a servant, and the speaking
humble words, and the being clothed in ' humble
(garments), unworthy if one looks to His dig-
nity, but worthy if one consider the unspeakable
riches* of His lovingkindness. And there is
another cause of the humility of His words.
What is that? It is that they knew and con-
fessed' the Father, but Him they knew not.
Wherefore He continually betaketh Himself to
the Father as being confessed by them, because
He Himself was not as yet deemed worthy of
credit ; not on account of any inferiority of His
own, but because of the folly and infirmity of
the hearers. On this account He prayeth, and
saith, " Father, I thank Thee that Thou hast
heard Me." For if He quickeneth whom He
will, and quickeneth in like manner as doth the
Father, wherefore doth He call upon Him ?

But it is time now to go through the passage
from the beginning.' " Then they took up the
stone where the dead man lay. And Jesus lifted
up His eyes, and said. Father, I thank Thee
that Thou hast heard Me. And I knew that
Thou hearest Me always, but because of the
people that stand by I said it, that they might
believe that Thou hast sent Me." Let us then
ask the heretic. Did He receive an impulse ' from
the prayer, and so raise the dead man? How
then did He work other miracles without prayer ?
saying, "Thou evil spirit, I charge thee, come
out of him" (Mark ix. 25) ; and, "I will, be
thou clean" (Mark i. 41); and, "Arise, take
up thy bed" (c. v. 8) ; and, "Thy sins be for-
given thee " (Matt. ix. 2) ; and to the sea,
" Peace, be still." (Mark iv. 39.) In short,
what hath He more than the Apostles, if so be
that He also worketh by '" prayer ? Or rather 7
should say, that neither did they work all witl
prayer, but often they wrought without prayer


* al. " enduring mean things." " al. " to enter on the passage
" al. " greatness." itself."

^ al. " admired." ' powitv.

" al. '* upon."


238


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIV.


calling upon the Name of Jesus. Now, if His
Name had such great power, how could He have
needed prayer? Had He needed prayer, His
Name would not have availed. When He wholly
made man, what manner of prayer did He need ?
was there not then great equality of honor ? " Let
Us make," It saith, " man." (Gen. i. 26.) What
could be greater sign of weakness, if He needed
prayer ? But let us see what the prayer was ; " I
thank Thee that Thou hast heard Me." Who
now ever prayed in this manner ? Before utter-
ing any prayer. He saith, " I thank Thee," show-
ing that He needed not prayer.' "And I knew
that Thou hearest Me always." This He said not
as though He Himself were powerless, but to
show that His will and the Father's is one. But
why did He assume the form of prayer ? Hear,
not me, but Himself, saying, " For the sake of
the people which stand by, that they may believe
that Thou hast sent Me." He said not, " That
they may believe that I am inferior, that I have
need of an impulse from above, that without
prayer I cannot do anything ; but, " That Thou
hast sent Me." For all these things the prayer
declareth, if we take it simply. He said not,
" Thou hast sent me weak, acknowledging servi-
tude, and doing nothing of Myself"; but dis-
missing all these things, that thou mayest have
no such suspicions. He putteth the real cause of
the prayer, "That they may not deem Me an
enemy of God ; that they may not say. He is
not of God, that I may show them that the work
hath been done according to Thy will." All but
saying, " Had I been an enemy of God, what is
done would not have succeeded," but the, " Thou
heardest Me," is said in the case of friends and
equals. "And I knew that Thou hearest Me
always," that is, " in order that My will be done I
need no prayer, except to persuade men that to
Thee and Me belongeth one will." " Why then
prayest Thou? " For the sake of the weak and
grosser ^ sort.

Ver. 43. " And when He had thus spoken,
He cried with a loud voice."

Why said He not, " In the name of My
Father come forth " ? Or why said He not,
" Father, raise him up " ? Why did he omit
all these expressions, and after assuming the
attitude of one praying, show by His actions
His independent authority? Because this also
was a part of His wisdom, to show condescen-
sion by words, but by His deeds, power. For
since they had nothing else to charge Him with
except that He was not of God, and since in
this way they deceived many. He on this account
most abundantly proveth this very point by what
He saith, and in the way that their infirmity
required. For it was in His power by other


1 al. some MSS. add, " for Thou doest all things, whatsoever 1
will, He saith." ' al. *' meaner."


means to show at once His agreement with the
Father and His own dignity, but the multitude
could not ascend so far. And He saith,

" Lazarus, come forth."

[3.] This is that of which He spake, " The
hour is coming, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live." (c. v. 28.) For, that thou mightest
not think that He received the power of work-
ing from another, He taught thee this before,
and gave proof by deeds, and said not. Arise,
but, " Come forth," conversing with the dead
man as though living. What can be equal to
this authority? And if He doth it not by His
own strength, what shall He have more than the
Apostles, who say, " Why look ye so earnestly
on us as though by our own power or holiness
we had made this man to walk? " (Acts iii. 1 2.)
For if, not working by His own power. He did
not add what the Apostles said concerning them-
selves, they will in a manner be more truly wise
than He, because they refused the glory. And '
in another place, " Why do ye these things ?
We also are men of like passions as you."
(Acts xiv. 15.) The Apostles since they did
nothing of themselves, spoke in this way to
persuade men of this ; but He when the like
opinion was formed concerning Him, would He
not have removed the suspicion, if at least He
did not act by His own authority? Who would
assert this ? But in truth Christ doeth the con-
trary, when He saith,* " Because of the people
which stand by I said it, that they might be-
lieve" ; so that had they believed, there would
have been no need of prayer. Now if prayer
were not beneath His dignity, why should He
account them the cause of His praying? Why
said He not, " I do it in order that they may
believe that I am not equal to Thee " ; for He
ought on account of the suspicion to have come
to this point. When He was suspected of
breaking the Law, He used the very expression,
even when they had not said anything, " Thinli
not that I am come to destroy the Law'
(Matt. V. 17) ; but in this place He establishetl
their suspicion. In fact, what need was ther(
at all of going such a round, and of using sucl
dark sayings ? It had been enough to say, "
am not equal," and to be rid of the matter
" But what," saith some one, " did He not sa
that, I do not My own will ? " Even this He dii
in a covert way, and one suited to their infirm
ity, and from the same cause through which th
prayer was made. But what meaneth " Th;
Thou hast heard Me"? It meaneth,' "Th;
there is nothing on My part opposed to Thee.
As then the, " That Thou hast heard Me," is nt


* al, again, ** why look ye," &c., " we also," &c.

* al. but He even saith the contrary " because," &c.
'> al. so then the " hearing Me always" meaneth, &c.


iOMILY LXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


239


le saying of one declaring, that of Himself He
ad not the power, (for were this the case, it
ould be not only impotence but ignorance, if
efore praying He did not know that God would
rant the prayer ; and if He knew not, how was
that He said, "I go that I may awake him,"
istead of, " I go to pray My Father to awake
im?") As then this expression is a sign, not
f weakness, but of identity of will, so also is
le, "Thou hearest Me always." We must then
ither say this, or else that it was addressed to
leir suspicions. If now He was neither igno-
mt nor weak, it is clear that He uttereth these
)wly words, that thou mayest be persuaded by
leir very excess, and mayest be compelled to
onfess, that they suit not His dignity, but are from
ondescension. What then say the enemies of
•uth ? " He spake not those words. Thou hast
card me," saith some one, "to the infirmity of
\e hearers, but in order to show a superiority."
et this was not to show a superiority,' but to
[umble Himself greatly, and to show Himself
having nothing more than man. For to pray
not proper to God, nor to the sharer of the
hrone. Seest thou then that He came to this ^
om no other cause than their unbelief? Ob-
rve at least that the action beareth witness to
is authority.

" He called, and the dead man came forth
rapped."' Then that the matter might not
em to be an appearance, (for his coming forth
mnd did not seem to be less marvelous than
resurrection,) Jesus commanded to loose him,
order that having touched and having been
ar him, they might see that it was really he.
id He saith,
" Let him go."

Seest thou His freedom from boastfulness ?
e doth not lead him on, nor bid him go about^
th Him, lest He should seem to any to be
owing him ; so well knew He how to observe
^deration.

When the sign had been wrought, some won-
ted, others went and told it to the Pharisees.'
dat then did they ? When they ought to have
en astonished and to have admired Him, they
)k counsel to kill Him who had raised the
.d. What folly ! They thought to give up to
Lth Him who had overcome death in the
dies of others.

Ver. 47. "And they said, What do we? for
man doeth many miracles."


i.e. a mere superiority of the Father. * i.e. to use prayer.
Ver. 44, " And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and
with grave clothes: and his face was bound about with a nap-
*' N. T. " Jesus saith unto them, Loose him." N. T.
aL " walk."

Ver. 45-47. ** Then many of the lews which came to Mary,

. W had seen the things which Jesus did, believed on Him. But

»ce of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what

tligs Jesus had done. Then gathered the Chief Priests and Phari-

W a council." N. T.


They still call Him " man," these who had
received such proof of His divinity. " What do
we ? " They ought to have believed, and served,
and bowed down to Him, and no longer to have
deemed Him a man.

Ver. 58. "If we let him thus alone, the
Romans will come," and will take away both our
nation and city." '

What is it which they counsel to do ? ' They
wish to stir up the people, as though they them-
selves would be in danger on suspicion of es-
tablishing a kingdom. " For if," saith one of
them, " the Romans learn ' that this Man is
leading the multitudes, they will suspect us,'"
and will come and destroy our city." Where-
fore, tell me? Did He teach revolt? Did He
not permit you to give tribute to Caesar ? Did
not ye wish to make Him a king, and He fly
from you ? Did He not follow " a mean and
unpretending '- life, having neither house nor
anything else of the kind ? They therefore said
this, not from any such expectation, but from
malice. Yet it so fell out contrary to their
expectation, and the Romans took their nation
and city when they had slain Christ. For the
things done by Him were beyond all suspicion.
For He who healed the sick, and taught the
most excellent way of life, and commanded men
to obey their rulers, was not establishing but
undoing a tyranny. " But," saith some one, " we
conjecture from former (impostors)." But they
taught revolt. He the contrary. Seest thou that
the words were but a pretense ? For what action
of the kind did He exhibit? Did He lead about
with Him'' pompous'* guards? had He a train
of chariots? Did He not seek the deserts?
But they, that they may not seem to be speaking
from their own ill feeling," say that all the city
is in danger, that the common weal is being
plotted against, and that they have to fear the
worst. These were not the causes of your cap-
tivity, but things contrary to them ; both of this
last, and of the Babylonish, and of that under
Antiochus which followed : it was not that there
were worshipers among you, but that there
were among you those who did unjustly, and
excited God to wrath, this caused you to be
given up into bondage. But such a thing is
envy, allowing men to see nothing which they
ought to see, when it has once for all blinded the
soul. Did He not teach men to be meek ? Did
He not bid them when smitten on the right cheek
to turn the other also? Did He not bid them
when injured to bear it? to show greater readi-

" al. " are coming."

^ N. T- " All men will believe on Him, and the Romans shall
come and take away both our place and nation."

* al. "which they mean to say?" " al. "sec."

t'' al. " us about a kingdom." " al. " exhibit.**

^3 al. " plain."

•■^ al. " did He surround Himself with." ** <ro^vvTMS,
^^ itno ira^oOs Toil iaVTtav, Sav. reads to ff. Taif c.


240


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily hXV


ness to endure evil, than others have to inflict it ?
Are these, tell me, the signs of one establishing a
tyranny, and not rather of one pulling a tyranny
down?

[4.] But, as I said, a dreadful thing is malice,
and full of hypocrisy ; this hath filled the world
with ten thousand evils ; through this malady
the law courts are filled, from this comes the
desire of fame and wealth, from this the love of
rule, and insolence,' through this the roads have
wicked robbers and the sea pirates,^ from this
proceed the murders through the world, through
this our race is rent asunder, and whatever evil
thou mayest see, thou wilt perceive to arise from
this. This hath even burst into ' the churches, this
hath caused ten thousand dreadful things from
the beginning, this is the mother of avarice, this
malady hath turned all things upside down, and
corrupted justice. For " gifts," It saith, " blind
the eyes of the wise, and as a muzzle on the mouth
turn away reproofs." (Ecclus. xx. 29, LXX. and
marg. of E. V.) This makes slaves of freemen,
concerning this we talk every day, and no good
comes of it, we become worse than wild beasts ;
we plunder orphans, strip widows, do wrong to
the poor, join woe to woe. " Alas ! that the
righteous hath perished from the earth ! " (Mic.
vii. I, 2.) It is our part too henceforth to mourn,
or rather we have need to say this every day.
We profit nothing by our prayers, nothing by
our advice and exhortation, it remaineth there-
fore that we weep. Thus did Christ ; after hav-
ing many times exhorted those in Jerusalem,
when they profited nothing, He wept at their
hardness.* This also do the Prophets, and this
let us do now. Henceforth is the season for
mourning and tears and wailing ; it is seasonable
for us also to say now, " Call for the mourning
women, and send for the cunning women, that
they may cry aloud " (Jer. ix. 17) ; perhaps thus
we shall be able to cast out the malady of those
who build splendid houses, of those who surround
themselves with lands gotten by rapine. It is
seasonable to mourn ; but do ye take part with me
in the mourning, ye who have been stripped and
injured, by your mournings bring down my tears.
But while mourning we will mourn, not for our-
selves but for them ; they have not injured you,
but they have destroyed themselves ; for you have


* al. " vainglory.'*

* al. " the roads and the sea are

beset."


' tiatKiiiixaat.

* al. " misfortune."


the Kingdom of heaven in return for the injustic
done you, they hell in return for their gain. 0
this account it is better to be injured than to ii
jure. Let us bewail them with a lamentatio
not of man's making,'' but that from the Hoi
Scriptures with which the Prophets also waile(
With Isaiah let us wail bitterly, and say, " Wo^
they that add house to house, that lay field t
field, that they may take somewhat from the
neighbor ; will ye dwell alone upon the earth
Great houses and fair, and there shall be no ii
habitants in them." (Isa. v. 8, 9.)

Let us mourn with Nahum, and say with hir
" Woe to him that buildeth his house on high
(Perhaps Jer. xxii. 13.) Or rather let us moui
for them as Christ mourned for those of oli
" Woe to you that are rich, for ye have receive
your consolation." (Luke vi. 24.) Let us, I b
seech you, not cease thus lamenting, and if it I
not unseemly, let us even beat our breasts f(
the carelessness of our brethren. Let us m
weep for him who is already dead, but let 1
weep for the rapacious man, the grasping, tl
covetous, the insatiable. Why should we moui
for the dead, in whose case it is impossib
henceforth to effect anything? Let us moui
for these who are capable even of change. B
while we are lamenting, perhaps they will laug
Even this is a worthy cause for lamentation, th
they laugh when they ought to mourn. For hi
they been at all affected by our sorrows, it wou
have behooved us to cease from sorrowing c
account of their promise of amendment ; b
since they are of an insensible disposition, let 1
continue to weep, not merely for the rich, b
for the lovers of money, the greedy, the rap
cious. Wealth is not an evil thing, (for we m;
use it rightly when we spend it upon those wl
have need,) but greediness is an evil, and it pr
pares " deathless punishments. Let us then b
wail them ; perhaps there will be some amen
ment ; or even if they who have fallen in do r 1
escape, others at least will not fall into the da
ger, but will guard against it. May it come
pass that both they may be freed from
malady, and that none of us may ever fall into
that we all may in common obtain the promis
goods, through the grace and lovingkindness
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
ever and ever. Amen.


' al. " not the comman."


" nfto^evovva^


lOMlLY LXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


241


HOMILY LXV.


John xi. 49, 50.


And one of them, Caiaphas, being the High Priest that
same year, saitl unto them. Ye know nothing at all,
nor consider that it is expedient that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish
not," &c.

[i.] "The heathen are stuck fast in the de-

truction which they made ; in the trap which

hey hid is their foot taken." (Ps. ix. 15, LXX.)

rhis hath been the case with the Jews. They

aid that they would kill Jesus, lest the Romans

hould come and take away their place and

lation ; and when they had killed Him, these

hings happened unto them, and when they had

lone that by doing which they thought to es-

;ape, they yet did not escape. He who was

lain is in Heaven, and they who slew have for

Jieir portion hell. Yet they did not consider

lese things; but what? "They desired," It

lith, " from that day forth to kill Him " (ver.

) , for they said, " The Romans will come, and

ill take away our nation ; and a certain one of

lem, Caiaphas, being High Priest that year,

d," (being more shameless than the rest,)

Ye know nothing." What the others made

atter of doubt, and put forth in the way of

liberation, this man cried aloud, shamelessly,

)enly, audaciously. For what saith he ? " Ye

low nothing, nor consider that it is expedient

at one man should die, and that the whole

tion perish not."

Ver. 51. " And this spake he not of himself,
t being High Priest he prophesied." '
Seest thou how great is the force of the High
iest's authority ? for, since he had in any wise
en deemed worthy of the High Priesthood,
hough unworthy thereof, he prophesied, not
owing what he said ; and the grace merely
.de use of his mouth, but touched not his
ursed heart. Indeed many others have fore-
things to come, although unworthy to do
as Nebuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, Balaam ; and
reason of all is evident. But what he saith
if this kind. " Ye still sit quiet, ye give heed
carelessly to this matter, and know not how
.espise one man's safety for the sake of the
imunity." See how great is the power of
Spirit ; from an evil imagination It was able
ring forth words full of marvelous prophecy.
Evangelist calleth the Gentiles "children


* Being High Priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should
br that nation," ver. 52, " and not for that nation only, but that
iHe should gather togetlier in one the children of God that were
bretl abroad." G. T.


of God," from what was about to be : as also
Christ Himself saith, " Other sheep I have " (c.
X. 16), so calling them from what should after-
wards come to pass.

But what is, " being High Priest that year"?
This matter as well as the rest had become cor-
rupt ; for from the time that offices became
matters of purchase, they were no longer priests
for the whole period of their lives, but for a
year. Notwithstanding, even in this state of
things the Spirit was still present. But when
they lifted up their hands against Christ, then It
left them, and removed to the Apostles. This
the rending of the veil declared, and the voice
of Christ which said, " Behold, your house is left
unto you desolate." (Matt, xxiii. 38.) And
Josephus, who lived a short time after, saith,
that certain Angels who yet remained with them,
(to see) if they would alter their ways, left them.^
While the vineyard stood, all things' went on;
but when they had slain the Heir, no longer so,
but they perished. And God having taken it
from the Jews, as a glorious garment from an
unprofitable son, gave it to right-minded servants
of the Gentiles, leaving the others desolate and
naked. It was, moreover, no small thing that
even an enemy should prophesy this. This
might draw over others also. For in respect of
his* will, matters fell out contrariwise, since,'
when He died, the faithful were on this account
delivered from the punishment to come. What
meaneth, " That He might gather together those
near and those afar off" (ver. 52) ? He made
them one Body. The dweller in Rome deemeth
the Indians a member of himself. What is equal
to this " gathering together"? And the Head
of all is Christ.

Ver. 53. " From that day forth the Jews ' took
counsel to put Him to death."

And, in truth, had sought to do so before ; for
the Evangelist saith, " Therefore the Jews sought
to kill Him " (c. v. 18) ; and, "Why seek ye to
kill Me?" (c. vii. 19.) But then they only
sought, now they ratified their determination,
and treated the action as their business.

Ver. 54. "But Jesus walked no more openly
in Jewry." '


2 De Bell. Jud. I. 6, 31. " During the Festival called Pentecost,
the Priests having come by night into the Inner Temple to perform
their services, as was their custom, reported that they perceived a
motion and noise, and after that a voice as of a multitude, Let us
depart hence." * navra. e-ytfeTO.

* " Caiaphas." ^ al. " and." " " they," N. T.

' Ver. 54. " Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the
Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into


242


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMiLV LXV


[2.] Again He saveth Himself in a human
manner, and this He doth continually. But I
have mentioned the reason for which He often
departed and withdrew. And at this time He
dwelt in Ephratah, near the wilderness, and
there He tarried with His disciples. How
thinkest thou that those disciples were con-
founded when they beheld Him saving Himself
after the manner of a man ? After this no man
followed Him. For since the Feast was nigh,
all were running to Jerusalem ; but they,' at a
time when all others were rejoicing and holding
solemn assembly, hide themselves, and are in
danger. Yet still they tarried with Him. For
they hid themselves in Galilee, at the time of the
Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles ; and
after this again during the Feast, they only of
all were with their Master in flight and conceal-
ment, manifesting their good will to Him. Hence
Luke recordeth that He said, " I abode with
you in temptations " j^'and this He said, showing
that they were strengthened by His influence.'

Ver. 55.* " And many went up from the coun-
try to purify themselves."

Ver. 5 7. " And the High Priests and Pharisees
had commanded that they should lay hands on
Him."

A marvelous purification, with a murderous
will, with homicidal intentions, and blood-
stained hands !

Ver. 56. "And they said, Think ye that he
will not come to the feast? "

By means of the Passover they plotted against
Him, and made the time of feasting a time of
murder, that is, He there would fall into their
hands, because the season summoned Him.
What impiety ! When they needed greater
carefulness, and to forgive those who had been
taken for the worst offenses, then they attempted
to ensnare One who had done no wrong. Yet
by acting thus they had already not only profited
nothing, but become ridiculous. For this end
coming among them continually He escapeth,
and restraineth them when they take counsel^
to kill Him, and maketh them to be in perplexity,
desiring to prick them by the display of His
power ; that when they took Him, they might
know that what had been done was done, not
by their power, but by His permission. For not
even at that time could they take Him, and this
though Bethany was near ; and when they did
take Him, He cast them backwards.


a city called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples."
55. " And the Jews' Passover was nigh at hand." N. T.

* i.e. the disciples.

' Luke xxii. 28. " Ye are they which have continued with Me
in My temptations." ^ poir^?,

* Ver. 55-57. " And many went out of the country up to Jeru-
salem before the Passover to purify themselves. Then sought they
for Jesus, and spalce among themselves as they stood in the Temple,
What think ye, that He will not come to the feast? Now both the
Chief Priests and Pharisees had given a commandment, that if any
man knew where He were, he should show it, that they might take
Him." N. T. »al. "wish."


Ch. xii. ver. i, 2. "Then six days before thi
Passover He came to Bethany, where Lazaru
was, and feasted with them ; and Martha served
but Lazarus sat at meat." '

This was a proof of the genuineness of hi
resurrection, that after many days he both live(
and ate. " And Martha ministered " ; whenct
it is clear that the meal was in her house, fo
they received Jesus as loving and beloved. Some
however, say, that it took place in the house 01
another. Mary did not minister, for she was ;
disciple. Here again she acted in the mort
spiritual manner. For she did not minister ai
being invited, nor did she afford her services t<
all alike. But she directeth' the honor to Hin
alone, and approacheth Him not as a man, bu
as a God. On this account she poured out thi
ointment,* and wiped (His feet) with the hair
of her head, which was the action of one wh(
did not entertain the same opinion concerninj
Him as did others ; yet Judas rebuked her, unde
the pretense forsooth of carefulness. What thei
saith Christ ? " She hath done a good work fo;
My burying." ^ But why did He not expose th<
disciple in the case of the woman, nor say t(
him what the Evangelist hath declared, that 01
account of his own thieving he rebuked her ? Ii
His abundant longsuffering He wished to brin{
him to a better mind.'" For because He knen
that he was a traitor. He from the beginning
often rebuked him, saying, " Not all believe,'
and, " One of you is a devil." (c. vi. 64.) H(
showed them that He knew him to be a traitor
yet He did not openly rebuke him, but bare witl:
him, desiring to recall him. How then saitl:
another Evangelist, that all the disciples usee
these words? (Matt. xxvi. 70.) All used them
and so did he, but the others not with like pur
pose. And if any one ask why He put the ba(
of the poor in the hands of a thief, and madi
him steward who was a lover of money, we woult
reply, that God knoweth the secret reason ; bu
that, if we may say something by conjecture, i
was that He might cut off" from him all excusf
For he could not say that he did this thing
from love of money, (for he had in the ba
sufficient to allay his desire,) but from excessiv
wickedness which Christ wished to restrain, usin


* Ch. xii. ver. i, 2. " Then Jesus, six days before the Passow
came to IJethany, where Lazarus was which had been dead, whc
He raised from the dead. There they made Him a supper, a
Martha served, but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the tal
with Him." N. T. ' Trepii(TT>jffi.

* Ver. 3-6. " Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spi'
nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped I
feet with her hair: and the whole house was filled with the odol
the ointment. Then saith one of His disciples, Judas Iscar;
Simon's son, which should betray Him, Why was not this ointm
sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor? This he sj
not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and 1
the bag, and bare what was put therein."

w These words are from St. Matthew or St, Mark. _ In St. J-
we read, ver. 7, " Then said Jesus, Let her alone, against the da;
My burying hath she kept this."

^^ ivTpintiv, *^ i.e. the betrayal.


Homily LXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


243


much condescension towards him. Wherefore
He did not even rebuke him as steaUng, although
aware of it, stopping the way to his wicked de-
sire, and taking from him all excuse. " Let her
alone," He saith, " for against the day of My
burying hath she done ' this." Again, He maketh
mention of the traitor in speaking of His burial.
But him the reproof reacheth not, nor doth the
expression soften '' him, though sufficient to in-
spire him with pity : as if He had said, " I am
burdensome and troublesome, but wait a little
ivhile, and I shall depart." This too he intended
in saying,

Ver. 8. " But Me ye have not always."'

But none of these things turned back* that
avage madman ; yet in tnith Jesus said and did
Far more than this, He washed his feet that
aight, made him a sharer in the table and the
lalt, a thing which is wont to restrain even the
ouls of robbers, and spake other words, enough
o melt a stone, and this, not long before, but
an the very day, in order that not even time
might cause it to be forgotten. But he stood
>ut against all.

[3.] For a dreadful, a dreadful thing is the
ove of money, it disables both eyes and ears,
md makes men worse to deal with than a wild
jeast, allowing a man to consider neither con-
icience, nor friendship, nor fellowship, nor the
alvation of his own soul, but having withdrawn
hem at once from all these things, like some
larsh mistress," it makes those captured by it
ts slaves. And the dreadful part of so bitter a
lavery is, that it persuades them even to be
rateful for it ; and the more they become en-
laved, the more doth their pleasure increase ;
nd in this way especially the malady becomes
ncurable, in this way the monster becomes hard
o conquer. This made Gehazi a leper instead
if a disciple and a prophet ; this destroyed
Ananias and her with him ; ° this made Judas a
raitor ; this corrupted the rulers of the Jews,
ho received gifts, and became the partners of
hieves. This hath brought in ten thousand
rars, filling the ways with blood, the cities with
railings and lamentations. This hath made
deals to become impure, and tables accursed,
nd hath filled food with transgression ; there-
are hath Paul called it "idolatry" (Col. iii. 5),
nd not even so hath he deterred men from it.
nd why calleth he it " idolatry " ? Many pos-
ess wealth, and dare not use it, but consecrate
:, handing it down untouched, not daring to
3uch it, as though it were some dedicated
Sling. And if at any time they are forced to do

', they feel as though they had done something
nlawful. Besides, as the Greek carefully tends


« " kept," N. T.

' al. ' nor will the expression check."

• " For the poor always ye have with you, but Mc," &c., N. T.

* or. *' bent." ** TvoavvU. * Touc iteoL.


' Tvpafvif.


' Tovs nepit


his graven image,' so thou entrusteth thy gold
to doors and bars ; providing a chest instead of
a shrine, and laying it up in silver vessels. But
thou dost not bow down to it as he to the
image ? Yet thou showest all kind of attention
to it.

Again, he would rather give up his eyes or
his life than his graven image. So also would
those who love gold. " But," saith one, " I
worship not the gold." Neither doth he, he
saith, worship the image, but the devil that
dwelleth in it ; and in like manner thou, though
thou worship not the gold, yet thou worshipest
that devil who springeth on thy soul, from the
sight of the gold and thy lust for it. For more
grievous than an evil spirit is the lust of money-
loving, and many obey it more than others do
idols. For these last in many things disobey,
but in this case they yield everything, and
whatever it telleth them to do, they obey. What
saith it? "Be at war with all," it saith, "at
enmity with all, know not nature, despise God,
sacrifice to me thyself," and in all they obey.
To the graven images they sacrifice oxen and
sheep, but avarice saith. Sacrifice to me thine
own soul, and the man obeyeth. Seest thou
what kind of altars it hath, what kind of sacri-
fices it receiveth ? The covetous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, but not even so do they
fear, (i Cor. vi. 10.) Yet this desire is' weaker
than all the others, it is not inborn, nor natural,
(for then it would have been placed in us at the
beginning ;) but there was no gold at the begin-
ning, and no man desired gold. But if you will,
I will tell you whence the mischief entered. By
each man's envying the one before him, men
have increased the disease, and he who has
gotten in advance provokes him who had no
desire. For when men see splendid houses, and
extensive lands, and troops of slaves, and silver
vessels, and great heaps of apparel, they use
every means to outdo them ; so that the first
set of men are causes of the second, and these
of those who come after. Now if they would
be sober-minded, they would not be teachers
(of evil) to others ; yet neither have these any
excuse. For others there are also who de-
spise riches. " And who," saith one, " despises
them ? " For the terrible thing is, that, because
wickedness is so general, this seems to have
become impossible, and it is not even believed
that one can act aright. Shall I then mention
many both in cities and in the mountains ? And
what would it avail? Ye will not from their
example become better. Besides, our discourse
hath not now this purpose, that you should empty
yourselves of your substance ; I would that ye
could do so ; however, since the burden is too


7 al. " as one the graven image of stone, so thou,*' &c.
' i.e. in itself.


244


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXV


hea\'y for you, I constrain you not ; only I advise
you that you desire not what belongs to others,
that you impart somewhat of your own. Many
such we shall find, contented with what belongs
to them, taking care of their own, and living on
honest labor. Why do we not rival and imitate
these? Let us think of those who have gone
before us. Do not their possessions stand, pre-
serving nothing but their name ; such an one's
bath, such an one's suburban seat and lodging?
Do we not, when we behold them, straightway
groan, when we consider what toil he endured,
what rapine committed ? and now he is no-
where seen, but others luxuriate in his posses-
sions, men whom he never expected would do
so, perhaps even his enemies, while he is suffer-
ing extremest punishment. These things await
us also ; for we shall certainly die, and shall
certainly have to submit to the same end. How
much wrath, tell me, how much expense, how


many enmities these men incurred ; and wh;
the gain? Deathless punishment, and the havir
no consolation ; and the being not only whi
alive, but when gone, accused by all? What
when we see the images of the many laid up i
their houses, shall we not weep the more ? Of
truth well said the Prophet, " Verily, every ma
living disquieteth himself in vain " (Ps. xxxi:
II, LXX.) ; for anxiety about such things
indeed disquiet, disquiet and superfluous troubl
But it is not so in the everlasting mansions, n(
so in those tabernacles. Here one hath laborei
and another enjoys ; but there each shall posse:
his own labors, and shall receive a manifol
reward. Let us press forward to get that poi
session, there let us prepare for ourselves house
that we may rest in Christ Jesus our Lord, wit
whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost t
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXVI.


John xii. 8.


" Much people of the Jews therefore knew that He was
there, and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but
that they might see Lazarus also, whom He had raised
from the dead."

[i.] As wealth is wont to hurl into destruc-
tion ' those who are not heedful, so also is power ;
the first leads into covetousness, the second into
pride. See, for instance, how the subject multi-
tude of the Jews is sound, and their rulers cor-
rupt ; for that the first of these believed Christ,
the Evangelists continually assert, saying, that
" many of the multitude beheved on Him "
(c. vii. 31, 48) ; but they who were of the rul-
ers, believed not. And they themselves say,
not the multitude,^ " Hath any of the rulers
believed on Him?" But what saith one? "The
multitude who know not God^ are accursed"
(c. vii. 49) ; the believers they call accursed,
and themselves the slayers, wise. In this place
also, having beheld the miracle, the many be-
lieved ; but the rulers were not contented with
their own evil deeds,^ they also attempted to kill
Lazarus.'' Suppose they did attempt to slay
Christ because He broke the Sabbath, because
He made Himself equal to the Father, and be-
cause of the Romans whom ye allege, yet what

• or, " is it not the inultitude." » " the Law," N. T.

* o'tKeioiv aKoif, i.e. in matters aflecting themselves.

8 Ver. 10, II. " But the Chief Priests consuhed that they might
put La7ariis also to death, because that hy reason of him many of
the Jews went away, and bcUcved on Jesus."


charge had they against Lazarus, that they sougl-
to kill him ? Is the having received a benefit
crime ? Seest thou how murderous is their will
Yet He had worked many miracles ; but nor
exasperated them so much as this one, not th
l)aralytic, not the blind. For this was moi
wonderful in its nature, and was wrought aft<
many others, and it was a strange thing to se
one, who had been dead four days, walking an
speaking. An honorable action, in truth, for tl
feast, to mix up the solemn assembly with mu
ders. Besides, in the one case ° they thought '
charge Him concerning the Sabbath, and so
draw away the multitudes ; but here, since th<
had no fault to find with Him, they make tl
attempt on the man who had been healed. F
here they could not even say that He was o
posed to the Father, since the prayer stopp'
their mouths. Since then the charge which th
continually brought against Him was remove
and the miracle was evident, they hasten to mi
der. So that they would have done the same
the case of the blind man, had it not been
their power to find fault respecting the Sabbai
Besides, that man was of no note, and they c
him out of the temple ; but Lazarus was a pers
of distinction, as is clear, since many came
comfort his sisters ; and the miracle was done
the sight of all, and most marvelously.

^ i.e. that of the blind man.


Homily LXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


245


which account all ran to see. This then stung
them, that while the feast was going on, all should
leave it and go to Bethany. They set their hand
therefore to kill him, and thought they were not '
daring anything, so murderous were they. On
this account the^ Law at its commencement
)pens with this, "Thou shall not kill " (Ex. xx.
[3) ; and the Prophet brings this charge against
;hem, " Their hands are full of blood." (Isa. i.

'5-)

But how, after not walking openly in Jewry,
md retiring into the wilderness, doth He again
;nter openly?^ Having quenched their anger
)y retiring, He cometh to them when they were
itilled. Moreover, the multitude which went
)efore and which followed after was sufficient to
;ast them into an agony ; for no sign so much
ittracted the people as that of Lazarus. And
mother Evangelist saith, that they strewed their
[arments under His feet* (Matt. xxi. 8), and
hat " the whole city was moved " (Matt. xxi.
o) ; with so great honor did He enter. And
his He did, figuring one prophecy and fulfilling
nether ; and the same act was the beginning of
he one and the end of the other. For the.

Rejoice, for thy King cometh unto thee meek "
Zech. ix. 9), belonged to Him as fulfilling a
rophecy, but the sitting upon an ass was the
ct of one prefiguring a future event, that He
ras about to have the impure race of the Gen-
les subject to Him.

But how say the others, that He sent disciples,
nd said, " Loose the ass and the colt " (Matt.
xi. 2), while John saith nothing of the kind, but
lat " having found a young ass. He sat upon it " ?
lecause it is likely that both circumstances took
lace, and that He after the ass was loosed, while
le disciples were bringing it, found (the colt) ,
ad sat upon it. And they took the small
ranches of palm trees and olives, and strewed
leir garments in the way, showing that they

rw had a higher opinion concerning Him than
a Prophet, and said,

Ver. 13. " Hosannah, blessed is He that

imeth in the name of the Lord."

Seest thou that this most choked them, the

ersuasion which all men had that He was not

1 enemy of God ? And this most divided the

;ople. His saying that He came from the Father.

at what meaneth,

T Ver. 15. " Rejoice greatly,' daughter of Zion " ?

' ' Because all their kings had for the most part

'(>n an unjust and covetous kind of men, and


\'Gn. " did not so much as think they were.'*
;. the second Table.

'^r. 12-15. " On the next day, much people that had come to

- .cast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem)

pk branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet Him, and cried,

bsanna. Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of

: Lord. And Jesus, when He had found a young ass, sat thereon,

it is written, Fear not, daughter of Sion; behold, thy King com-

sitting on an ass's colt."

" in the way," N. T. 5 " Fear not," N. T.


i:


had given them over to their enemies, and had
perverted the people, and made them subject to
their foes ; " Be of good courage," It saith, "this
is not such an one, but meek and gentle " ; as is
shown by the ass, for He entered not with an
army in His train, but having an ass alone.

Ver. i6. "But this," saith the Evangelist,
" the disciples knew not, that it was written of
Him."«

[2.] Seest thou that they were ignorant on
most points, because He did not reveal to them ?
For when He said, " Destroy this Temple, and
in three days I will raise it up " (c. ii. 19), neither
then did the disciples understand.' And another
Evangelist saith, that " the saying was hid from
them " (Luke xviii. 34), and they knew not that
He should rise from the dead. Now this was
with reason concealed from them, (wherefore
another Evangelist saith, that as they heard it
from time to time, they grieved and were de-
jected,' and this because they understood not
the saying concerning the Resurrection,) it was
with reason concealed, as being too high for
them : but why was not the matter of the ass
revealed to them ? Because this was a great
thing also. But observe the wisdom of the Evan-
gelist, how he is not ashamed to parade their
former ignorance. That it was written they
knew, that it was written of Him they knew not.
For it would have offended them if He being a
King were about to suffer such things, and be so
betrayed. Besides, they could not at once have
taken in the knowledge of the Kingdom of which
He spake ; for another Evangelist saith, that
they thought the words were spoken of a king-
dom of this world. (Matt. xx. 21.)

Ver. 17." But the multitude bare witness that
He had raised Lazanis."'

For so many would not have been suddenly
changed, unless they had beUeved in the miracle.

Ver. 19. " The Pharisees therefore said among
themselves. Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?
behold, the world is gone after Him."

Now this seems to me to be said by those who
felt rightly, but had not courage to speak boldly,
and who then would restrain the others by point-
ing to the result, as though they were attempting
impossibilities. Here again they call the multi-
tude " the world." For Scripture is wont to call
by the name " world " both the creation, and
those who live in wickedness ; the one, when It
saith, "Who bringeth out His world '"by number"
(Isa. xl. 26) ; the other when It saith, " The


" Ver. 16. " These things understood not the disciples at the
first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that
these things were written of Him, and that they had done these
things unto Him." N. T.

' al. *' neither did they know this." * iv Karritiititf.

^ Ver. 17, 18. " The people therefore that was with Him when
He called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead,
bare record. For this cause the people also met Him, for that they
heard that He had done this miracle. N. T.
»» E. V. " host."


246


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX\


world hateth not * you, but Me it hateth." (c. vii.
7.) And these things it is necessary to know
exactly, that we may not through the significa-
tion of words afford a handle to the heretics.

Ver. 20. " And there were certain of the
Greeks that came up to worship at the Feast."

Being now near to become proselytes, they
were at ' the Feast. When therefore the report
concerning Him was imparted to them, they say,

Ver. 21. " We would see Jesus." ^

Philip gives place to Andrew as being before
him, and communicates the matter to him. But
neither doth he at once act with authority ; for
he had heard that saying, " Go not into the way
of the Gentiles" (Matt. x. 5) : therefore having
communicated with the disciple, he refers the
matter to his Master. For they both spoke to
Him. But what saith He ?

Ver. 23, 24. "The hour is come, that the
Son of Man should be glorified. Verily, verily,
I say unto you. Except a corn of wheat fall into
the ground and die, it abideth alone."

What is, "The hour is come"? He had
said, " Go not into the way of the Gentiles,"
(thus cutting away all excuse of ignorance from
the Jews,) and had restrained the disciples.
When therefore the Jews continued disobedient,
and the others desired to come to Him, " Now,"
saith He, " it is time to proceed to My Passion,
since all things are fulfilled. For if we were to
continue to wait for those who are disobedient
and not admit these who even desire to come, this
would be unbefitting our tender care." Since
then He was about to allow the disciples to go
to the Gentiles after the Crucifixion, and beheld
them springing on before. He said, " It is time
to proceed to the Cross." For He would not
allow them to go sooner, that it might be for a
testimony unto them.'' Until that by their deeds
the Jews rejected Him, until they crucified Him,
He said not, " Go and make disciples of all na-
tions " (Matt, xxviii. 19), but, " Go not into the
way of the Gentiles " (Matt. x. 5), and, " I am
not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel" (Matt xv. 24), and, "It is not meet
to take the children's bread and give it unto
dogs." (Matt. XV. 26.) But when they hated
Him, and so hated as to kill Him, it was super-
fluous to persevere while they repulsed Him.
For they refused Him, saying, " We have no king
but Caesar." (c. xix. 15.) So that at length He
left them, when they had left Him. Therefore
He saith, " How often would I have gathered
your children together, and ye would not ? "
(Matt, xxiii. 37.)


* " cannot hate," N. T.

* perhaps, *' went to," jjtffay, conj. for fi<rav.

■ Ver. 31, 22. " The same came therefore to Philip, which was
of Bethsaida in Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see
Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew, and again Andrew and
Philip tell Jesus." N. T. • i.e. to the Jews.


What is, " Except a grain of corn fall into tl
ground and die " ? He speaketh of the Cros
for that they might not be confounded at seein
that just when Greeks also came to Him, th<
He was slain. He saith to them, " This vei
thing specially causeth them to come, and shi
increase the preaching of Me." Then since h
could not so well persuade them by words, F
goeth about to prove this from actual experienc
telling them that this is the case with con
it beareth the more fruit when it hath diei
" Now," saith He, " if this be the case wi
seeds, much more with Me." But the disc
pies understood not what was spoken. Wher
fore the Evangelist continually putteth this," ;
making excuse for their flight afterwards. Th
same argument Paul also hath raised whe
speaking of the Resurrection.

[3.] What sort of excuse then will they ha\
who disbelieve the Resurrection, when the actic
is practiced each day, in seeds, in plants, and
the case of our own generation? for first it
necessary that the seed die, and that then tl
generation take place. But, in short, when Go
doeth anything, reasonings are of no use ; fi
how did He make us out of those things th
were not? This I say to Christians, who asse
that they believe the Scriptures ; but I shall ali
say something else drawn from human reasoi
ings. Of men some live in vice, others i
virtue ; and of those who live in vice, mar
have attained to extreme old age in prosperit
many of the virtuous after enduring the coi
trary. ^Vhen then shall each receive his d(
serts? At what season? "Yea," saith son
one, " but there is no resurrection of the body.
They hear not Paul, saying, " This corruptib
must put on incorruption." (i Cor. xv. 53
He speaks not of the soul, for the soul is ni
corrupted ; moreover, " resurrection " is sa
of that which fell, and that which fell was tl
body. But why wilt thou have it that there
no resurrection of the body? Is it not possil
with God ? But this it were utter folly to sa
Is it unseemly? Why is it unseemly, that t
corruptible which shared the toil and deal
should share also the crowns? For were
unseemly," it would not have been created
the beginning, Christ would not have taken t
flesh again. But to show that He took it agij
and raised it up, hear what He saith : " Reac
hither thy fingers" (c. xx. 27) ; and, " Behc<
a spirit hath not bones and sinews."' (Lt
xxiv. 39.) But why did He raise Lazarus agf
if it would have been better to rise withou i
body? Why doth He this, classing it as*
miracle and a benefit? Why did He ^t
nourishment at all? Be not therefore decei !


» i.e. that they did not understand. ' fiiKt [il>if>t, G. T.l.
* i.e. the body. * " flesh and bones, * '■


Homily LXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


247


by the heretics, beloved : for there is a Resur-
rection and there is a Judgment, but they deny
these things, who desire not to give account
of their actions. For this Resurrection must be
such as was that of Christ, for He was the first
fruits, the first born of the dead. But if the
Resurrection is this,' a purifying of the soul, a
deliverance from sin, and if Christ sinned not,
how did He rise again? And how have we
been delivered from the curse, if so be that He
also sinned ? And now saith He, " The prince
of this world cometh, and had nothing in Me " ?
(c. xiv. 30.) They are the words of One de-
claring His sinlessness. According to them
therefore He either did not rise again ; or that
He might rise,^ He sinned before His Resur-
rection. But He both rose again, and did no
Isin. Therefore He rose in the Body, and these
!wicked doctrines are nothing else than the
ioffspring of vainglory. Let us then fly this
malady. For, It is saith, " evil communications
corrupt good manners." (i Cor. xv. 33.)
These are not the doctrines of the Apostles ;
Marcion and Valentius have newly invented
them. Let us then flee them, beloved, for a
pure life profits nothing when doctrines are cor-
■upt ; as on the other hand neither do sound
ioctrines, if the life be corrupt. The heathen
' vere the parents of these notions, and those
1 leretics reared them, having received them from
jcntile philosophers, asserting that matter is un-
;reated, and many such like things. As then
hey asserted that there could be no Artificer ^
inless there were some uncreated subject matter,
io also they disallowed the Resurrection. But
et us not heed them, as knowing that the power
if Ood is all sufficient.^ Let us not heed them.
Id you I say this ; for we will not dechne the
Kittle with them. But the man who is unarmed
11(1 naked, though he fall among the weak,
;hough he be the stronger, will easily be van-
juished. Had you given heed to the Scriptures,
lad you sharpened yourselves each day, I would
n>t have advised you to flee the combat with
hem, but would have counseled you to grapple
: Kith them ; for strong is truth. But since you
: Inow not how to use the Scriptures, I fear the
; itruggle, lest they take you unarmed and cast
. iou down. For there is nothing, there is nothing
eaker than those who are bereft of the aid of


. which heretics say it is.
" if He rose."


* al. " almighty.'


the Spirit. If these heretics employ the wisdom
of the Gentiles, we must not admire, but laugh
at them, because they employ foolish teachers.
For those men were not able to find out any-
thing sound, either concerning God or the crea-
tion, and things which the widow among us is
acquainted with, Pythagoras did not yet know,
but said that the soul becomes a bush, or a fish,
or a dog. To these, tell me, ought you to give
heed ? And how could it be reasonable to do
so ? They are great men in their district,' grow
beautiful curls, and are enfolded in cloaks ; thus
far goes their philosophy ; b'lt if you look within
there is dust and ashes and nothing sound, but
"their throat is an open sepulcher " (Ps. v. 9),
having all things full of impurity and corruption,*
and all their doctrines (full) of worms. For
instance, the first of them said that water was
God, his successor fire, another one air, and'
they descended to things corporeal ; ought we
then, tell me, to admire these, who never even
had the thought of the incorporeal God ? and if
they did ever gain it afterwards, it was after
conversing in Egypt with our people. But, that
we bring not upon you much confusion, let us
here close our discourse. For should we begin
to set before you their doctrine, and what they
have said about God, what about matter, what
about the soul, what about the body, much
ridicule will follow. And they will not even
require to be accused by us, for they have
attacked each other ; and he who wrote against
us the book concerning matter, made away with
himself. Therefore that we may not vainly
delay you, nor wind together' a labyrinth of
words, leaving these things we will bid you keep
fast hold of the listening to the Holy Scriptures,
and not fight with ' words to no purpose ; as also
Paul exhorteth Timothy (2 Tim. 2, 14), filled
though he was with much wisdom, and possess-
ing the power of miracles. Let us now obey
him, and leaving trifling let us hold fast to real
works, I mean to brotherly-kindness and hos-
pitality ; and let us make much account of alms-
giving, that we may obtain the promised good
things, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
endless ages.'" Amen.


' at. '' and all."


* unwind."

* about."


"^ al. " To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory
now and for the endless ages of eternity."


248


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVII.


HOMILY LXVII


John xii. 25, 26.


" He that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that hateth
his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
If any man serve Me, let him follow Me."


[i.] Sweet is the present life, and full of much
pleasure, yet not to all, but to those who are
riveted to it. Since, if any one look to heaven
and see the beauteous things there, he will soon
despise this life, and make no account of it.
Just as the beauty of an object is admired while
none more beautiful is seen, but when a better
appears, the former is despised. If then we
would choose to look to that beauty, and observe
the splendor of the kingdom there, we should
soon free ourselves from our present chains ; for
a kind of chain it is, this sympathy with present
things. And hear what Christ saith to bring us
in to this, " He that loveth his life shall lose it,
and he that hateth his life in this world shall
keep it unto life eternal ; if any man serve Me,
let him follow Me " ; and, " Where I am, there
is ' My servant also." The words seem like a
riddle, yet they are not so, but are full of much
wisdom. But how shall " he that loveth his life,
lose it " ? When he doeth its unseemly desires,
when he gratifies it where he ought not. Where-
fore one exhorteth us, saying, " Walk not in the
desires of thy soul" (Ecclus. xviii. 30) ; for so
wilt thou destroy it since it leadeth away from
the path leading to virtue ; just as, on the con-
trary, " he that hateth it in this world, shall save
it." But what meaneth, " He that hateth it " ?
He who yields not to it when it commands what
is pernicious. And He said not, " he that yield-
eth not to it," but, "He that hateth it" ; for as
we cannot endure even to hear the voice of
those we hate, nor to look upon them with pleas-
ure, so from the soul also we must turn away
with vehemence, when it commands things con-
trary to what is pleasing to God. For since He
was now about to say much to them concern-
ing death. His own death, and saw that they
were dejected^ and desponding, He spake very
strongly, saying, " What say I ? If ye bear not
valiantly My death ? Nay, if ye die not your-
selves, ye will gain nothing." Observe also how
He softens the discourse. It was a very grievous
and sad thing to be told, that the man who loves
life should die. And why speak I of old times,
when even now we shall find many gladly en-
during to suffer anything, in order to enjoy the


' "shall be," N.T.

* al. " loolung down," or, " disdainful."


present life, and this too when they are persuaded
concerning things to come ; who when they be-
hold buildings, and works of art, and contriv-
ances, weep, uttering the reflection, " How many
things man inventeth, and yet becometh dust !
So great is the longing after this present life."
To undo these bonds then, Christ saith, " He
that hateth his soul in this world, shall keep it
unto life eternal." For that thou mayest know
that He spake as exhorting them, and dissipat-s
ing their fear, hear what comes next. j

" If any man serve Me, let him follow Me." '

Speaking of death, and requiring the following
which is by works. For certainly he that serveth
must follow him who is served. And observe at
what time He said these things to them ; not
when they were persecuted, but when they were
confident ; when they thought they were in
safety on account of the honor and attention of
the many, when they might rouse themselves and
hear, " Let him take up his cross, and follow
Me" (Matt. xvi. 24) ; that is, "Be ever,"'' He
saith, " prepared against dangers, against death,
against your departure hence." Then after He
had spoken what was hard to bear, He putteth
also the prize. And of what kind was this? The
following Him, and being where He is ; showing
that Resurrection shall succeed death. For,
saith He,

"Where I am, there is* My servant also."

But where is Christ? In heaven. Let us
therefore even before the Resurrection remove
thither in soul and mind.

" If any man serve Me, the Father shall love'
him."

Why said He not, "I"? Because they did
not as yet hold a right opinion concerning Him,
but held a higher opinion of the Father. Foi
how could they imagine anything great concern-
ing Him, who did not even know that He was
to rise again ? Wherefore He said to the sons 0
Zebedee, " It is not mine to give, but it shall bf
given to them for whom it is prepared by m;
Father" (Mark x. 40), yet He it is that j'
eth. But in this passage He also establi^
His genuine sonship.' For as the servants 0
His own Son, so will the Father receive them.

Ver. 2 7. " Now is My soul troubled ; arn
what shall I say? Father, save me from thi
hour."


* lit. " in battle array."

* •• shall be." N. T.


" honor," N. T.
' TO yv^aioy.


OMILY LXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


249


" But surely this is not ' the expression of
le urging them to go even to death." Nay,
is that of one greatly so urging them. For
St they should say, that " He being exempt
am mortal pains easily philosophizes on death,
id exhorts us being himself in no danger," He
loweth, that although feeling its agony," on ac-
)unt of its profitableness He declineth it not.
jt these things belong to the Dispensation, not
e Godhead. Wherefore He saith, " Now is
y soul troubled " ; since if this be not the case,
Kat connection hath that which was spoken,
id His saying, " Father, save Me from this
)ur"? And so troubled, that He even sought
;liverance from death, if at least it were pos-
ble to escape. These were the infirmities of
is human nature.

[2.] "But," He saith, "I have not what to
y, when asking for deliverance."
" For for this cause came I unto this hour."
As though He had said, " Though we be con-
junded, though we be troubled, let us not fly
)m death, since even now I though troubled
not speak of flying ; for it behooveth to bear
lat is coming on. I say not. Deliver Me from

hour," but what?
Ver. 28. " Father, glorify Thy Name."

Although My trouble urges Me to say this,'

t I say the opposite, ' Glorify Thy Name,'

It is. Lead Me henceforth to the Cross " ;

ich greatly shows His humanity, and a nature

(villing to die, but clinging to the present life,

wing that He was not exempt from human

lings. For as it is no blame to be hungry, or

sleep, so neither is it to desire the present

and Christ indeed had a body pure from

yet not free from natural wants, for then it

Id not have been a body. By these words

He taught something else. Of what kind is

t? That if ever we be in agony and dread,

even then start not back from that which is

before us ; and by saying,* " Glorify Thy

ne," He showeth that He dieth for the tnith,

ing the action, " glory to God." And this

out after the Crucifixion. The world was

ut to be converted, to acknowledge the Name

■od, and to serve Him, not the Name of the

ler only, but also that of the Son ; yet still as

lis He is silent.

There came therefore a Voice from Heaven,
ve both glorified it, and will glorify it again."
Tien had He "glorified it"? By what
been done before ; and " I will glorify it
I " after the Cross. What then said Christ ?
T. 30.' " This Voice came not because of
but for your sakes."


' is no longer.'* * i.e. " Save Me," &c.

K'jwi'Lwv ovTof . * Ben. omits " and by .saying."

Ver. 2^ omitted. *' The people therefore that stood by, and
I it, said that it thundered; others said, An Angel spake to


They thought that it thundered, or that an
Angel spake to Him. And how did they think
this? Was not the voice clear and distinct? It
was, but it quickly flew away from them as being
of the grosser sort, carnal and slothful. And
some of them caught the sound only," others
knew that the voice was articulate, but what it
meant, knew not. What saith Christ? "This
Voice came not because of Me, but for your
sakes." Why said He this? He said it, setting
Himself against what they continually asserted,
that He was not of God. For He who was glo-
rified by God, how was He net from that God
whose name by Him was glorified? indeed for
this purpose the Voice came. Wherefore He
saith Himself, " This Voice came not because of
Me, but for your sakes," " not that I may learn
by it anything of which I am ignorant, (for I
know all that belongeth to the Father,) but for
your sakes." For when they said, " An Angel
hath spoken unto Him," or " It hath thundered,"
and gave not heed to Him, He saith, " it was for
your sakes," that even so ye might be led to en-
quire what the words meant. But they, being
excited, did not even so enquire, though they
heard that the matter related to them. For to
one who knew not wherefore it was uttered, the
Voice naturally appeared indistinct. " The
Voice came for your sakes." Seest thou that
these lowly circumstances take place on their
account, not as though the Son needeth help ?

Ver. 31. " Now is the judgment of this world,
now shall the prince of this world be cast down."^

What connection hath this with, " I have
glorified, and will glorify " ? Much, and closely
harmonizing. For when God saith, " I will glo-
rify," He showeth the manner of the glorifying.
What is it? That one* should be cast down.
But what is, "the judgment of this world"?
It is as though He said, " there shall be a tri-
bunal and a retribution." How and in what way ?
" He " slew the first man, having found him guilty
of sin, (for 'by sin death entered ' — Rom. v. 12 ;)
but in Me this he found not. Why then did he
spring upon Me and give Me over to death?
Why did he put into the mind of Judas to de-
stroy Me ? " (Tell me not that it was God's dis-
pensation, for this belongeth not to the devil,
but His wisdom ; for the present let the dispo-
sition of that evil one be enquired into.) " How
then is the world judged in Me ? " It shall be
said, as if a court of justice were sitting, to Satan,
" Well, thou hast slain all men, because thou
didst find them guilty of sin. But why didst
thou slay Christ ? Is it not clear that thou didst
it wrongfully?" Therefore in Him the whole
world shall be avenged. But, that this may be
still more clear, I will make it plain by an exam-


•* Ben. omits "only."
' " cast out," N. T.


9 i.e. the prince of this world.
° i.c. Sataa.


2 so


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVI


pie. Suppose there is some cruel tyrant, bring-
ing ten thousand evils on all those who fall into
his hands. If such a one engaging with a king,
or a king's son, slay him unjustly, his death will
have power to get revenge for the others also.
Suppose there is one who demands payment of
his debtors, that he beats them and casts them
into prison ; then from the same recklessness
that he leads to the same dungeon one who
owes him nothing : such a man shall suffer pun-
ishment for what he hath done to the others.
For that one shall destroy him.

[3.] So also it is in the case of the Son ; for
of those things which the devil hath done against
us, of these shall the penalty be required by
means of what he hath dared against Christ.
And to show that He implieth this, hear what
He saith ; " Now shall the prince of this world
be cast down," "by My Death."

Ver. 32. " And I, if I be lifted up, will draw
all men unto Me."

That is, " even those of the Gentiles." And
that no one may ask, " How shall he be cast
down, if he is stronger even than Thou art?"
He saith, " He is not stronger ; how can he be
stronger than One who draweth others to Him ? "
And He speaketh not of the Resurrection, but
of what is more than the Resurrection, " I will
draw all men to Myself" For had He said, " I
shall rise again," it was not yet clear that they
would believe ; but by His saying, " they shall
believe," both are proved at once, both this, and
also that He must rise again. For had He con-
tinued dead, and been a mere man, no one would
have believed. " I will draw all men to My-
self." (c. vi. 44.) How then said He that the
Father draweth? Because when the Son draw-
eth, the Father draweth also. He saith, " I will
draw them," as though they were detained by a
tyrant, and unable of themselves alone to ap-
proach Him, and to escape the hands of him
who keepeth hold of them. In another place
He calleth this " spoiling ; no man can ^ spoil a


* " how can," &c., N. T.


Strong man's goods, except he first bind tl:
strong man, and then spoil his goods." (Mat
xii. 29.) This He said to prove His strengtl
and what there He calleth " spoiling," He hatl
here called " drawing."

Knowing then these things, let us rouse ou
selves, let us glorify God, not by our faith alon
but also by our life, since otherwise it would n(
be glory, but blasphemy. For God is not s
much blasphemed by an impure heathen, as by
corrupt Christian. Wherefore I entreat you 1
do all that God may be glorified ; for, " Woe,"
saith, " to that servant by whom the Name (
God is blasphemed," (and wherever there is
"woe," every punishment and vengeance straigh
way follows,) "but blessed is he by whom th;
Name is glorified." Let us then not be as i
darkness, but avoid all sins, and especially thoi
which tend to the hurt of others, since by the!
God is most blasphemed. What pardon sha
we have, when, being commanded to give I
others, we plunder the property of others
What shall be our hope of salvation ? Thou a
punished if thou hast not fed the hungry ; but
thou hast even stripped one who was clothei
what sort of pardon shalt thou obtain? The!
things I will never desist from saying, for th<
who have not heard to-day perhaps will hear ti
morrow, and they who take no heed to-morro
perhaps will be persuaded the next day ; an
even if any be so disposed as not to be pe
suaded, yet for us there will be no account to gi\
of them at the Judgment. Our part we have fu
filled ; may we never have cause to be ashame
of our words, nor you to hide your faces, bi
may all be able to stand with boldness befoi
the judgment-seat of Christ, that we also ma
be able to rejoice over you, and to have son
compensation of our own faults, in your beir
approved in Christ Jesus our Lord, with who
to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory f
ever. Amen.


lOMILY LXVIIL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


251


HOMILY LXVIII,

John xii. 34.


The people answered Him, We have heard out of the
Law that Christ aliideth for ever; and how sayest
thou, The Son of Man must be Hfted up? Who is
this Son of Man? "

[i.] Deceit is a thing easily detected, and
eak, though it be daubed outside with ten thou-
md colors. For as those who whitewash decayed
alls, cannot by the plastering make them sound,
too those who lie are easily found out, as in
,ct was the case here with the Jews. For when
hrist said to them, " If I be lifted up I will
raw all men unto Me ; We have heard," saith
lie of them, " out of the Law, that Christ re-
aineth forever ; and how sayest thou, that the
an of Man must be lifted up ? Who is this Son
Man ? " Fjven they then knew that Christ
as some Immortal One, and had life without
id. And therefore they also knew what He
eant ; for often in Scripture the Passion and
e Resurrection are mentioned in the same
ace. Thus Isaiah puts them together, saying.
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter" (Isa.
i. 7), and all that follows. David also in the
cond Psalm, and in many other places, con-
;cts these two things. The Patriarch too after
ying, " He lay down, He couched as a lion,"
Ideth, " .'Vnd as a lion's whelp, who shall raise
im up?" (Gen. xlix. 9.) He showeth at once
e Passion and the Resurrection. But these men
len they thought to silence Him, and to show
at He was not the Christ, confessed by this very
cumstance that the Christ remaineth forever,
id observe their evil dealing ; they said not.
We have heard that Christ neither suffereth nor
crucified," but that " He remaineth forever."
;t even this which has been mentioned, would
ve been no real objection, for the Passion was
hindrance to His Immortality. Hence we
y see that they understood many of the doubt-
points, and deliberately went wrong. For
ice He had before spoken about death, when
y now heard in this place the, " be lifted up,"
y guessed that death was referred to. Then
y said, "Who is this Son of Man?" This
0 they did deceitfully. " Think not, I pray,"
ath one, " that we say this concerning thee,
."sert not that we oppose thee through enmity,
Ir, lo, we know not concerning whom thou
^L•akest, and still we declare our opinion."
Ihat then doth Christ? To silence them, and
♦ show that the Passion is no impediment to
ii enduring forever, He saith,


Ver. 35. "Yet a little while," He saith, "is

the light with you."

Signifying that His death was a removal ; ' for
the light of the sun is not destroyed, but having
retired for a while appears again.

" Walk while ye have the light."'

Of what season doth He here speak ? Of the
whole present life, or of the time before the
Crucifixion? I for my part think of both, for
on account of His unspeakable lovingkindness,
many even after the Crucifixion believed. And
He speaketh these things to urge them on to the
faith, as He also did before, saying, " Yet a little
while I am with you." (c. vii. 33.)

" He that walketh in darkness knoweth not
whither he goeth."

How many things, for instance, even now do
the Jews, without knowing what they do, but
walking as though they were in darkness ? They
think that they are going the right way, when
they are taking the contrary ; keeping " the Sab-
bath, respecting the Law and the observances
about meats, yet knowing not whither they walk.
Wherefore He said,

Ver. 36. " Walk in the light,^ that ye may be-
come children of the light."

That is, " My children." Yet in the beginning
the Evangelist saith, " Were born, not of bloods,
nor of the will of the flesh, but of God " (c. i. 13);
that is, of the Father; while here Himself is
said to beget them ; that thou mayest understand
that the operation of the Father and the Son is
One. " Jesus having spoken these things," de-
parted from them, and did hide Himself.'

Why doth He now "hide Himself"? They
took not up stones against Him, nor did they
blaspheme Him in any such manner as before ;
why then did He hide Himself? Walking in
men's hearts, He knew that their wrath was
fierce, though they said nothing ; He knew it
boiling and murderous, and waited not till it
issued into action, but hid Himself, to allay their
ill-will. Observe how the Evangelist has alluded
to this feeling ; he has immediately added,

Ver. 37. "Though He had done so many
miracles,^ they beUeved not on Him."


^ i.e. temporary.

2 " Lest darkness come upon you," N. T.

^ Savile reads KaTrjyopovirTeVf cotiject. rr^povvrtif which is the
Ben. reading.

* *' While ye have light, believe in the light," N. T.
^ i.e. Christ.

« " departed and did hide Himself from them," N. T.
' "before them," N. T.


252


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX\


[2.] What "so many"? So many as the
Evangehst hath omitted. And this ' is clear also
from what follows. For when He had retired,
and given in, and had come to them again, He
speaketh with them in a lowly manner, saying,
" He that believeth on Me, believeth not on
Me, but on Him that sent Me." (Ver. 44.) Ob-
serve what He doeth. He beginneth with hum-
ble and modest expressions, and betaketh Him-
self to the Father; then again He raiseth His
language, and when He seeth that they are ex-
asperated, He retireth ; then He cometh to
them again, and again beginneth with words of
humility. And where hath He done this ? Nay,
where hath He not done it ? See, for instance,
what He saith at the beginning, " As I hear, I
judge." (c. V. 30.) Then in a loftier tone, " As
the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth
them, so also the Son quickeneth whom He
will " (c. V. 21) ; again, " I judge you not, there
is another that judgeth." Then again He retir-
eth. Then coming to Galilee, " Labor not," He
saith, " for the meat that perisheth " (c. vi.
27) ; and after having said great things of Him-
self, that He came down from Heaven, that He
giveth eternal life, He again withdraweth Him-
self. And He cometh in the Feast of Taber-
nacles also, and doth the same. And one may
see Him continually thus varying His teaching,
by His presence, by His absence, by lowly, by
high discourses. Which He also did here.
"Though He had done so many miracles," it
saith, " they believed not on Him."

Ver. 38. "That the saying of Esaias^ might
be fulfilled which he spake. Lord, who hath be-
lieved our report, and to whom hath the arm of
the Lord been revealed?" And again,

Ver. 39-41. "They^ could not believe," it
saith, " because that Esaias said,* Ye shall hear
with your ears, and not understand.^ These
things he said," when he saw His glory, and
spake of Him."

Here again observe, that the " because," and
" spake," refer not to the cause of their unbe-
lief, but to the event. For it was not " be-
cause " Isaiah spake, that they believed not ;
but because they were not about to believe, that
he spake. Why then doth not the Evangelist
express it so, instead of making the unbelief
proceed from the prophecy, not the prophecy
from the unbelief? And farther on he putteth
this very thing more positively, saying, " There-
fore they could not believe, because that Esaias
said." He desires hence to establish by many
proofs the unerring truth of Scripture, and that


I i.e. that Christ withdrew from the malice of the Jews.

' " Esaias the prophet," N. T.

» " therefore they," N. T. * " said again," N. T.

* Ver. 40. *' He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their
heart: that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their heart, and be converted, and 1 should neal them.'* N. T.

■ " said Etaias," N. T.


what Isaiah foretold fell not out otherwise,
as he said. For lest any one should say, " Wh
fore did Christ come ? Knew he not that t
would give no heed to him?" he introdi
the Prophets, who knew this also. But
came that they might have no excuse for i
sin ; for what things the Prophet foretold,
foretold as certainly to be ; since if they w
not certainly to be, he could not have forei
them ; and they were certainly to be, beca
these men were incurable.

And if, " they could not," is put, instead
" they would not," do not marvel,' for He s;
also in another place, " He that is able to
ceive it, let him receive it." (Matt. xix. i
So in many places He is wont to term cho
power. Again, "The world cannot hate 3
but Me it hateth." (c. vii. 7.) This one 1
even see observed in common conversation
when a man saith, " I cannot love this or
person," calling the force of his will, poi
And again, " this or that person cannot b
good man." And what saith the Prophet?
the Ethiopian shall change his skin, or the le
ard his spots, this people also shall be abU
do good, having learned evil." (Jer. xiii.
LXX.) He saith not that the doing of vi;
is impossible to them, but that because t
will not, therefore they cannot. And by v
he saith the Evangelist means, that it was
possible for the Prophet to lie ; yet it was
on that account impossible that they she
believe. For it was possible, even had t
believed, that he should remain true ; since
would not have prophesied these things if t
had been about to believe. "Why then," s;
some one, "did he not say so?" Beca
Scripture hath certain idiomatic phrases of
kind, and it is needful to make allowance
its laws.

"The seethings he spake when he saw
glory." Whose ? The Father's. How t
doth John speak of the Son? and Paul of
Spirit? Not as confounding the Persons,
as showing that the Dignity is one, they saj
For that which is the Father's is the Son's ;
and that which is the Son's is the Spirit's.'
many things God spake by Angels, and no
saith, "as the Angel spake," but how? "as
spake." Since what hath been said by
through the ministry of Angels would h>'
God; yet not therefore is what is of. Goo
the Angels also. But in this place John
that the words are the Spirit's.

"And spake of Him." What spake he?'
saw the Lord sitting upon a high throne "
vi. i), and what follows. Therefore he


^ Ben. *' and if ' they could not * is put, it is put instead ofc
would not.' And do not marvel."

' al. " saith one." • al. " the Father's."


Homily I.XVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


253


:alleth "glory," that vision, the smoke, the
learing unutterable Mysteries, the beholding
:he Seraphim, the lightning which leaped from
the throne, against which those powers could
lot look. "And spake of Him." What said
lie? That he heard a voice, saying, "Whom
shall I send? who shall go? And I said. Here
im I, send me. And He said. Ye shall hear
(vith your ears, and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see, and not perceive." (Isa. vi.
8, 10.) For,

Ver. 40. " He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart, lest they at any time
should see with their eyes, and understand with
their heart."

Here again is another question, but it is not
so if we rightly consider it. For as the sun
dazzles the eyes of the weak, not by reason of
its proper nature, so it is with those who give
not heed to the words of God. Thus, in the
case of Pharaoh, He is said to have hardened
his heart, and so it is with those who are at all
contentious against the words of God. This is
I peculiar mode of speech in Scripture, as also
;he, " He gave them over unto a reprobate
nind" (Rom. i. 28), and the, "He divided
hem to the nations,"^ that is, allowed, per-
nitted them to go. For the writer doth not
lere introduce God as Himself working these
hings, but showeth that they took place through
he wickedness of others. For, when we are
. bandoned by God, we are given up to the

I evil, and when so given up, we suffer ten thou-
md dreadful things. To terrify the hearer,
lerefore, the writer saith, " He hardened," and
.gave over." For to show that He doth not
"■'nly not give us over, but doth not even leave
xcept we will it, hear what He saith, " Do
i your iniquities separate between Me and
■ ou?" (Isa. lix. 2, LXX.). And again, "They
I lat go far away from Thee shall perish." (Ps.


' iirtvtint Tot? fQvftri. The words are found in Deut. iv. 19,
!CX., but are there spoken concerning the heavenly bodies.


Ixxiii. 27, LXX.) And Hosea saith, "Thou hast
forgotten the law of thy God, and I will also
forget thee" (Hos. iv. 6, LXX.) ; and He saith
Himself also in the Gospels, " How often would
I have gathered your children — and ye would
not." (Luke xiii. 34.) Esaias also again, "I
came, and there was no man ; I called, and
there was none to hearken." (Isa. 1. 2, LXX.)
These things He saith, showing that we begii\
the desertion, and become the causes of our
perdition ; for God not only desireth not to
leave or to punish us, but even when He punish-
eth, doth it unwillingly ; " I will not," He saith,
" the death of a sinner, so much as that he
should turn and live." (Ezek. xviii. 32, LXX.)
Christ also mourneth over the destruction of
Jerusalem,^ as we also do over our friends.

[3.] Knowing this, let us do all so as not to
remove from God, but let us hold fast to the
care of our souls, and to the love towards each
other; let us not tear our own members, (for
this * is the act of men insane and beside them-
selves,) but the more we see any ill disposed,
the more let us be kind to them. Since we
often see many persons suffering ' in their bodies
from difficult or incurable maladies, and cease
not to apply remedies. What is worse than
gout in foot or hand ? Are we therefore to cut
off the limbs? Not at all, but we use every
means that the sufferer may enjoy some comfort,
since we cannot get rid of the disease. This
also let us do in the case of our brethren, and,
even though they be diseased incurably, let us
continue to tend them, and let us bear one an-
other's burdens. So shall we fulfill the law of
Christ, and obtain the promised good things,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


8 al. " being about to destroy Jerusalem even wcepeth."

* al. •* which." * al, " persons suffering many."


254


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIX.


HOMILY LXIX.

John xii. 42, 43.


" Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed
on Him; but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess Him, lest they should be put out of the syna-
gogue : for they loved the praise of men more than
the praise of God."

[i.] It is necessary for us to avoid alike all
the passions which corrupt the soul, but most
especially those, which from themselves generate
numerous sins. I mean such as the love of
money. It is in truth of itself a dreadful malady,
but it becomes much more grievous, because it
is the root and mother of all mischiefs. Such
also is vainglory. See, for instance, how these
men were broken off from the faith through their
love of honor. " Many," it saith, " of the chief
rulers also believed on Him, but because of the
Jews ' they did not confess Him, lest they should
be put out of the synagogue." As He said also
to them before, " How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that cometh from God only?" (c. v. 44.)
So then they were not nders, but slaves in the
utmost slavery. However, this fear was after-
wards done away, for nowhere during the time
of the Apostles do we find them possessed by
this feeling, since in their time both rulers and
priests believed. The grace of the Spirit hav-
ing come, made them all firmer than adamant.
Since therefore this was what hindered them
from believing at this time, hear what He saith.

Ver. 44. " He that believeth on Me, believeth
not on Me, but on Him that sent Me."

As though He had said, " Why fear ye to
believe on Me? Faith passeth to the Father
through Me, as doth also unbelief." See how
in every way He showeth the unvaryingness of
His Essence.^ He said not, He that believeth
" Me," lest any should assert that He spake con-
cerning His words ; this might have been said
in the case of mere men, for he that believeth
the Apostles, believeth not them, but God. But
that thou mightest learn that He speaketh here
of the belief on His Essence, He said not, " He
that believeth My words," but, " He that believ-
eth on Me." " And wherefore," saith some one,
" hath He nowhere said conversely. He that
believeth on the Father, believeth not on the
Father but on Me?" Because they would have
replied, " Lo, we believe on the Father, but we
believe not on thee." Their disposition was
as yet too infirm. Anyhow, conversing with the


' " Pharisees," N. T.

* i.e. in respect of that of the Father.


disciples. He did speak thus : " Ye believe on
the Father,'' believe also on Me" (c. xiv. i) ;
but seeing that these men were too weak to heai
such words. He leadeth them in another way,
showing * that it is not possible to believe on the
Father, without believing on Him. And thai
thou mayest not deem that the words are spoker
as of man. He addeth,

Ver. 45. " He that seeth Me, seeth Him thai
sent Me."

What then ! Is God a body ? By no means,
The "seeing" of which He here speaketh i<
that of the mind, thence showing the Consub-
stantiality. And what is, " He that believeth or
Me " ? It is as though one should say, " He thai
taketh water from the river, taketh it not fron;
the river but from the fountain" ; or rather this
image is too weak, when compared with the
matter before us.

Ver. 46. " I am come a light into the world."'

For since the Father is called by this name
everywhere both in the Old (Testament) and
in the New, Christ useth the same name also
therefore Paul also calleth Him, " Brightness '
(Heb i. 3), having learnt to do so from this
source. And He showeth here His close rela-
tionship with the Father, and that there is nc
separation'' between them, if so be that He
saith that faith on Him is not on Him, but
passeth on to the Father. And He called Him-
self "light," because He delivereth from error
and dissolveth mental darkness.

Ver. 47. " If any man hear not Me, and be
lieve not, I judge him not, for I came not tn
judge the world, but to save the world."

[2.] For lest they should think, that for war
of power He passed by the despisers, therefor
spake He the, " I came not to judge the world.
Then, in order that they might not in this wa
be made more negligent, when they had learne
that " he that believeth is saved, and he that di:
believeth is punished,"' see how He hath ah
set before them a fearful court of judgment, 1:
going on to say,

Ver. 48. " He that rejecteth Me, and recer
eth not My words, hath One to judge him."

" If the Father judgeth no man, and thou a
not come to judge the world, who judge
him ? " " The word that I have spoken, t'


' " on God," N. T. * al. " He showeth."

' " that whosoever believeth on Me should not abide in dt

ness," N. T. , * eirfiev to ^tetrof.

^ The sense seems to require, " tt not punished," aad so J

and Ben. conjecture.


[OMILY LXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


255


ime shall judge him." ' For since they said,
He is not from God," He saith this,^ that,
they shall not then be able to say these things,
ut the words which I have spoken now, shall
e in place of an accuser, convicting them, and
jtting off all excuse." " And the word which
have spoken." What manner of word ?
Ver. 49. " For I have not spoken of Myself,
ut the Father which sent Me, He gave Me a
smmandment what I should say, and what I
lould speak." And other such like.^
Surely these things were said for their sakes,
lat they might have no pretense of excuse,
ince if this were not the case, what shall He
ave more than Isaiah ? for he too saith the very
ime thing, " The Lord God giveth me the
)ngue of the learned, that I should know when
ought to speak a word." (Isa. 1. 4, LXX.)
/hat more than Jeremiah ? for he too when he
as sent was inspired. (Jer. i. 9.) What then
;zekiel? for he too, after eating the roll, so
sake. (Ezek. iii. i.) Otherwise also, they who
ere about to hear what He said shall be found to
5 causes of His knowledge. For if when He was
nt. He then received commandment what He
ould say, thou wilt then argue that before He
sent He knew not. And what more impious
an these assertions ? if (that is) one take the
)rds of Christ in this sense, and understand
the cause ■* of their lowliness ? Yet Paul
th, that both he and those who were made
iCiples knew "what was that good and ac-
ptable and perfect will of God " (Rom. xii.
and did the Son not know until He had re-
ived commandment ? How can this be rea-
lable? Seest thou not that He bringeth His
ressions to an excess of humility, that He
f both draw those men over, and silence
)se who should come after. This is why He
ereth words befitting a mere man, that even
He may force us to fly the meanness of the
ings, as being conscious that the words belong
; to His Nature, but are suited to the infirmity
the hearers.

/er. 50. " And I know that His command-
nt is life everlasting ; whatsoever I speak
refore, even as the Father said unto Me, so I
ak."
est thou the humility of the words ? For
;hat hath received a commandment is not his
master. Yet He saith, " As the Father
eth up the dead and quickeneth them, even
' ,e Son quickeneth whom He will." (c. v.
Hath He then power to quicken whom
will, and to say what He will hath He not
er? What He intendeth then by the words
is ; ' " The action hath not natural possi-


it


. *• in the last day,*' N. T. ^ Morel. " such like works."
. " thus showing." * al. " pretext."

hi. " what then, saith one, meaneth this saying, that he hath


bility,' that He should speak one set of words,
and I should utter another." " And I know that
His commandment is life everlasting." He said
this to those that called Him a deceiver, and
asserted that He had come to do hurt. But
when He saith, " I judge not," He showeth that
He is not the cause of the perdition of these
men.' By this He all but plainly testifies, when
about to remove from, and to be no more with,
them, that " I converse with you, speaking noth-
ing as of Myself, but all as from the Father."
And for this cause He confined His discourse to
them to humble expressions, that He might say,
" Even until the end did I utter this. My last
word, to them." What word was that? "As
the Father said unto Me, so I speak." " Had I
been opposed to God I should have said the
contrary, that I speak nothing of what is pleasing
to God, so as to attract the honor to Myself, but
now I have so referred all things to Him, as to
call nothing My own.* Why then do ye not
believe Me when I say that ' I have received a
commandment,' and when I so vehemently re-
move your evil suspicion respecting rivalry ? For
as it is impossible for those who have received a
commandment to do or say anything but what
their senders wish, as long as they fiilfill the com-
mandment, and do not forge ' anything ; so
neither is it possible for Me to say or do any-
thing except as My Father willeth. For what I
do He doeth, because He is with Me, and ' the
Father hath not left Me alone.' " (c. viii. 29.)
Seest thou how everywhere He showeth Him-
self connected with Him who begat Him, and
that there is no separation?'" For when He
saith, " I am not come of Myself," He saith it
not, as depriving Himself of power, but as taking
away all alienation or opposition." For if men
are masters of themselves, much more the Only-
begotten Son. And to show that this is true,
hear what Paul saith,'^ " He emptied Himself,
and gave Himself for us." (Phil. ii. 7.) But,
as I said, a terrible thing is vainglory, very
terrible (Eph. v. 2) ; for this made these men
not to believe, and others to believe ill, so that
the things which were said for the sake of those
men, through lovingkindness, they turned to '*
impiety.

[3.] Let us then ever flee this monster : vari-
ous and manifold it is, and everywhere sheds its
peculiar venom, in wealth, in luxury, in beauty
of person. Through this we everywhere go
beyond needful use ; " through this arises ex-
travagance in garments, and a great swarm of
domestics ; through this the needful use is every-

" oijK fX*t 4tv(riv TO irpaytxa,

' *' I am not, &c. He saith, but themselves."

* at. " a thing peculiar (to MyselO."

^ irapaxapaTTtiKTL. ^'^ oiiSiv TO fltaov,

'* i.e. between Himself and the Father.
'2 al. " yet this is true, for Paul showeth by what he saith."
^^ al. " drew to." " \ptiav.


256


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX;


where despised, in our houses, our garments, our
table ; and extravagance prevails. Wilt thou
enjoy glory ? Do alms-deeds, then shall Angels
praise thee, then shall God receive thee. Now
the admiration goes no farther than the gold-
smiths and weavers, and thou * departest without
a crown, often seeing that thou receivest curses.
But if thou put not these things about thy body,
but expend them in feeding the poor, great will
be the applause from all sides, great the praise.
Then shalt thou have them, when thou givest
them to others ; when thou keepest them to
thyself, then thou hast them not. For a house
is a faithless treasury, but a sure treasury are the
hands of the poor. Why adornest thou thy body,
while thy soul is neglected, possessed by unclean-
ness ? Why bestowest thou not so much thought
on thy- soul, as thy body? Thou oughtest to
bestow greater ; but anyhow, beloved,^ we ought
to bestow equal care upon it. For tell me, if
any one asked thee which thou wouldest choose,
that thy body should be fresh and of good habit
and surpassing in beauty, and wear mean raiment,
or having the body deformed and full of diseases,
to wear gold and finery ; wouldest thou not much
prefer to have beauty depending on the nature
of thy person, than on the raiment with which
thou art clothed ? And wilt thou choose this in
the case of thy body, but the contrary in the
case of thy soul ; and, when thou hast that ugly
and unsightly and black, dost thou think to gain
anything from golden ornaments ? What mad-
ness is this ! Shift this adorning within, put
these necklaces about thy soul. The things that
are put about thy body help neither to its health
nor to its beauty, for it will not make black
white, nor what is ugly either beautiful or good
looking. But if thou put them about thy soul.


thou shalt soon make it white instead of blac
instead of ugly and unsightly, thou shalt make
beautiful and well-favored. The words are n
mine, but those of the I^rd Himself, who salt
" Though thy sins be as scarlet, I will make the
white as snow" (Isa. i. 18, LXX.) ; and, "Gi
alms — and all things shall be clean unto yoi
(Luke xi. 41) ; and by such a disposition thi
shalt beautify not thyself only, but thy husbar
For they if they see you putting off these outwa
ornaments, will have no great need of expen!
and not having it, they will abstain from
covetousness, and will be more inclined to gi
alms, and ye too will be able boldly to give the
fitting counsel. At present ye are deprived
all such authority. For with what mouth will
speak of these things? with what eyes will
look your husbands in the face, asking mon
for alms, when ye spend most upon the coveri
of your bodies? Then wilt thou be able bole
to speak with thy husband concerning aln
giving, when thou layest aside thine omamei
of gold. Even if thou accomplish nothing, th^
hast fulfilled all thy part ; but I should rath
say, that it is impossible that the wife should n
gain the husband, when she speaks by the ve
actions.* " For what knowest thou, O woma
whether thou shalt save thy husband?" (i C(
vii. 16.) As then now thou shalt give accou
both for thyself and for him, so if thou put 1
all this vanity thou shalt have a double crow
wearing thy crown and triumphing' with tl
husband through those unalloyed ' ages, ai
enjoying the everlasting good things, which m.
we all obtain, through the grace and lovin
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
glory for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXX.

John xiii. 1.


" Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew
that His hour was come that He should depart out
of this world unto the Father, having loved His own
which were in the world, He loved them unto the
end."

[i.] " Be ye imitators of me," said Paul, " as
I also am of Christ." (i Cor. xi. i.) For on |
this account He took also flesh of our substance,^
that by means of it He might teach us virtue.
For ("God sending His own Son) in the like-


^ addressed to women.

* al. *' we might be content if ye did but."

• lit. " gur lump."


ness of sinful flesh," it saith, " and for sin c
demned sin in the flesh." (Rom. viii. 3.)
Christ Himself saith, " Learn of Me, for I
meek and lowly in heart." (Matt. xi. 29.)
this He taught, not by words alone, but
actions also. For they called Him a Samari
and one that had a devil, and a deceiver,
cast stones at Him ; and at one time the PI
sees sent servants to take ' Him, at another
sent plotters against Him ; and they contii


* at. " with him by actions."

* iTottntvovaa.
^ axripaTovt.


' al.
• al.


' and Himself."
' in order to kill."


lOMILY LXX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


257


Iso insulting Him themselves, and that when
ley had no fault to find, but were even being
ontinually benefited. Still after such conduct
le ceaseth not to do well to them both by
'ords and deeds. And, when a certain domes-
c smote Him on the face. He said, " If I have
joken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if well,
■hy smitest thou Me?" (c. xviii. 23.) But
lis was to those who hated and plotted against
lim. Let us see also what He doeth now
)wards the disciples, or rather what actions He
ow exhibiteth ' towards the traitor. The man
horn most of all there was reason' to hate,
ecause being a disciple, having shared the table
nd the salt, having seen the miracles and been
eemed worthy of such great things, he acted
lore grievously than any, not stoning indeed,
or insulting Him, but betraying and giving Him
p, observe in how friendly sort He receiveth
lis man, washing his feet ; for even in this way
(e desired to restrain him from that wicked-
:ss. Yet it was in His power, had He willed
, to have withered him like the fig-tree, to have
It him in two as He rent the rocks, to have
eft him asunder hke the veil ; but He would
)t lead him away from his design by compul-
Dn, but by choice. Wherefore He washed his
et ; and not even by this was that wretched
d miserable man shamed.
" Before the feast of the Passover," it saith,
esus knowing that His hour was come." Not
en "knowing," but (it means) that He did
lat He did having " known " long ago. " That
e should depart." Magnificently^ the Evan-
list calleth His death, " departure." " Having
red His own, He loved them unto the end."
est thou how when about to leave them He
jweth greater love ? For the, " having loved,
; loved them unto the end," showeth that he
litted nothing of the things which it was likely
It one who earnestly loved would do. Why
in did He not this from the beginning? He
rketh* the greatest things last, so as to render
ire intense their attachment, and to lay up
them beforehand much comfort, against the
rible things that were about to fall on them.
John calls them " His own," in respect of
■sonal attachment, since he calls others also
is own," in respect of the work of creation ;
hen he saith, " His own received Him not."
1. II.) But what meaneth, "which were in
world"? Because the dead also were "His
' Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the men of
sort,' but they were not in the world.
:st thou that He is the God both of the Old
New (Testament) ? But what meaneth,
e loved them unto the end " ? It stands for,


«l. '_' doeth."

•I. ** magniloquently."


' al. "added."
^ 01 fcar' CKciVouc.


" He continued loving them unceasingly," and
this the Evangelist mentions as a sure proof of
great affection. Elsewhere indeed He spake of
another (proof), the laying down life for His
friends ; but that had not yet come to pass.
And wherefore did He this thing " now " ? Be-
cause it was far more wonderful at a time when
He appeared more glorious in the sight of all
men. Besides, He left them no small consola-
tion now that He was about to depart, for since
they were going to be greatly grieved. He by
these means introduceth also comfort to the
grief

Ver. 2. "And supper being ended, the devil
having now put it into the heart of Judas' to
betray Him."

This the Evangelist hath said' amazed, show-
ing that Jesus washed the man who had already
chosen to betray Him. This also proves his
great wickedness, that not even the having shared
the salt restrained him, (a thing which is most
able to restrain wickedness ;) not the fact that
even up to the last day, his Master continued to
bear with him.*

Ver. 3. "Jesus knowing that the Father had
given' all things into His hands, and that He
was come from God, and went to God."

Here the Evangelist saith, even '" wondering,
that one so great, so very great, who came from
God and went to Him, who ruleth over all, did
this thing, and disdained not even so to under-
take such an action. And by the " giving over,"
methinks St. John means the salvation of the
faithful. For when He saith, "All things are
given over" to Me of My Father " (Matt. xi. 27),
He speaketh of this kind of giving over ; as also
in another place He saith, "Thine they were,
and Thou gavest them Me" (c. xvii. 6) ; and
again, " No man can come unto Me except the
Father draw him " (c. vi. 44) ; and, " Except it
be given him from heaven." (c. iii. 27.) The
Evangelist then either means this, or that Christ
would be nothing lessened by this action, since
He came from God, and went to God, and pos-
sessed all things. But when thou hearest of " giv-
ing over," understand it in no human sense, for it
showeth how He honoreth the Father, and His
unanimity with Him. For as the Father giveth
over to Him, so He to the Father. And this Paul
declares, saying, "When He shall have given
over'^ the kingdom to God, even the Father."
(i Cor. XV. 24.) But St. John hath said it here
in a more human sense, showing His great care
for them, and declaring His unutterable love,
that He now cared for them as for His own ;
teaching them the mother of all good, even


•^ " Judas Iscariot, Simon's son," N. T.
' al. " hath put in by the way."

" al. "given over." " E. V. "delivered."

" al. " either he saith this." " " delivered up," E. V.


258


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX


humblemindedness, which He said was both
the beginning and the end of virtue. And not
without a reason is added the,' " He came from
God and went to God " : but that we may learn
that He did what was worthy * of One who came
thence and went thither, trampling down all
pride.

Ver. 4. " And having risen ' from supper, and
laid aside His garments." *

[2.] Observe how not by the washing only,
but in another way also He exhibiteth humility.
For it was not before reclining, but after they
had all sat down, then He arose. In the next
place. He doth not merely wash them, but doth
so, putting off His garments. And He did not
even stop here, but girded Himself with a towel.
Nor was He satisfied with this, but Himself
filled (the basin), and did not bid another fill
it ; He did all these things Himself, showing by
all that we must do such things, when we are
engaged in well doing, not merely for form's
sake,' but with all zeal. Now He seemeth to
me to have washed the feet of the traitor first,
from its saying,

Ver. 5. "He began to wash the disciples'
feet," • and adding,

Ver. 6. "Then cometh He to Simon Peter,
and Peter saith unto Him, Lord, dost Thou wash
my feet?"

"With those hands," he saith, "with which
Thou hast opened eyes, and cleansed lepers,
and raised the dead?" For this (question) is
very emphatic ; wherefore He needed not to
have said any more than the, " Thou " ; for
even of itself this would have sufficed to convey
the whole. Some one might reasonably enquire,
how none of the others forbade Him, but Peter
only, which was a mark of no slight love and
reverence. What then is the cause ? He seem-
eth to me to have washed the traitor first, then
to have come to Peter, and that the others were
afterwards instructed from his case.' That He
washed some one other before him is clear from
its saying, "But when He came' to Peter."
Yet the Evangelist is not a vehement accuser,'
for the " began," is the expression of one imply-
ing this. And even if Peter were the first,'" yet
it is probable that the traitor, being a forward
person, had reclined even before the chief."
For by another circumstance also his forward-
ness is shown, when He dippeth with his Master
in the dish, and being convicted, feels no com-


* al. " what then is added? **

' al. " went to God," that is, did what was worthy.

* avaarai (e-yetfliTttt, G. T.).

* "He riscth," &c., *' and took a towel, and girded Himself.*
5. " After that He poureth water into a basin." N. T.

* a(^o(rtovM<^oi>f.

* '* and to wipe them with the towel wherewith He was girded,'
N. T. _

' an' tKtivov, al. vn' eic. *' by him.**

' " He Cometh therefore, '* owe, N. T. " i.e. in dignity.

* i.e. of Judas. " icopu<fraiov.


punction ; while Peter being rebuked but on
on a former occasion, and for words which 1
spake from loving affection, was so abashe
that being even distressed and trembling, 1
begged another to ask a question. But Jud;
though continually convicted, felt not. (Ver. 24
When therefore He came to Peter, he sai
unto Him, " Lord, dost Thou wash my feet? "

Ver. 7. " He saith unto him, What I do th(
knowest not now, but thou shalt know her
after."

That is, " thou shalt know how great is tl
gain from this, the profit of the lesson, and he
it is able to guide us into all humbleminde
ness." What then doth Peter? He still hindc
Him, and saith,

Ver. 8. " Thou shalt never wash my feet."

"What doest thou, Peter? Rememben
thou not those former words ? Saidst thou n(
' Be merciful to Thyself,' '^ and heardest thou r
in return, ' Get thee behind Me, Satan ' ? (Ma
xvi. 22.) Art thou not even so sobered, but :
thou yet vehement?" "Yea," he saith, "i
what is being done is a great matter, and f
of amazement." Since then he did this fro
exceeding love, Christ in turn subdueth him
the same ; and as there He effected this
sharply rebuking him, and saying, "Thou i
an offense unto Me," so here also by saying,

" If I wash thee not, thou hast no part wi
Me." What then saith that hot and burni
one?

Ver. 9. " Lord, not my feet only, but also r
hands and my head."

Vehement in deprecation, he becometh y
more vehement in acquiescence ; but both fro
love. For why said He not wherefore He d
this, instead of adding a threat ? Because Pet
would not have been persuaded. For had I
said, " Suffer it, for by this I persuade you
be humbleminded," Peter would have promisi
it ten thousand times, in order that his Mast
might not do this thing. But now what sai
He? He speaketh of that which Peter rac
feared and dreaded, the being separated frc
Him ; for it is he who continually asks, " Whith
goest Thou ? " (Ver. 36.) Wherefore also he sa
" I will give '^ even my life for Thee." (Ver. 3'
And if, after hearing, " What I do thou knoW'
not now, but thou shalt know hereafter," he s
persisted, much more would he have done
had he learnt (the meaning of the actio
Therefore said He, " but thou shalt know he
after," as being aware, that should he learr
immediately he would still resist. And Pe
said not, "Tell me, that I may suffer The
but (which was much more vehement) he
not even endure to learn, but withstands Hii i


" " that be far from Thee,'* E. V.
*3 '• lay down,'* N. T.


al. " Him a^ain.'


[OMILY LXX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


259


lying, "Thou shalt never wash my feet." But
s soon as He threatened, he straightway re-
ixed his tone. But what meaneth, "Thou
lalt know after this " ? " After this ? " When ?
When in My Name thou shalt have cast out
evils ; when thou shalt have seen Me taken
p into Heaven, when thou shalt have learnt
om the Spirit' that I sit^ on His right hand,
len shalt thou understand what is being done
ow." What then saith Christ? When Peter
lid, " not my feet only, but also my hands and
ly head," He replieth,

Ver. 10, II. "He that is washed, needeth

ot save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit ;

nd ye are clean,^ but not all. For He knew

ho should betray Him." *

" And if they are clean, why washeth He '

leir feet?" That we may learn to be modest.^

•n which account He came not to any other

art of the body, but to that which is considered

lore dishonorable than the rest. But what is.

He that is washed " ? It is instead of, " he

lat is clean." Were they then clean, who had

ot' yet been delivered from their sins, nor

^emed worthy of the Spirit, since sin still had

e mastery, the handwriting of the curse still

maining, the victim not having yet been of-

red? How then calleth He them "clean"?

lat thou mayest not deem them clean, as de-

ered from their sins. He addeth,' Behold, " ye

clean through the word that I have spoken

to you." That is, " In this way ye are so far'

an ; ye have received the light, ye have been

ed from Jewish error. For the Prophet also

th, ' Wash you, make you clean, put away the

ckedness from your souls' (Isa. i. 16, LXX.) ;

that such a one is washed and is clean." Since


Ben. and MSS. Sav. " the Father."

Sav. " He sitteth."

al. " clean through the word which I have spoken unto you "

Q C. XV. 3).

" Him, therefore said He, Ye are not all clean," N. T.
al. *' washest thou."

tUTpia^tii'. 8 from c. XV. 3.

' al. yet they had not." " t(w«.


then these men had cast away all wickedness from
their souls, and had companied with Him with a
pure mind, therefore He S&ith according to the
word of the Prophet, " he that is washed is clean
already." For in that place also It meaneth not
the " washing " of water, practiced by the Jews ;
but the cleansing of the conscience.'"

[3.] Be we then also clean ; learn we to do
well. But what is " well " ? " Judge for the
fatherless, plead for the widow ; and come, let us
reason together, saith the Lord." (Isa. i. 7.)
There is frequent mention in the Scriptures of
widows and orphans, but we make no account of
this. Yet consider how great is the reward.
" Though," it saith, " your sins be as scarlet, I will
whiten them as snow ; though they be red like
crimson, I will whiten them as wool." For a
widow is an unprotected being, therefore He"
taketh much care for her. For they, when it is
even in their power to contract a second mar-
riage, endure the hardships of widowhood
through fear of God. Let us then all, both men
and women, stretch forth our hands to them, that
we may never undergo the sorrows of widow-
hood ; or if we should have to undergo them,
let us lay up"* a great store of kindness for our-
selves. Not small is the power of the widow's
tears, it is able to open heaven itself. Let us not
then trample on them, nor make their calamity
worse, but assist them by every means. If so
we do, we shall put around ^ ourselves much
safety, both in the present life, and in that
which is to come. For not here alone, but
there also will they be our defenders, cutting
away most of our sins by reason of our benefi-
cence towards them, and causing us to stand
boldly before the judgment-seat of Christ.
Which '■* may it come to pass that we all obtain,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


" al. "of the creation." ^^ or, " It."

" al. " but we shall not undergo them, if we lay up.'*

** al. " putting around." ** oH, al. ijs, " whicn boldness.'


26o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXI.


HOMILY LXXI.


John xiii.


"And He took^ His garments, and having sat down
again, said unto them, Know ye what I have done
to you ? " And what follows.


[i.] A GRIEVOUS thing, beloved, a grievous
thing it is to come to the depths of wickedness ;
for then the soul becomes hard to be restored.
Wherefore we should use every exertion not to
be taken at all ; ^ since it is easier not to fall in,^
than having fallen to recover one's self. Ob-
serve, for instance, when Judas had thrown him-
self into sin, how great assistance he enjoyed,
yet not even so was he raised. Christ said to
him, " One of you is a devil " (c. vi. 71) ; He
said, "Not all beheve " (c. vi. 65) ; He said,
" I speak not of all," and, " I know whom I have
chosen" (c. xiii. 18) ; and not one of these say-
ings doth he feel. Now when He had washed
their feet, and taken His garments, and sat
down, He said, " Know ye what I have done
unto you ? " He no longer addresseth Himself
to Peter only, but to them all. <

Ver. 13. " Ye call Me Lord * and Master/ and
ye say well, for so I am."

" Ye call Me." He taketh to Him their judg-
ment, and then that the words m.ay not be
thought to be words of their kindness. He add-
eth, " for so I am." By introducing a saying of
theirs," He maketh it not offensive, and by con-
firming it Himself when introduced from them,
unsuspected. " For so I am," He saith. Seest
thou how when He converseth with the disciples,
He speaketh revealing more what belongeth unto
Himself? As He saith, " Call no man master
on earth,' for One is your guide " ' (Matt, xxiii.
8, 9), so also, "And call no man father upon
earth." But the " one " and " one " ^ is spoken
not of the Father only, but of Himself also. For
had He spoken excluding Himself, how saith
He, " That ye may become the children of the
light " ? And again, if He called the Father
only, " Master," how saith He, " For so I am " ;
and again, " For one is your Guide, even Christ " ?
(c. xii. 26.)

Ver. 14, 15. "If I then," He saith, "your
Lord '" and Master have washed your feet, ye
ought also to wash one another's feet. For I


' '* So when He had washed their feet, and had taken," &c.,
N. T. * al. " among them."

* Tyjv aftvijy, ' " be not ye catled Rabbi," N. T.

* al. *' fall away.** * Ka6T^r}Ty}i.

* al. " the Christ.** ■ i.e. one Master, one Father.
» "Master and Lord,'* N.T. '» al. " the Christ."


have given you an example, that ye should do as
I have done to you."

And yet it is not the same thing, for He is
Lord and Master, but ye are fellow-servants one
of another. What meaneth then the "as"i
" With the same zeal." For on this account H«
taketh instances from greater actions that we
may, if so be, perform the less. Thus school-
masters write the letters for children very beauti-
fully, that they may come to imitate them thougl
but in an inferior manner. Where now are the)
who spit on their fellow-servants? where now
they who demand honors ? Christ washed the
feet of the traitor, the sacrilegious, the thief, and
that close to the time of the betrayal, and incur-
able as he was, made him a partaker of His table
and art thou highminded, and dost thou draw
up thine eyebrows ? " Let us then wash one
another's feet," saith some one, " then we must
wash those of our domestics." And what great
thing if we do wash even those of our domestics i
In our case" " slave " and " free " is a difference
of words ; but there an actual reality. For b)
nature He was Lord and we servants, yet ever
this '^ He refused not at this time to do. But
now it is matter for contentment if we do not
treat free men as bondmen, as slaves bought
with money. And what shall we say in that day,"
if after receiving proofs of such forbearance, we
ourselves do not imitate them at all, but take the
contrary part, being in diametrical opposition
lifted up, and not discharging the debt? Foi
God hath made us debtors one to another, hav
ing first so done Himself, and hath made U'
debtors of a less amount. For He was our Lord
but we do it, if we do it at all, to our fellow-ser
vants, a thing which He Himself implied by say
ing, " If I then your Lord and Master — so alsi i
do ye." It would indeed naturally have fol
lowed to say, " How much more should ye sei
vants," but He left this to the conscience of th
hearers.

[2.] But why hath He done this "now"
They were for the future to enjoy, some greate
some less honor. In order then that they ma
not exalt themselves one above the other, an
say as they did before, "Who is the greatest
(Matt, xviii. i), nor be angry one against tl
other, He taketh down" the high thoughts
them all, by saying, that " although thou maye


^1 ivTavGa.

IS i.e. this humble office.


>» TOTe.

^* al. " purgeth.'


lOMILY LXXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


261


le very great, thou oughtest to have no high
houghts towards thy brother." And He men-
ioned not the greater action, that " if I have
rashed the feet of the traitor, what great matter
" ye one another's?" but having exempUfied
liis by deeds. He then left it to the judgment of
lie spectators. Therefore He said, " Whoso-
ver shall do and teach, the same shall be called
reat" (Matt. v. 19) ; for this is "to teach" a
ling, actually to do it. What pride should not
lis remove? what kind of folly and insolence
hould it not annihilate ! ' He who sitteth upon
le Cherubim washed the feet of the traitor, and
ost thou, O man, thou that art earth and ashes
id cinders and dust, dost thou exalt thyself,
id art thou highminded? And how great a
ell wouldest thou not deserve? If then thou
esirest a high state of mind, come, I will show
lee the way to it ; for thou dost not even know
hat it is. The man then who gives heed to the
esent things as being great, is of a mean soul,
I that there can neither be humility without
catness of soul, nor conceit except from little-
;ss of soul. For as little children are eager for
ifles, gaping upon balls and hoops and dice,''
lit cannot even form an idea of important mat-
so in this case, one who is truly wise, will
eem present things as nothing, (so that he will
either choose to acquire them himself, nor to
ceive them from others ;) but he who is not
i such a character will be affected in a con-
ary way, intent upon cobwebs and shadows
id dreams of things less substantial than these.
Ver. 16-18. "Verily I say unto you, the ser-
,nt is not greater than his lord, neither he that
sent greater than he that sent him. If ye
low these things, happy are ye if ye do them,
speak not of you all '"^ — but that the Scripture
ay be fulfilled. He that eateth bread with Me
ith lifted up his heel against Me."
What He said before, this He saith here also,
shame them ; " For if the servant is not greater
an his master, nor he that is sent greater than
m that sent him, and these things have been
)ne by Me, much more ought they to be done
' you." Then, lest any one should say, " Why
iw sayest Thou these things ? Do we not already
low them?" He addeth this very thing, "I
eak not to you as not knowing, but that by
ur actions ye may show forth the things spoken
For "to know," belongeth to all; but
o do," not to all. On this account He said,
Jlessed are ye if ye do them " ; and on this
count I continually and ever say the same to
u, although ye know it, that I may set you on
work. Since even Jews "know," but yet


Itcpuvetc.

* avTfiaya\ov^, square bones used as dice.

• " I speak not of you all, 1 know whom I have chosen," N.T.


they are not " blessed " ; for they do not what
they know.''

"I speak not," He saith, "of you all." O
what forbearance ! Not yet doth He convict
the traitor, but veileth the matter, hence giving
him room for repentance. He convicteth and
yet doth not convict him when He saith thus,
" He that eateth bread with Me hath Ufted up
his heel against Me." It seems to me that the,
" The servant is not greater than his lord," was
uttered for this purpose also, that if any persons
should at any time suffer harm either from domes-
tics or from any of the meaner sort, they should
not be offended ; looking to the instance of Judas,
who having enjoyed ten thousand good things,
repaid his Benefactor with the contrary. On this
account He added, " He that eateth bread with
Me," and letting pass all the rest, He hath put
that which was most fitted to restrain and shame
him ; " he who was fed by Me," He saith, " and
who shared My table." And He spake the
words, to instruct them to benefit those who did
evil to them, even though such persons should
continue incurable.

But having said, " I speak not of you all," in
order not to attach fear to more than one," He
at last separateth the traitor, speaking thus ; " He
that eateth bread with Me." For the, " not of
you all," doth not direct the words to any single
one, therefore He added, " He that eateth bread
with Me " ; showing to that wretched one that
He was not seized in ignorance, but even with
full knowledge ; a thing which of itself was most
of all fitted to restrain him. And He said not,
" betrayeth Me," but, " hath lifted up his heel
against Me," desiring to represent the deceit, the
treachery, the secrecy of the plot.

[3.] These things are written that we bear
not malice towards those who injure us ; but
rebuke them and weep for them ; for the fit
subjects of weeping are not they who suffer,
but they who do the wrong. The grasping man,
the false accuser, and whoso worketh any other
evil thing, do themselves the greatest injury, and
us the greatest good, if we do not avenge our-
selves. Such a case as this : some one has
robbed thee ; hast thou given thanks for the
injury, and glorified God? by that thanksgiv-
ing thou hast gained ten thousand rewards,
just as he hath gathered for himself fire un-
speakable. But if any one say, " How then,
if I ' could ' not defend myself against him who
wronged me, being weaker?" I would say this,
that thou couldest have put into action the
being discontented, the being impatient, (for
these things are in our power,) the praying
against him, who grieved you, the uttering ten
thousand curses against him, the speaking ill


c lit. *' to many.**


262


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXL .


of him to every one. He therefore who hath
not done these things shall even be rewarded
for not defending himself, since it is clear that
even if he had had the power, he would not
have done it. The injured man uses any weap-
on that comes to hand, when, being little of
soul, he defends himself against one who has
injured him, by curses, by abuse, by plotting.
Do thou then not only not do these things, but
even pray for him ; for if thou do them not, but
wilt even pray for him, thou art become like
unto God. For, " pray," it saith, " for them,
that despitefuUy use you — that ye may be like
unto' your Father which is in Heaven." (Matt.
V. 44, 45.) Seest thou how we are the greatest
gainers from the insolence of others? Nothing
so delighteth God, as the not returning evil for
evil ? But what say I ? Not returning evil for
evil? Surely we are enjoined to return the
opposite, benefits, prayers. Wherefore Christ
also repaid him who was about to betray Him
with everything opposite. He washed his feet,
convicted him secretly, rebuked him sparingly,
tended ^ him, allowed him to share His table
and His kiss, and not even by these ' was he
made better; nevertheless (Christ) continued
doing His own part.

But come, let us teach thee even from the
example of servants, and (to make the lesson
stronger) those in the Old (Testament), that
thou mayest know that we have no ground of
defense when we remember a wrong. Will you
then that I tell you of Moses, or shall we go
yet farther back? For the more ancient the
instances that can be pointed out, the more are
we surpassed. "Why so?" Because virtue was
then more difficult. Those men had no written
precepts, no patterns of living, but their nature
fought, unarmed, by itself,^ and was forced to
float in all directions unballasted.' Wherefore
also when praising Noah, God called him not
simply perfect, but added, "in his generation"
(Gen. vii. i); signifying, "at that time," when
there were many hindrances, since many others
shone after him, yet will he have nothing less
than they ; for in his own time he was per-
fect. Who then before Moses was patient ? The
blessed and noble Joseph, who having shone by
his chastity, shone no less by his long suffering.
He was sold when he had done no wrong, but was
waiting on others, and serving, and performing all
the duties of domestics. They brought against
him an evil accusation, and he did not defend
himself, though he had his father on his side.
Nay, he even went to carry food to them in the
desert, and when he found them not, he did not
despair or turn back, (yet he had an excuse for


* '* the children of," N. T. * or, in its own
' i9*pa.irtva*. ^ afcpfiarurrof.

' ll. " by this."


* or, in its own way, xaSf iavrriv.
arurroc.


doing so had he chosen,) but remained near the
wild beasts and those savage men, preserving the
feeling of a true brother. Again, when he dwelt
in the prison house, and was asked the cause, he
spake no evil of them, but only, " I have done
nothing," and, " I was stolen out of the land of
the Hebrews"; and after this again, when he
was made lord, he nourished them, and delivered
them from ten thousand dangers. If we be
sober, the wickedness of our neighbor is not
strong enough to cast us out of our own virtue.
But those others were not like him ; they both
stripped him, and endeavored to kill him, and
reproach him with his dream, though they had
even received their meat from him, and planned
to deprive him of life and of liberty. And they
ate, and cared not for their brother lying naked
in the pit. What could be worse than such
brutality? Were they not worse than any num-
ber of murderers ? And after this, having drawn
him up, they gave him over to ten thousand
deaths, selling him to barbarian and savage men,
who were on their journey to barbarians. Yet
he, when he became ruler, not only remitted
them their punishment, but even acquitted them,
as far at least as relating to himself, of their sin,
calling what had been done a dispensation of
God, not any wickedness of theirs ; and the
things which he did against them he did not as
remembering evil, but in all these he dissembled,
for his brother's ^ sake. After this, when he saw
them clinging to him, he straightway threw away
the mask, and wept aloud, and embraced them,
as though he had received the greatest benefits,
he, who formerly was made away with by them,
and he brought them all down into Egypt, and
repaid them with ten thousand benefits. What-
excuse then shall we have, if after the Law,
and after grace, and after the addition of soi
much heavenly wisdom, we do not even strivei
to rival him who lived before grace and beforei
the Law? Who shall deliver us from punish-i
ment? For there is nothing, there is nothing
more grievous than the remembrance of in-i
juries. And this the man hath showed that owed
ten thousand talents ; from whom payment was
at one time not demanded, at another time again
demanded ; not demanded, because of the lovi
ingkindness of God ; but demanded, because ot
his own wickedness, and because of his malice
toward his fellow- servant. Knowing all which
things, let us forgive our neighbors their tresn
passes, and repay them by deeds of an opposiM
kind, that we too may obtain mercy from Godi
through the grace and lovingkindness of oui
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and domiin
ion for ever and ever. Amen.


i.e. Benjamin's.


Homily LXXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


263


HOMILY LXXII.


John xiii. 20.'


" Verily, verily, I say unto you. He that receiveth whomso-
ever I send, receiveth Me: and He that receiveth
Me, receiveth Him that sent Me."


[i.] Great is the recompense" of care be-
stowed upon the servants of God, and of itself =
It yieldeth to us its fruits. For, " he that receiveth
you, It saith, "receiveth Me, and he that re-
ceiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me " (Matt
X. 40.) Now what can be equal to the receiving
Chnst and His Father? But what kind of con
action hath this with what was said before?
What hath it m common with that which He had

add, "He that receiveth you"? A close con-
wu"°"',. ^"'^ """y harmonious.* Observe how
When they were about to go forth and to suffer
many dreadful things. He comforteth them in
two ways ; one derived from Himself, the other
derived from others. " For if," He saith, « ye
are truly wise, ever keeping Me in mind, and
bearing about all both what I said, and what I
aid, ye will easily endure terrible things. And
not in this way only, but also from your enioying
great attention from all men." The first point
He declared when He said, " If ye do these
things happy are ye " ; the second when He said
He that receiveth you receiveth Me " For
He opened the houses of all men to them, so
that both from the sound wisdom of their man-
ners, and the zeal of those who would tend
them, they might have twofold comfort. Then
when He had given these directions to them as
to men about to run through all the world
reflecting that the traitor was deprived of both
ot these things, and would enjoy neither of them
neither patience in toils, nor the service of kind
entertainers. He again was troubled. And the
tvangehst to signify this besides, and to show
adds" ""^^ °" ""'^^ account that He was troubled,

Ver. 21. "When Jesus had thus said. He was
troubled in spirit, and testified, and said. Verily
verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray

Again He bringeth fear on all by not mention-
■ng (the traitor) by name.
_yen^2^But they are in doubt " ; ° although

«'• return. q - -*

ie'siake." 'n. ^^''p'" '«'''«i ■>"<= o" another, doubting of whom


conscious to themselves of nothing evil ; but they
deeme, the declaration of Christ more to be
believed than their own thoughts. Wherefore
they looked one on another." By laying the
whole upon one, Jesus would' have cut short
heir fear, but by adding, "one of you," He
troubled all. What then? The rest looked
upon one another; but the ever fervent Peter
"beckoneth- to John. Since he had been
before rebuked, and when Christ desired to
wash him would have hindered Him, and since
he IS everywhere found moved indeed by love
yet blamed ; being on this account afraid he
neither kept quiet, nor did he speak, but wished
to gam information by means of John. But it is
a question worth asking, why when all were dis-
tressed, and trembling, when their leader was
afraid, John like one at ease" leans on Jesus'
bosom, and not only leans, but even (lies) on
His breast? Nor is this the only thing worthy
of enquiry but that also which follows. What is
that? What he saith of himself, "Whom Tesus
loved." Why did no one else ^ay this of him!
self? yet the others were loved too. But he more
than any. And if no other hath said this about
him, but he about himself, it is nothing wonder-
fu Paul too does the same,'" when occasion
calls saying thus, "I knew a man fourteen years
ago ; yet m fact he" has gone through other no
trifling praises of himself. Seems it to thee a
sma thing that when he had heard, "Follow
hLr , ^V'^i'ghtway left his nets, and his
father and followed ; and that Christ took
him alone with Peter into the mountain, (Matt
XVII. I,) and another time again when He
went mto a house?" (Luke viii. rx.) What
high praise also has he himself passed on Peter
wahout concealment, telling us that Christ said,
Peter, lovest thou Me more than these?" (c
XXI. IS) and everywhere he showeth him warm'
and nobly disposed towards himself-" for
instance, when he said, "Lord, and what shall
this man do ? "he spake from great love. But
why did'» no other say (this '0 concerning him
Because he would not himself have said it, unless


J al. "The laying, &c., would."

His ditlipdl^homfZusZT sr:'"S°" J«"^' bosom one of
to him, that i,e should ask who it tS/^lV^'i."'""'^"'^'""'^


•' St. John.

,'! "?',''! St. John, but see Matt.

" of Jairus.

" "Simon, son of Jonas,"

" I.e. that Jesus loved him.


'» i.e. speaks of himself,
iv. 21.
" or, " Christ," airov.
" al. " on this account then.'


264


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXII,


he had come to this passage.^ For if after tell-
ing us that Peter beckoned to John to ask, he had
added nothing more, he would have caused
considerable doubt, and have compelled us to
enquire into the reason. In order therefore
himself to solve this difficulty, he saith, " He lay
on the bosom of Jesus." Thinkest thou that thou
hast learnt a little thing when thou hast heard
that " he lay," and that their Master allowed such
boldness to them?^ If thou desirest to know
the cause of this, the action was of love ; ^ where-
fore he saith, " Whom Jesus loved." * I suppose
also that John doth this for another reason, as
wishing to show that he was exempt from the
charge ; and so he speaks openly and is confi-
dent. Again, why did he use these words, not
at any other point of time,° but only when the
chief of the Apostles beckoned? That thou
mightest not deem that Peter beckoned to him
as being greater, he saith that the thing took
place because of the great love (which Jesus
bare him) . But why doth he even lie on His
bosom ? They had not as yet formed any high
surmises concerning Him ; besides, in this way
He' calmed their despondency; for it is prob-
able that at this time their faces were overclouded.
If they were troubled in their souls, much more
would they be so in their countenances. Sooth-
ing them therefore by word and by the question.
He makes a way beforehand, and allows him to
lean on His breast. Observe too his modesty;
he mentions not his own name, but, " whom He
loved." As also Paul, when he said, " I knew a
man about fourteen years ago." Now for the
first time Jesus convicted the traitor, but not
even now by name ; but how ?

Ver. 26. " He it is, to whom I shall give a
sop when I have dipped it." '

Even the manner (of the rebuke) was calcu-
lated to put him to shame. He respected not
the table, though he shared the bread ; be it so ;
but the receiving the sop from His own hand,
whom would not that have won over ? yet him
it won not.

Ver. 27. "Then* Satan entered into him."

Laughing at him for his shamelessness. As
long as he belonged to the band of disciples he
dared not spring upon him, but attacked ° him
from without ; but when Christ made him mani-
fest and separated him, then he sprang upon
him without fear. It was not fitting to keep
within one of such a character, and who so
long had remained incorrigible. Wherefore He
henceforth cast him out, and then that other


1 t.e. in his Gosp«l history.
* Sav. conject. him."


* iifiiXt.
Sav. conject. " him." ^ x<^P^V*

i* a^airnf . " or, " Christ.'*

' " And when He had dipped the sop. He gave it to Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon." N. T.

• " after the sop," N. T.

• al, " put forward."


seized him when cut off, and he leaving them
went forth by night.'"

"Jesus saith unto him, Friend," that thou
doest, do quickly."

Ver. 28. " Now no man at the table knew
with what intent He spake this unto him." "

[3.] Wonderful insensibility ! How could ii
be that he was neither softened nor shamed ; bul
rendered yet more shameless, " went out." The
" do quickly," is not the expression of one com-
manding, nor advising, but of one reproaching,
and showing him that He desired to correcl
him, but that since he was incorrigible. He lei
him go. And this, the EvangeUst saith, "nc
man of those that sat at the table knew." Some
one may perhaps find here a considerable diffi-
culty, if, when the disciples had asked, " Who is
it?" and He had answered, "He to whom 1
shall give a sop when I have dipped it," the)
did not even so understand ; unless indeed Ht
spake it secretly, so that no man should hear
For John on this very account, leaning by Hi;
breast, asked Him almost close to His ear, sc
that the traitor might not be made manifest
and Christ answered in like manner, so that no
even then did He discover him. And thoug!
He spake emphatically,'^ " Friend, that thoi
doest, do quickly," even so they understood not
But he spake thus to show that the things wer
true which had been said by Him to the Jew
concerning His death. For He had said 1 1
them, " I have power to lay down My life, an '
I have power to take it again " : and, " No ma i
taketh it from Me." (ex. 18.) As long the
as He would retain it, no man was able (to tak|
it) ; but when He resigned it, then the actio
became easy. All this He implied when H
said, "That thou doest, do quickly." Yet n<
even then did He expose him," for perhaps tl
others might have torn him in pieces, or Pet
might have killed him. On this account " 1
man at the table knew." Not even John ? N
even he : for he could not have expected that
disciple would arrive '^ at such a pitch of wickc
ness. For since they were far from such iniqu
themselves, they could not suspect such thin
concerning others. As before He had told the
"I speak not of you all" (ver. 18), yet did r
reveal the person ; so here, they thought that
was said concerning some other matter.

" It was night," saith the Evangelist, when
went out. "Why tellest thou me the time '
That thou mayest learn his forwardness, that i
even the time restrained him from his purpc
Yet not even did this make him quite manif( .


^^ a!. " went forth out." " ** unto him, That," &c., ^ ■

'* Ver. 29, 30. " For some of them thought, because Judas d
the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things tha e
have need of against the feast, or that he should give somethii o
the poor. He then having received the sop, went immediately o "

^'^ at. " more plainly." " Judas

" al. " have gone out."


Homily LXXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


265


for the others were at this time in confusion,
occupied by fear and great distress, and they
knew not the true reason of what had been said,
hut supposed ' that He spake thus, in order that
Judas might give somewhat to the poor. For
He cared greatly for the poor, teaching us also
to bestow much diligence on this thing. But
they thought this, not without a cause, but
" because he had the bag." Yet no one appears
to have brought money to Him ; that the female
disciples nourished Him of their substance, it
has said, but this" it hath nowhere intimated.
(Luke viii. 3.) But how did He who bade His
disci])les bear neither scrip, nor money, nor staff,
Himself bear a bag to minister to the poor?
That thou mayest learn, that it behooveth even
him who is exceedingly needy and crucified, to
be very careful on this point. For many things
He did in the way of dispensation^ for our
instruction. The disciples then thought that
He said this, that Judas should give something
to the poor ; and not even this shamed him. His
not being willing even to the last day to make
him a public example. We too ought to do the
like, and not parade the sins of our companions,
though they be incurable. For even after this
He gave a kiss to the man who came to betray
Him, and endured,'' such an action as that was,
and then proceeded to a thing of far greater
I daring,^ the Cross itself," to the death of shame,
and there again He manifested His lovingkind-
ness. And here He calleth it "glory," showing
us that there is nothing so shameful and re-
proachful which makes not brighter him who
• goeth to it, if it be done according to the will of
God. At least after the going forth of Judas to
the betraying, He saith,
Ver. 31. " Now is the Son of Man glorified.""
In this way rousing the dejected thoughts of
I the disciples, and persuading them not only not
I to despond, but even to rejoice. On this account
I He rebuked Peter at the first, because for one
I who has been in death to overcome death, is
i great glory. And this is what He said of Him-
[Self, "When I am lifted up,* then ye shall know
,that I Am" (c. viii. 28) ; and again, "Destroy
, |this Temple " (c. ii. 19) ; and again, " No sign
. |shall be given unto you" but the sign of Jonas."
, l(Matt. xii. 39.) For how can it be otherwise
ithan great glory, the being able even after death
|to do greater things than before death? for in
. brder that the Resurrection might be believed,
,. |the disciples did work greater things. But unless
He had lived, and had been God, how could
these men have wrought such things in His Name ?


al. " thought it salth."
the carrying of money.


* KoTeSf'feTO.

'> al. " far more grievous."
oifcoi'o^u);'. 0 al. " His Cross."

' " And God is glorified in Him." N. T.
" " When ye have lifted up the Son of Man." N. T.
• " this generation," N. T,


Ver. 32. "And God shall glorify Him."'"
What is, " And God shall glorify Him in Him-
self"? It is "by means of" Himself, not by
means of another."

" And shall straightway glorify Him."
[4.] That is, " simultaneously with the Cross."
" For it will not be after much time," He saith,
" nor will He wait for the distant season of the
Resurrection, nor will He then show Him glori-
ous, but straightway on the Cross itself His
glories shall appear." And so the sun was dark-
ened,'" the rocks rent, the veil of the temple was
parted asunder, many bodies of saints that slept
arose, the tomb had its seals, the guards sat by,
and while a stone lay over the Body, the Body
rose ; forty days passed by, and the Gift of the
Spirit came, and they all straightway preached
Him. This is, " shall glorify Him in Himself,
and shall straightway glorify Him " ; not by
Angels or Archangels, not by any other power,
but by Himself. But how did He also glorify
Him by Himself? By doing all for the glory of
the Son. Yet the Son did all. Seest thou that
He referreth to the Father the things done by
Himself?

Ver. 33. " Little children, yet a little while I
am with you — and " as I said unto the Jews,
Whither I go ye cannot come, so now I say to
you."

He now begins words of sorrow after the
supper. For when Judas went forth it was no
longer evening, but night. But since they '* were
about to come shortly, it was necessary to set
all things before the disciples, that they might
have them in remembrance ; or rather, the Spirit
recalled all to their minds. For it is likely that
they would forget many things, as hearing for
the first time, and being about to undergo such
temptations. Men who were weighed down to
sleep, (as another Evangehst saith, — Luke xxii.
45,) who were possessed by despondency, as
Christ saith Himself, " Because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow hath filled your hearts "
(c. xvi. 6), how could they retain all these things
exactly ? Why then were they spoken ? It
became no little gain to them with respect to
their opinion of" Christ, that in after times when
reminded,'" they certainly knew that they had
long ago heard these things from Christ. But
wherefore doth He first cast down their souls,
saying, " Yet a little while I am with you " ?
" To the Jews indeed it was said with reason,
but wherefore dost Thou place us in just the
same class with those obstinate ones ? " He by
no means did so. " Why then said He, ' As I
said to the Jews ' ? " He reminded them that


'» " If God be glorified in Him, God shall also glorify," &c., N. T.

^* Sia. ^' al. " turned away."

" " Ye shall seek Me, and," &c., N. T. and Ben.

^* i.e. they who were to take Him.

" or, " the glory of." " i.e. by the Spirit.


266


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMTLY LXXII.


He did not now, because troubles were upon
them, warn them of these things, but that He
had foreknown them from the first, and that
they were witnesses who had heard that He had
said these things to the Jews. Wherefore He
added also the word, " little children," that when
they heard, " As I said to the Jews," they might
not deem that the expression was used in like
sense towards themselves. It was not then to
depress but to comfort them that He thus spake,
that their dangers might not, by coming upon
them suddenly, trouble them to excess.

" Whither I go, ye cannot come." He show-
eth that His death is a removal, and a change
for the better' to a place which admits not
corruptible bodies. This He saith, both to
excite their love towards Him, and to make it
more fervent. Ye know that when we see any
of our dearest friends departing from us, our
affection is warmest, and the more so, when
we see them going to a place to which it is not
even possible for us to go. These things then
He said, terrifying the Jews, but kindling long-
ing in the disciples. " Such is the place, that
not only not they, but not even you, My best
beloved, can come there." Here He showeth
also His Own dignity.

" So now I say to you." Why "now " ? " In
one way to them, to you in another way " ; that
is, " not with them." But when did the Jews
seek Him, when the disciples? The disciples,
when they fled ; the Jews, when they suffered
miseries unendurable and surpassing all descrip-
tion at the capture of their city, when the wrath
of God was borne down upon them from every
side. To the Jews therefore He ^ spake then,
because of their unbelief, " but to you now, that
troubles might not come upon you unexpected."

Ver. 34. " A new commandment I give unto
you." '

For since it was likely that they would be
troubled when they heard these things, as though
they were about to be deserted, He comforteth
them, investing them with that which was the root
of all blessings and a safeguard, love. As though
He had said, " Grieve ye at My departure ? Nay,
if ye love one another, ye shall be the stronger."
Why then said He not this ? Because He said
what profited them more than this.

Ver. 35. " By this shall all men know that ye
are My disciples."*

[5.] By this He at the same time showed
that the company" should never be extinguished,
when He gave them a distinguishing token.
This He said when the traitor was cut off from
them. But how calleth He that a new com-


* litraBtaif atitivtav. * al. *' I."

s *'That ye love one Another; as I have loved you, that ye also
love one another." N. T.

* " if ye have love one to another," N. T.
^ i.e. of Christian people, xoftof-


mandment which is contained also in the Old
(covenant) ? He made it new Himself by the
manner ; therefore He added, " As I have loved
you." " I have not paid back to you a debt
of good deeds first done by you, but Myself
have begun," He saith. " And so ought you to
benefit your dearest ones, though you owe them
nothing " ; and omitting to speak of the mira-
cles which they should do, He maketh their
characteristic, love. And why? Because it is
this which chiefly shows men holy ; it is the
foundatioii of all virtue ; by this mostly we are
all even saved. For " this," He saith, " is
to be a disciple ; so shall all men praise you,
when they see you imitating My Love." What
then ? Do not miracles much more show this ? By
no means. For " many will say. Lord, have we
not in Thy Name cast out devils? " (Matt. vii.
22.) And again, when they rejoice that the
devils obey them. He saith, " Rejoice not that
the devils obey" you, but that your names are
written in heaven." (Luke x. 20.) And' this in-
deed brought over the world, because that* was
before it ; had not that been, neither would this
have endured. This then straightway made
them perfect,' the having '" all one heart and one
soul. But had they separated one from the
other, all things would have been lost.

Now He spake this not to them only, but to
all who should believe on Him ; since even now,
there is nothing else that causes the heathen '
to stumble, except that there is no love. " But,'
saith some one, " they also urge against us thtj
absence of miracles." But not in the samel
way. " But where did the Apostles manifes^
their love?" Seest thou Peter and John in
separable from one another, and going up to th<j
Temple? (Acts iii. i.) Seest thou Paul dis
posed in a like way towards them, and doa
thou doubt? If they had gained the othe
blessings, much more had they the mother cf
them all. For this is a thing that springs from
a virtuous soul ; but where wickedness is, thetl
the plant withers away. For " when," " it saitll
" iniquity shall abound, the love of many sha
wax cold." ( Matt. xxiv. 12.) And miracles ci
not so much attract the heathen as the mode ■
life ; and nothing so much causes a right life
love. For those who wrought miracles th«|
often even called deceivers ; but they could haJ
no hold upon a pure life. While then the me|
sage of the Gospel was not yet spread abroa
miracles were with good reason marveled
but now men must get to be admired by thJ
lives. For nothing so raises respect in the hel
then as virtue, nothing so offends them as viJ


* " are subject to," N. T.
' the working of miracles.
" love.

* KaXoiii Kaya6ov^, beautiful and good.


50 al. " and to have.'|
" lit. " Greeks."
" " because," N. T.I


Homily LXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


267


And with good reason. When one of them sees
the greedy man, the plunderer, exhorting others
to do the contrary, when he sees the man who
was commanded to love even his enemies, treat-
ing his very kindred like brutes, he will say that
the words are folly. When he sees one trem-
bling at death, how will he receive the accounts
of immortality? When he sees us fond of rule,
and slaves to the other passions, he will more
firmly remain in his own doctrines, forming no
high opinion of us. We, we are the cause of
their remaining in their error. Their own doc-
trines they have long condemned, and in like
manner they admire ours, but they are hindered
by our mode of life. To follow wisdom in talk
is easy, many among themselves have done this ;
but they require the proof by works. " Then
let them look to the ancients of our profession."
But about them they by no means believe ;
they enquire concerning those now living. For,
" show me," it saith, "thy faith by thy works'"
(Jas. ii. 18) ; but this is not the case; on the
contrary, seeing us tear our neighbors worse
than any wild beast, they call us the curse of the


world. These things restrain the heathen, and
suffer them not to come over to our side. So
that we shall be punished for these also ; not
only for what we do amiss ourselves, but because
the name of God is blasphemed. How long
shall we be given up to wealth, and luxury, and
the other passions ? For the future let us leave
them. Hear what the Prophet saith of certain
foolish ones, " Let us eat and drink, for to-mor-
row we die." (Isa. xxii. 31.) But in the present
case we cannot even say this,' so " many "
gather round themselves what belongs to all.
So chiding them also, the Prophet said, " Will ye
dwell alone upon the earth ? " (Isa. v. 8.) Where-
fore I fear lest some grievous thing come to pass,
and we draw down upon us heavy vengeance from
God. And that this may not come to pass, let
us be careful of ° all virtue, that we may obtain
the future blessings, through the grace and lov-
ingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
and with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory now and forever, and world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXIII.

John xiii. 36.


"Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, whither goest thou?
Jesus answered him, Whither I go thou canst not
follow Me now, but thou shalt follow Me after-
wards."

[i.] A GREAT thing ^ is love, and stronger than
fire itself, and it goeth up to the very heaven ;
there is '' no hindrance which can restrain its
tearing* force. And so the most fervent Peter,
when he hears, "Whither I go ye cannot come,"

, what saith he ? " Lord, whither goest thou ? " and
this he said, not so much from wish to learn, as
from desire to follow. To say openly, " I go,"
he dared not yet, but, "Whither goest thou?"
( hrist answered, not to his words, but to his
tlioughts. For that this was his wish, is clear
from what Christ said, " Whither I go thou canst
n-it follow Me now." Seest thou that he longed
t ir the following Him, and therefore asked the
question? And when he heard, "thou shalt
Ifollow Me afterwards," not even so did he re-

; (Strain his longing, and, though he had gained
igood hopes, he is so eager as to say,

,1 Ver. 37. -'Why cannot I follow Thee now?

■ II will lay down my life for Thee."


' so read in some copies. ' al. " whence neither shall there be."
' al. " a great good. * (iayJoCoi/.


When he had shaken off the dread of being
the traitor, and was shown to be one of His
own,' he afterwards asked boidly himself, while
the others held their peace. " What sayest
thou, Peter? He said, 'thou canst not,' and
thou sayest, ' I can ' ? Therefore thou shalt know
from this temptation that thy love is nothing
without the presence of the impulse* from
above." Whence it is clear that in care for
him He allowed even that fall. He desired in-
deed to teach him even by the first words, but
when he continued in his vehemence. He did
not indeed throw or force him into the denial,
but left him alone, that he might learn his own
weakness. Christ had said that He must be
betrayed ; Peter replied, " Be it far from Thee,
Lord ; this shall not happen unto Thee." (Matt,
xvi. 22.) He was rebuked, but not instructed.
On the contrary, when Christ desired to wash his
feet, he said, "Thou shalt never wash my feet.'"
(Ver. 8.) Again, when he hears, " Thou canst not
follow Me now," he saith, "Though all deny
Thee, I will not deny Thee." Since then it was
likely that he would be lifted up to folly by his

^ i.e. " certain " foolish ones. ' twc ymjiriuv,

* at. *' lay hold on." ■ ponrji,

• al. " Thou shalt never do this thing."


268


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIII.


practice of contradiction, Jesus next teacheth
him not to oppose Him. This too Luke implies,
when he telleth us that Christ said, "And I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not "
(Luke xxii. 32); that is, " that thou be not finally
lost." In every way teaching him humility, and
proving that human nature by itself is nothing.
But, since great love made him apt for contra-
diction, He now sobereth him, that he might
not in after times be subject to this, when he
should have received the stewardship of the
world, but remembering what he had suffered,
might know himself And look at the violence
of his fall ; it did not happen to him once or
twice, but he was so beside himself, that in a
short time thrice did he utter the words of
denial, that he might learn that he did not so
love as he was loved. And yet, to one who had
so fallen He saith again, " Lovest thou Me more
than these?" So that the denial was caused
not by the cooling of his love, but from his
having been stripped of aid from above. He
accepteth then Peter's love, but cutteth off the
spirit of contradiction engendered by it. " For
if thou lovest, thou oughtest to obey Him who
is beloved. I said ' to thee and to those with
thee, ' Thou canst not ' ; why art thou conten-
tious ? Knowest thou what a thing it is to con-
tradict God ? But since thou wilt not learn in
this way that it is impossible that what I say
should not come to pass, thou shalt learn * it in
the denial." And yet this appeared to thee to
be much more incredible. For this thou didst
not even understand, but of that thou hadst the
knowledge ' in thy heart. Yet still that came to
pass which was not even * expected.

" I will lay down my life for Thee." For
since he had heard, " Greater love than this hath
no man,"' he straightway sprang forward, insati-
ably eager and desirous to reach even to the
highest pitch of virtue. But Christ, to show that
it belonged to Himself alone to promise these
things with authority, saith,

Ver. 39. " Before the cock crow." °

That is, " now " ; there was but a little inter-
val. He spake when it was late at night, and
the first and second watch was past.

Chap. xiv. ver. i . " Let not your heart be
troubled."

This He saith, because it was probable that
when they heard they would be troubled. For
if the leader of their band, one so entirely fer-
vent, was told that before the cock crew he
should thrice deny his Master, it was likely that
they would expect to have to undergo some


* in the Greek, *' He said." * al. " the consciousness."

2 al. " shalt know." * al. " was not."

r- the words occur later, c. xv. 13.

'' "Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for Me?
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow till thou hast
denied Me thrice." N. T.


great reverse, sufficient to bend even souls of
adamant. Since then it was probable that they
considering these things would be astounded, see
how He comforteth them, saying, " Let not your
heart be troubled." By this first word showing
the power of His Godhead, because, what they
had in their hearts He knew and brought to
light.

"Ye believe in God, beUeve also in Me."

That is, "All dangers shall pass you by, for
faith in Me and in My Father is more powerful
than the things which come upon you, and wil'
permit no evil thing to prevail against you.'
Then He addeth,

Ver. 2. "In My Father's house are man;
mansions."

As He comforteth Peter when bewildered ' b;
saying, " but thou shalt follow afterwards," si
also He gives this glimpse of hope to the others
For lest they should think that the promise wa
given to him alone, He saith, " In My Father'
house are many mansions."

" If it were not so I would have said to yov,
I go * to prepare a place for you."

That is, " The same place which receivet'
Peter shall receive you." For a great abun
dance of dwellings is there, and it may not b
said that they need preparation. When H
said, " Ye cannot follow Me now," that the
might not deem that they were finally cut of
He added,

Ver. 3.^ " That where I am, there ye may
also." " So earnest have I been concerning thi
matter,'" that I should already have been give
up to it," had not preparation been made Ion
ago for you." Showing them that they ought i
be very bold and confident. Then that He ma
not seem to speak as though enticing them, b'
that they may believe the thing to be so, H
addeth,

[2.] Ver. 4. "And whither I go ye kno-
and the way ye know."

Seest thou that He giveth them proof th
these things were not said without a meanin;
And He used these words, because He knew.
Himself that their souls now desired to lea
this. For Peter said what he said, not in ord
to learn, but that he might follow. But whi
Peter had been rebuked, and Christ had c
clared '^ that to be possible which for the tii
seemed impossible,'^ and when the apparent i
possibility led him to desire to know the mat
exactly, therefore He saith to the others, "A
the way ye know." For as when He hath sa
" Thou shalt deny Me," before any one spaki
word, searching into their hearts, He said, "■


' aAuofra, 8 a], «' shall go."

<* Ver. 3. " And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will c
again, and receive you unto Myself, that where," &c. N. T.

1" i.e. the preparing a place for disciples.

" fjSri av TotJTOu iyfv6iJ.T)v. ^2 g]^ " had showed."

^3 i.e. that the disciples should follow.


HOMILV LXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


269


not troubled," so here also by saying, "Ye
know," He disclosed the desire which was in
their heart, and Himself giveth them an excuse
for questioning. Now the, " Whither goest
Thou?" Peter used from a very loving affec-
tion, Thomas from cowardice.

Ver. 5. " Lord,' we know not whither Thou
goest." ^

" The place," he saith, " we know not, and
how shall we know the way leading thither ? "
And observe with what submissiveness he speaks ;
he saith not, " tell us the place," but, " we
know not whither Thou goest " ; for all had long
yearned to hear this. If the Jews questioned
among themselves when they heard (of His
departure), although desirous to be rid of Him,
much more would those desire to learn, who
wished never to be separated from Him. They
feared therefore to ask Him, but yet they asked
Him, from their great love and anxiety. What
then saith Christ ?

Ver. 6. " I am the Way, and the Truth, and
the Life ; no man cometh unto the Father, but
by Me."

" Why then, when He was asked by Peter,
' Whither goest Thou,' did He not say directly,
' I go to the Father, but ye cannot come now ' ?
Why did He put in a circuit of so many words,
placing together questions and answers? With
■ good reason He told not this to the Jews ; but why
not to these ? " He had indeed said both to these
and to the Jews, that He came forth from God, and
was going to God, now He saith the same thing
more clearly than before. Besides, to the Jews He
spake not so clearly ; for had He said, " Ye can-
not come to the Father but by Me," they would
straightway have deemed the matter mere boast-
ing ; but now by concealing this. He threw them "
,into perplexity. "But why," saith some one,
" did He speak thus both to the disciples and to
Peter?" He knew his great forwardness, and
that he would by reason of this * the more press
on and trouble Him ; in order therefore to lead
him away. He hideth the matter. Having then
succeeded in what He wished by the obscurity
and by veiling His speech. He again discloseth
:the matter. After saying, " Where I am, no man
can come," He addeth, " In My Father's house
are many mansions " ; and again, " No man
.cometh to the Father but by Me." This He
would not tell them at first, in order not to throw
ithem into greater despondency, but, now that
|He hath soothed them. He telleth them. For
|by Peter's rebuke He cast out^ much of their
, (despondency ; and dreading lest they should be
. [addressed in the same way, they were the more


' " Thomas saith unto Him, Lord," &c.

- '* and how shall we know the way ? " N. T.

' or, *' these " (the disciples).

* i.e. if He had so spoken. ^ al. " cast off"


restrained. " I am the Way." This is the proof
of the, " No man cometh to the Father but by
Me " ; ° and, " the Truth, and the Life," of this,
"that these things shall surely be." "There is
then no falsehood with Me, if I am ' the Truth ' ;
if I am ' Life ' also, not even death shall be able
to hinder you from coming to Me. Besides ; if
I am ' the Way,' ye will need none to lead you
by the hand ; if I am also ' the Truth,' My
words are no falsehoods ; if I am also ' Life,'
though ye die ye shall obtain what I have told
you." Now His being " the Way," they both
understood and allowed, but the rest they knew
not. They did not indeed venture to say what they
knew not. Still they gained great consolation
from His being " the Way." " If," saith He,
" I have sole authority to bring ^ to the Father, ye
shall surely come thither ; for neither is it possi-
ble to come by any other way." But by saying
before, " No man can come to Me except the
Father draw him " ; and again, " If I be lifted
up from the earth, I shall draw all men unto
Me " (c. xii. 32) ; and again, " No man cometh
to the Father but by Me " (c. xiv. 6) ; He
showeth Himself equal to Him who begat Him.
But how after saying, " Whither I go ye know,
and the way ye know," hath He added,

Ver. 7. " If ye had known Me, ye should
have known My Father also ; and from hence-
forth ye know Him, and have seen Him " ?

He doth not contradict Himself; they knew
Him indeed, but not so as they ought. God
they knew, but the Father not yet. For after-
wards, the Spirit having come upon them
wrought' in them all knowledge. What He
saith is of this kind. " Had ye known My Es-
sence and My Dignity, ye would have known
that of the Father also ; and henceforth ye shall
know Him, and have seen Him," (the one be-
longing to the future, the other to the present,)
that is, "by Me." By "sight," He meaneth
knowledge by intellectual perception. For those
who are seen we may see and not know ; but
those who are known we cannot know and not
know. Wherefore He saith, " and ye have seen
Him " ; just as it saith, " was seen also of Angels."
(i Tim. iii. 16.) Yet the very Essence was not
seen ; yet it saith that He " was seen," that is,
as far as it was possible for them to see. These
words are used, that thou mayest learn that ' the
man who hath seen Him '° knoweth Him who
begat Him. But they beheld Him not in His
unveiled Essence, but clothed with flesh. He is
wont elsewhere to put " sight " for " knowledge " ;
as when He saith, " Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God." (Matt. v. 8.) By
" pure," He meaneth not those who are free


* al. " that is, that ye come by Me."
^ Kvpiof tlft.i ToO aycti'.


** al. " showing that.'
>» the Son.


270


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIII.


from fornication only, but from all sins. For
every sin brings filth upon the soul.

[3.] Let us then use every means to wipe off
the filthiness. But first the font cleanseth, after-
wards other ways also, many and of all kinds.
For God, being merciful, hath even after this '
given to us various ways of'' reconciliation, of all
which the first is that by alms-doing. " By alms-
deeds," it saith, " and deeds of faith sins are
cleansed away." (Ecclus. iii. 30.) By alms-
doing I do not mean that which is maintained
by injustice, for this is not alms-doing, but sav-
ageness and inhumanity. What profits it to
strip one man and clothe another? For we
ought to begin the action with mercy, but this is
inhumanity. If we give away everything that
we have got from other people, it is no gain to
us. And this Zacchaeus shows, who on that oc-
casion said, that he propitiated God by giving
four times as much as he had taken. (Luke xix.
8.) But we, when we plunder unboundedly, and
give but little, think that we make God propi-
tious, whereas we do rather' exasperate Him. For
tell me, if thou shouldest drag a dead and rotten
ass from the waysides and lanes, and bring it to
the altar, would not all stone thee as accursed and
polluted ? * Well then, if I prove that a sacri-
fice procured by plunder is more polluted than
this, what defense shall we obtain ? Let us sup-
pose that some article has been obtained by
plunder, is it not of fouler scent than a dead ass ?
Wouldest thou learn how great is the rottenness
of sin ? Hear the Prophet saying, " My wounds
stank, and were corrupt." (Ps. xxxviii. 5, LXX.)
And dost thou in words entreat God to forget
thy misdeeds, and dost thou by what thou thy-
self doest, robbing and grasping, and placing thy
sin upon the altar, cause Him to remember them
continually? But now, this is not the only sin,
but there is one more grievous than this, that
thou defilest the souls of the saints.' For the
altar is but a stone, and is consecrated, but they
ever bear with them Christ Himself; and darest
thou to send thither any of such impurity?
" No," saith one, " not the same money, but
other." Mockery this, and trifling. Knowest
thou not, that if one drop of injustice fall on a
great quantity of wealth, the whole is defiled ?
And just as a man by casting dung into a pure
fountain makes it all unclean, so also in the case
of riches, anything ill-gotten entering in makes


^ after baptism.

' Ben. *' ways of various."

^ al. "not knowing that we."


* al. " abominable."
B i.e. of communicants.


them to be tainted with the ill savor from itself
Then we wash our hands when we enter into
church, but our hearts not so. Why, do our
hands send forth a voice ? It is the soul that
utters" the words : to that God looketh ; clean-
ness of the body is of no use, while that is de-
filed. What profits it, if thou wipe clean thine
outward hands, while thou hast those within im-
pure? For the terrible thing and that which
subverts all good is this, that while we are fear-
ful about trifles, we care not for important mat-
ters. To pray with unwashed hands is a matter
indifferent ; but to do it with an unwashed mind,
this is the extreme of all evils. Hear what was
said to the Jews who busied themselves about
such outward impurities. " Wash thine heart
from wickedness, how long shall there be in thee
thoughts of thy labors ?" ' (Jer. iv. 14.) Let
us also wash ourselves, not with mire, but with
fair water, with alms-doing, not with covetous-
ness. First get free from rapine, and then show
forth alms-deeds. Let us " dechne from evil,
and do good." (Ps. xxxvii. 27.) Stay thy hands
from covetousness, and so bring them to alms-
giving. But if with the same hands we strip one
set of persons,' though we may not clothe the
others with what has been taken ' from them, yet
we shall not thus escape punishment. For that
which is the groundwork '° of the propitiation is
made the groundwork of all wickedness. Better
not show mercy, than show it thus ; since for
Cain also it had been better not to have " brought
his offering at all. Now if he who brought too
little angered God, when one gives what is an-
other's, how shall not he anger Him ? "I com-
manded thee," He will say, " not to steal, and
honorest thou Me from that thou hast stolen!
What thinkest thou? That I am pleased with
these things?" Then shall He say to thee
" Thou thoughtest wickedly that I am even such
an one as thyself; I will rebuke thee, and se»
before thy face thy sins." (Ps. 1. 21, LXX.;
But may it not come to pass that any one of ui
hear this voice, but having wrought pure alms
deeds, and having our lamps burning, so ma;<
we enter into the bride-chamber by the grao
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, t
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost '^ b
glory for ever and ever. Amen.


" al. " offers."

' E. v. " How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within theef
* al. " the poor." " al. " given." "* vir69*<m.

^* al. *• Cain would have been better if he had not."
" Ben. omits, " with the Father and the Holy Ghost."


Homily LXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


271


HOMILY LXXIV.

John xiv. 8, 9.


" Philip saith unto Him, Lord, show us the Father, and
it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I been
so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known
Me, Philip? He who hath seen Me, hath seen the
Father." '

[i.] The Prophet said to the Jews, "Thou
hadst the countenance of a harlot, thou wert
shameless towards all men." (Jer. iii. 3, LXX.)
Now it seems fitting to use this expression not
only against that city,^ but against all who shame-
lessly set their faces against the truth. For when
PhiUp said to Christ, " Show us the Father," He
replied, " Have I been so long time with you,
and hast thou not known Me, Philip?" And
yet there are some who even after these words
separate the Father from the Son. What prox-
imity dost thou require closer than this ? Indeed,
from this very saying some have fallen into the
malady of Sabellius. But let us, leaving both
these and those as involved in directly opposite
error, consider the exact meaning of the words.
"Have I been so long time with you, and hast
thou not known Me, Philip ? " He saith. What
then ? replieth Philip, " Art thou the Father after
whom I enquire ? " "No," He saith. On this
account He said not, "hast thou not known
I lim," but, " hast thou not known Me," declaring
nothing else but this, that the Son is no other
han what the Father is, yet continuing to be a
Son. But how came Philip to ask this question ?
Jhrist had said, " If ye had known Me, ye should
lave known My Father also" (c. xiv. 7), and
le had often said the same to the Jews. Since
hen Peter and the Jews had often asked Him,
'Who is the Father?" since Thomas had asked
lim, and no one had learnt anything clear, but
lis words were still not understood; Philip, in
irder that He might not seem to be importunate,
nd to trouble Him by asking in his turn after
le Jews, "Show us the Father," added, "and it
ifficeth us," "we seek no more." Yet Christ
ill said, "If ye had known Me, ye should have
nown My Father also," and by Himself He
eclared the Father. But Philip reversed the
rder, and said, " Show us the Father," as though
iiowing Christ exactly. But Christ endureth
im not, but putteth him in the right way, per-
lading him to gain the knowledge of the Father
irough Himself, while Philip desired to see Him
ith these bodily eyes, having perhaps heard
)ncerning the Prophets, that they "saw God."


^ " And how saycst thou then, Show us the Father? " N. T.
• i.e. Jerusalem.


But those cases, Philip, were acts of condescen-
sion. Wherefore Christ said, " No man hath
seen God at anytime" (c. i. 18) ; and again,
" Every man that hath heard and hath learned
from God cometh unto Me." (c. vi. 45.) "Ye
have neither heard His voice at any time, nor
seen His shape." (c. v. 37.) And in the Old
Testament, " No man shall see My face, and live."
(Ex. xx.xiii. 20.) What saith Christ? Very
reprovingly He saith, " Have I been so long
time with you, and hast thou not known Me,
Philip?" He said not, "hast thou not seen,"
but, " hast thou not known Me." " Why," Philip
might say, " do I wish to learn concerning Thee ?
At present I seek to see Thy Father, and Thou
sayest unto me, hast thou not known Me?"
What connection then hath this with the ques-
tion ? Surely a very close one ; for if He is that
which the Father is, yet continuing a Son, with
reason He showeth in Himself Him who begat
Him. Then to distinguish the Persons He saith,
" He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father,"
lest any one should assert that the same is
Father, the same Son. For had He been the
Father, He would not have said, " He that hath
seen Me hath seen Him." Why then did He
not reply, "thou askest things impossible, and
not allowed to man ; to Me alone is this possi-
ble"? Because Philip had said, "it sufficeth
us," as though knowing Christ, He showeth that
he had not even seen Him. For assuredly he
would have known the Father, had he been able
to know the Son.^ Wherefore He saith, " He
that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father." " If
anyone hath seen Me, he shall also behold Him."
What He saith is of this kind : " It is not possi-
ble to see either Me or Him." For Philip
sought the knowledge which is by sight, and
since he thought that he had so seen Christ, he
desired in like manner to see the Father ; but
Jesus showeth him that he had not even seen
Himself. And if any one here call knowledge,
sight, I do not contradict him, for, " he that hath
known Me," saith Christ, "hath known the
Father." Yet He did not say this, but desiring
to establish the Consubstantiality, declared, " he
that knoweth My Essence, knoweth that of the
Father also." "And what is this?" saith some
one ; " for he who is acquainted with creation
knoweth also God." Yet all are acquainted
with creation, and have seen it, but all do not
know God. Besides, let us consider what Philip

* al. " to do this."


272


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMiLV LXXIV.


seeks to see. Is it the wisdom of the Father ?
Is it His goodness ? Not so, but the very what-
ever God is, the very Essence. To this there-
fore Christ answereth, " He that hath seen Me."
Now he that hath seen the creation, hath not
also seen the Essence of God. " If any one hath
seen Me, he hath seen the Father," He saith.
Now had He been of a different Essence, He
would not have spoken thus. But to make use
of a grosser argument, no man that knows not
what gold is, can discern the substance of gold
in silver. For one nature is not shown by an-
other. Wherefore He rightly rebuked him, say-
ing, "Am I so long with you?" Hast thou
enjoyed such teaching, hast thou seen miracles
wrought with authority, and all belonging to the
Godhead, which the Father alone worketh, sins
forgiven, secrets published, death retreating, a
creation wrought from earth,' and hast thou not
known Me ? Because He was clothed with flesh,
therefore He said, " Hast thou not known Me?"

[2.] Thou hast seen the Father; seek not to
see more ; for in Him thou hast seen Me. If
thou hast seen Me, be not over-curious ; for thou
hast also in Me known Him.

Ver. 10. "Believest thou not that I am in the
Father?" 2

That is, " I am seen in that Essence."

" The words that I speak, I speak not of My-
self."

Seest thou the exceeding nearness, and the
proof of the one Essence ?

" The Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth
the works."

, How, beginning with words, doth He come
to works ? for that which naturally followed was,
that He should say, " the Father speaketh the
words." But He putteth t\vo things here, both
concerning doctrine and miracles. Or it may
have been because the words also were works.
How then doeth He ^ them ? In another place
He saith, " If I do not the works of My Father,
beUeve Me not." (c. x. 37.) How then saith
He here that the Father doeth them ? To show
this same thing, that there is no interval between
the Father and the Son. What He saith is this :
" The Father would not act in one way, and I
in apother." Indeed in another place both He
. and the Father work ; " My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work" (c. v. 17) ; showing in
the first passage the unvaryingness of the works,''
in the second the identity. And if the obvious
meaning of the words denotes humility, marvel
not ; for after having first said, " Believest thou
not?" He then spake thus, showing that He
so modeled His words to bring him to the faith ;
for He walked in their hearts.


* i.e. eyes given by means of the clay.

' " and the Father in Me? " N. T.

' tbc Father. * i.e. those of the Father and the Son.


Ver. II. " Believe " that I am in the Father
and the Father in Me."

" Ye ought not, when ye hear of ' Father ' and
' Son,' to seek anything else to the establishing
of the relationship " as to Essence, but if this is
not sufficient to prove to you the Condignity
and Consubstantiality, ye may learn it even from
the works." Had the, " he that hath seen Me,
hath seen My Father," been used with respect
to works. He would not afterwards have said,

" Or else believe Me for the very works' sake."

And then to show that He is not only able to
do these things, but also other much greater than
these. He putteth them with excess. For He
saith not, " I can do greater things than these,"
but, what was much more wonderful, " I can give
to others also to do greater things than these."

Ver. 12. "Verily, verily, I say unto you. He
that believeth on Me, the works that I do shall
he do also ; and greater works than these shall
he do, because I go to the Father."

That is, " it now remaineth for you to work
miracles, for I go away." Then when He had
accomplished what His argument intended, He
saith,

Ver. 13. "Whatsoever ye shall ask in Mj
Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in Me." j

Seest thou again that it is He who doeth it!
" I," saith He, " will do it" ; not, " I will ask of
the Father," but, "that the Father may b(
glorified in Me." In another place He said
"God shall glorify Him in Himself" (c. xiii
32), but here, " He shall glorify the Father " ; fo
when the Son shall appear with great power, H
who begat shall be glorified. But what is, " i
My Name"? That which the Apostles saic
" In the Name of Jesus Christ, arise and walk.
(Acts iii. 6.) For all the miracles which the
did He wrought in them, and " the hand of th
Lord was with them." (Acts xi. 21.)

Ver. 14. " I will do' it," He saith.

Seest thou His authority ? The things dor
by means of others Himself doeth ; hath He r
power for the things done by Himself, excef
as being wrought in by the Father ? And wl
could say this ? But why doth He put it secon
To confirm His own words, and to show that I
former sayings were of condescension. But
"I go to the P"ather," is this: "I shall
perish, but remain in My own proper Dignill
and Am in Heaven." All this He said, coiJ
forting them. For since it was likely that th«J
not yet understanding His discourses concemii
the Resurrection, would imagine something dJ
mal. He in other discourses promiseth that l|
will give them such things, soothing them .


'< "BeHeve Me," N. T.

' rij? leara Triv oitiriav <Tvyyeveiai,

" If ye shall ask anything in My Name, I," &c., N. T.


Homily LXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


273


every way, and showing that He abideth contin-
ually ; and not only abideth, but that He will
even show forth greater power.

[3.] Let us then follow Him, and take up the
Cross. For though persecution be not present,
yet the season for another kind of death is with
us. " Mortify," it saith, " your members which
are upon earth." (Col. iii. 5.) Let us then
quench concupiscence, slay anger, abolish envy.
This is a "living sacrifice." (Rom. xii. i.)
This sacrifice ends not in ashes, is not dispersed
in smoke, wants neither wood, nor fire, nor
knife. For it hath both fire and a knife, even
the Holy Spirit. Using this knife, circumcise
the superfluous and alien portion of thy heart ;
open the closedness of thine ears, for vices ' and
evil desires are wont to stop the way against the
entrance of the word. The desire of money,
when it is set before one, permits not to hear
the word concerning almsgiving ; and malice
when it is present raises a wall against the teach-
ing concerning love ; and some other malady
falling on in its turn, makes the soul yet more
dull to all things. Let us then do away these
wicked desires ; it is enough to have willed, and
all are quenched. For let us not, I entreat,
look to this, that the love of wealth is a tyran-
nical thing, but that the tyranny is that of our
own slackmindedness. Many indeed say that
they do not even know what money is. For
this desire is not a natural one ; such as are
natural were implanted in us from the first, from
the beginning, but as for gold and silver, for a
long time not even what it is was known. Whence
then grew this desire ? From vainglory and ex-
treme slackmindedness. For of desires some
ire necessary, some natural, some neither the


one nor the other. For example, those which
if not gratified destroy the creature are both
natural and necessary, as the desire of meat and
drink and sleep ; carnal desire is natural indeed
but not necessary, for many have got the better
of it, and have not died. But the desire of
wealth is neither natural nor necessary, but
superfluous ; and if we choose we need not
admit its beginning. At any rate, Christ speak-
ing of virginity saith, " He that is able to re-
ceive it, let him receive it." (Matt. xix. 12.)
But concerning riches not so, but how ? " Ex-
cept a man forsake all that he hath, he is not
worthy of Me." (Luke xi v. 33.) What was easy
He recommended, but what goes beyond the
many He leaveth to choice. Why then do we
deprive ourselves of all excuse ? The man who
is made captive by some more tyrannical passion
shall not suffer a heavy punishment, but he who
is subdued by a weak one is deprived of all
defense. For what shall we reply when He
saith, "Ye saw Me hungry and fed Me not"?
(Matt. XXV. 42) ; what excuse shall we have?
We shall certainly plead poverty ; yet we are
not poorer than that widow, who by throwing
in two mites overshot all the rest. For God
requireth not the quantity of the offering, but
the measure of the mind ; and that He doth
so, comes from His tender care. Let us then,
admiring His lovingkindness, contribute what is
in our power, that having both in this life and
in that which is to come obtained in abundance
the lovingkindness of God, we may be able to
enjoy the good things promised to us, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY LXXV.

John xiv. 15-17.


I If ye love Me, keep My commandments. And I will
pray the Father, and He shall give you another
Comforter, that He may abide with you forever;
even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot re-
ceive, because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth
Him." 2

[i.] We need everywhere works and actions,
^3t a mere show of words. For to say and to
"j^Broniise is easy for any one, but to act is not
■^■mally easy. Why have I made these remarks ?

cause there are many at this time who say

Hi. " maladies."

" But ye know Him, for He dwelleth with you, and shall be
l (h you." N. T.


that they fear and love God, but in their works
show the contrary ; but God requireth that love
which is shown by works. Wherefore He said
to the disciples, " If ye love Me, keep My com-
rtlandments." For after He had told them,
" Whatsoever ye shall ask,^ I will do it," that
they might not deem the mere " asking " to be
availing. He added, " If ye love Me," " then,"
He saith, " I will do it." And since it was likely
that they would be troubled when they heard
that, "I go* to the Father," He telleth them
" to be troubled now is not to love, to love is to


3 " in My Name," N. T.


* al. " depart."


274


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXV.


obey My words. I have given you a command-
ment that ye love one another, that ye do so to
each other as I have done to you ; this is love,
to obey these My words, and to yield to Him
who is the object of your love."

" And I will ask the Father, and He shall give
you another Comforter." Again His speech is
one of condescension. For since it was probable,
that they not yet knowing Him would eagerly
seek His society, His discourse, His presence
in the flesh, and would admit of no consolation
when He was absent, what saith He ? "I will
ask the Father, and He shall give you another
Comforter," that is, " Another like unto Me."
Let those be ashamed who have the disease of
Sabellius,' who hold not the fitting opinion
concerning the Spirit. For the marvel of this
discourse is this, that it hath stricken down
contradictory heresies with the same blow. For
by saying " another," He showeth the difference
of Person, and by " Paraclete," the connection
of Substance. But why said He, " I will ask the
Father " ? Because had He said, " I will send
Him," they would not have so much believed,
and now the object is that He should be believed.
For afterwards He declares that He Himselfsend-
eth Him, saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost"
(c. XX. 22) ; but in this place He telleth them
that He asketh the Father, so as to render His
discourse credible to them. Since John saith
of Him, " Of His fullness have all we received "
(c. i. 16) ; but what He had, how receiveth He
from another ? And again, " He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." (Luke
iii. 16.) "But what had He more than the
Apostles, if He was about to ask It of His Father
in order to give It to others, when they often
even without prayer appear to have done thus ? "
And how,^ if It is sent according to request
from the Father, doth It descend of Itself? And
how is that which is everywhere present sent
by Another, that which " divideth to every man
severally as He will" (i Cor. xii. 11), and which
saith with authority, "Separate Me Paul and
Barnabas"? (Acts xiii. 2.) Those ministers
were ministering unto God, yet still It called
them authoritatively to Its own work ; not that It
called them to any different work, but in order
to show Its power. "What then," saith some
one, "is, ' I will ask the Father'?" (He saith
it) to show the time of Its coming. For when
He had cleansed them by the sacrifice,^ then
the Holy Ghost lighted upon them. " And why,
while He was with them, came it not?" Be-
cause the sacrifice was not yet offered. But
when afterwards sin had been loosed, and they


* SabciUus was a bishop in Upper Egypt in the third century.
The heresy which bears his name denies the Personality of the Son
and the Holy Spirit, and holds that they are manifestations or char-
acters of the Godhead.

3 The objection is met by other questions. ^ i.e. of Himself.


were being sent forth to dangers, and were
stripping themselves for the contest, then need
was that the Anointer * should come. " But
why did not the Spirit come immediately after
the Resurrection?" In order that being greatly
desirous of It, they might receive It with great
joy. For as long as Christ was with them, they
were not in tribulation ; but when He departed,
being made defenseless and thrown into much
fear, they would receive It with much readiness.

" He remaineth with you." This showeth
that even after death It departeth not. But lest
when they heard of the " Paraclete," they should
imagine a second Incarnation, and expect to see
It with their eyes. He setteth them right by say-
ing, " Whom the world cannot receive, because
it seeth Him not." " He will not be with you
as I have been, but will dwell in your very
souls" ; for this is the, " shall be in you."' He
calleth it the " Spirit of truth " ; thus explain-
ing the types in the Old Testament. " That He
may be ^ with you." What is, " may be with
you " ? That which He saith Himself, that " I
am with you." (Matt, xxviii. 20.) Besides, He
also implieth something else, that " the case of
the Spirit shall not be the same as Mine, He
shall never leave you." " Whom the world can-
not receive, because it seeth Him not." "Why,
what is there belonging to the other Persons that
is visible ? " Nothing ; but He speaketh here
of knowledge ; at least He addeth, " neither
knoweth Him." For He is wont, in the case
of exact knowledge, to call it " sight " ; because
sight is clearer than the other senses, by this
He always representeth exact knowledge. By
"world," He here speaketh of "the wicked,"
thus too comforting the disciples by giving to
them a special gift. See in how many particu-
lars He raised His discourse concerning It. He
said, " He is Another like unto Me " ; He said,
" He will not leave you " ; He said, " Unto you
alone He cometh, as also did I " ; He said,
that " He remaineth in you " ; but not even sc
did He drive out their despondency. For the)
still sought Him and His society. To cure ther
this feeling. He saith,

Ver. 18. "I will not leave you orphans, I
come unto you."

[2.] " Fear not," He saith, " I said not th
I would send you another Comforter, as thougij
I were Myself withdrawing from you for ever ;
said not that He remaineth with you, as thougJ
I should see you no more. For I also MyseJ
will come to you, I will not leave you orphans/
Because when commencing He said, " Litt'l
children," therefore He saith also here, " I
not leave you orphans." At first then He toll
them, " Ye shall come whither I go " ; and, " ]|


* a\ei<t>oyTa.

fi al. " remaineth in you.**


« " may abide," N. T.


IIoMiLV LXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


275


My Father's house there are many mansions" ;
but here, since that time was long, He giveth
them the Spirit ; and when, not knowing what it
could be of which He spake, they were not suffi-
ciently comforted, " I will not leave you orphans,"
He saith ; for this they chiefly required. But
since the, " I will come to you," was the saying
of one declaring a " presence," observe how in
order that they might not again seek for the
same kind of presence as before, He did not
clearly tell them this thing, but hinted at it ; for
having said,

Ver. 19. "Yet a little while, and the world
seeth Me not " ; He added, " but ye see Me."
As though He had said, " I come indeed to
you, but not in the same way as before, ever
being with you day by day." And lest they should
say, " How then saidst Thou to the Jews, Hence-
forth ye shall not see Me? " He solveth the con-
tradiction by saying, " to you alone " ; for such
also is the nature of the Spirit.

" Because I live, ye shall live also."
For the Cross doth not finally separate us, but
only hideth for a little moment ; and by " life "
He seemeth to me to mean not the present only,
but the future also.

Ver. 20. " At that day ye shall know that I
am in the' Father, and you in Me, and I in you."
With regard to the Father, these words refer to
Essence ; with regard to the disciples, to agree-
ment of mind and help from God. " And how,
tell me, is this reasonable ? " saith som^ one.
And how, pray, is the contrary reasonable?
For great and altogether boundless is the in-
terval between Christ and the disciples. And
if the same words are employed, marvel not ;
for the Scripture is often wont to use in different
senses the same words, when applied to God
and to men. Thus we are called " gods," and
' sons of God," yet the word hath not the same
brce when applied to us and to God. And the
son is called " Image," and " Glory " ; so are
vt, but great is the interval between us. Again,
'Ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's" (i Cor.
23), but not in like manner as Christ is God's
e we Christ's. But what is it that He saith?
When I am arisen," He saith, " ye shall know
.t I am not separated from the Father, but
nre the same power with Him, and that I am
ith you continually, when facts proclaim the
id which cometh to you from Me, when your
>emies are kept down, and you speak boldly,
•hen dangers are removed from your path, when
,e preaching of the Gospel flourisheth day by
ay, when all yield and give ground to the word
if true religion. " As the Father hath sent Me,
send I you." (c. xx. 21.) Seest thou that here
the word hath not the same force ? for if we


' My," N. T.


take it as though it had, the Apostles will differ in
nothing from Christ. But why saith He, " Then
ye shall know"? Because then they saw Him
risen and conversing with them, then they learnt
the exact faith ; for great was the power of the
Spirit, which taught them all things.

[3.] Ver. 21. "He that hath My command-
ments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me."

It is not enough merely to have them, we
need also an exact keeping of them. But why
doth He frequently say the same thing to them ?
as, " If ye love Me, ye will keep'' My command-
ments " (ver. 15) ; and, " He that hath My com-
mandments and keepeth them " ; and, " If any
one heareth My word and keepeth it, he it is
that loveth Me — he that heareth not My words,
loveth Me not." (Ver. 24.) I think that He al-
luded to their despondency ; for since He had
uttered many wise sayings to them concerning
death, saying, " He that hateth his life in this
world shall save it unto life eternal " (c. xii. 25) ;
and, " Unless a man take^ his cross andf ollow Me,
he is not worthy of Me " (Matt. x. 38) ; and is
about to say other things besides, rebuking them.
He saith, " Think ye that ye suffer sorrow from
love? The not sorrowing would be a sign of
love." And because He wished all along to
establish this, as He went on He summed up
His discourse in this same point ; " If ye loved
Me," He saith, " ye would have rejoiced, because
— I go to My Father" (ver. 28), but now ye
are in this state through cowardice. To be thus
disposed towards death is not for those who
remember My commandments ; for you ought
to be crucified, if you truly loved Me, for My
word exhorteth you not to be afraid of those
that kill the body. Those that are such both
the Father loveth and I. " And I will manifest
Myself unto him.* Then saith Judas,'

Ver. 22. "How is it that Thou wilt manifest
Thyself unto us?"°

Seest thou that their soul was close pressed'
with fear ? For he was confounded and troubled,
and thought that as we see dead men in a dream,
so He also would be seen. In order therefore
that they might not imagine this, hear what He
saith.

Ver. 23. " I and the Father will come unto
him, and make Our abode with him.'"

All but saying, " As the Father revealeth Him-
self, so also do I." And not in this way only
He removed the suspicion, but also by saying,
" We will make Our abode with him," a thing


2 " If yc love Me, keep," &c.

s " He that taketh not," &c.
_ * " And he that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and I
will love him, and will manifest," &c. N. T.

^ ** not Iscariot," N, T.

'^ " and not unto the world," N. T.

^ neni^rjtitvTiv, " crushed like felt."

8 Ver. 23. "Jesus answered and said unto him. If a man love
Me, he will keep My words; and My Father will love him^ and We
will come," &c.


276


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXV.


which doth not belong to dreams. But observe,
I pray you, the disciple confounded, and not
daring to say plainly what he desired to say.
For he said not, " Woe to us, that Thou diest,
and will come to us as the dead come " ; he
spake not thus ; but, " How is it that Thou wilt
show Thyself to us, and not unto the world?"
Jesus then saith, that " I accept you, because ye
keep My commandments." In order that they
might not, when theyshould see Him afterwards,'
deem Him to be an apparition, therefore He
saith these things beforehand. And that they
might not deem that He would appear to them
so as I have said. He telleth them also the rea-
son, " Because ye keep My commandments " ;
He saith that the Spirit also will appear in like
manner. Now if after having companied with
Him so long time, they cannot yet endure that
Essence, or rather cannot even imagine It, what
would have been their case had He appeared
thus to them at the first? on this account also
He ate with them, that the action might not
seem to be an illusion. For if they thought this
when they saw Him walking on the waters, al-
though His wonted form was seen by them, and
He was not far distant, what would they have
imagined had they suddenly seen Him arisen
whom they had seen taken ^ and swathed?
Wherefore He continually telleth them that He
will appear, and why He will appear, and how,
that they may not suppose Him to be an appari-
tion.

Ver. 24. " He that loveth Me not keepeth not
My sayings ; and the word which ye hear is not
Mine, but the Father's which sent Me."

" So that he that heareth not these sayings
not only doth not love Me, but neither doth
he love the Father." For if this is the sure
proof of love, the hearing the commandments,
and these are of the Father, he that heareth
them loveth not the Son only, but the Father
also. " And how is the word ' thine ' and ' not
thine'?" This means, "I speak not without
the Father, nor say anything of Myself contrary
to what seemeth good to Him."

Ver. 25. "These things have I spoken unto
you, being yet present with you."

Since these sayings were not clear, and since
some they did not understand, and doubted
about the greater number, in order that they
might not be again confused, and say, " What
commands?" He released them from all their
perplexity, saying,

Ver. 26. " The Comforter, whom the Father
shall send in My Name, He shall teach you." ''

" Perhaps these things are not clear to you


* i.e. after the Resurrection. * Kareyo^ei-ou.

3 Ver. 26. " But the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in My Name, He shall te.ich you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto
you.


now, but ' He ' ■* is a clear teacher of them."
And the, " remaineth with you " (ver. 1 7) , is the
expression of One implying that Himself will
depart. Then that they may not be grieved.
He saith, that as long as He should remain with
them and the Spirit should not come, they
would be unable to comprehend anything great
or sublime. And this He said to prepare them
to bear nobly His departure, as that which was
to be the cause of great blessings to them. He
continually calleth Him " Comforter," because
of the afflictions which then possessed them.
And since even after hearing these things tht-y
were troubled, when they thought of the sorrows,
the wars, His departure, see how He calmeth
them again by saying,

Ver. 27. " Peace I leave to you.""

All but saying, " What are ye harmed by the
trouble of the world, provided ye be at peace
with" Me? For this peace is not of the same
kind as that. The one is external, is often mis-
chievous and unprofitable, and is no advantage
to those who possess it ; but I give you peace
of such a kind that ye be at peace with one
another, which thing rendereth you stronger."
And because He said again, " I leave," which 1
was the expression of One departing, and enough
to confound them, therefore He again saith,

" Let not your heart be troubled, neither let
it be afraid."

Seest thou that they were affected partly by
loving affection, partly by fear?

Ver. 28. "Ye have heard how I said unto
you, I go away, and come again unto you. If
ye loved Me, ye would rejoice because I said,
I go unto the Father ; for My Father is greateJ
than I."

[4.] And what joy would this bring to them'i
What consolation ? What then mean the words j
They did not yet know concerning the Resurrec I
tion, nor had they right opinion concernin;]
Him ; (for how could they, who did not eve
know that He would rise again?) but the!
thought that the Father was mighty. He salt J
then, that " If ye are fearful for Me, as not ab
to defend Myself, and if ye are not confide
that I shall see you again after the Crucifixiol
yet when ye heard that I go to the Father, 3 1
ought then to have rejoiced because I go awii
to One that is greater, and able to undo
dangers." " Ye have heard how I said unl
you." Why hath He put this? Because, fl
saith, " I am so firmly confident about t'
things which come to pass, that I even foretl
them, so far am I from fearing." This also |
the meaning of what follows.

Ver. 29. "And now I have told you befc|


'' Ver. 27. " Peace I leave with you. My peace I give untoyl
not as the world giveth give I unto you," N. T. " irpot.


HoMiLV LXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


277


it come to pass, that when it is come to pass, ye
might believe that I Am." ' As though He had
said, " Ye would not have known, had I not told
you. And I should not have told you, had I not
been confident." Seest thou that the speech is
one of condescension ? for when He saith, " Think
ye that I cannot pray to the Father, and He
shall presently give Me more than twelve legions
of Angels" (Matt. xxvi. 53), He speaketh to
the secret thoughts of the hearers ; since no one,
even in the height of madness, would say that
He was not able to help Himself, but needed
Angels ; but because they thought of Him as a
man, therefore He spoke of " twelve legions of
Angels." Yet in truth He did but ask those who
came to take Him a question, and cast them
backwards, (c. xviii. 6.) (If any one say that
the Father is greater, inasmuch as ^ He is the
cause of the Son, we will not contradict this.
But this doth not by any means make the Son to
be of a different Essence.) But what He saith,
is of this kind : " As long as I am here, it is
natural that you should deem that I am ' in dan-
ger ; but when I am gone ' there,' ■* be con-
fident that I am in safety ; for Him none will be
able to overcome." All these words were ad-
dressed to the weakness of the disciples, for,
I Myself am confident, and care not for death."
Dn this account. He said, " I have told you
hese things before they come to pass " ; " but
ince," He saith, " ye are not yet able to receive
he saying concerning them, I bring you comfort
yen from the Father, whom ye entitle great."
■laving thus consoled them. He again telleth
hem sorrowful things.
Ver. 30. " Hereafter I will not talk ' with
ou." Wherefore? "For the ruler of this
rorld cometh, and hath nothing in Me."
By " ruler of this world," He meaneth the
evil, calling wicked men also by the same
ame. For he ruleth not heaven and earth,
Jice he would have been subverted, and cast
own all things, but he ruleth over those who
ive themselves up to him. Wherefore He call-
th him, " the ruler of the darkness of this
orld," in this place again calling evil deeds,
darkness." " What then, doth the devil slay
ee ? " By no means ; " he hath nothing in
e." " How then do they kill Thee ? " " Be-
luse I will it, and,

Ver. 31. '' ' That the world may know that I
ve the Father.' " «

" For being not subject," He saith, " to death,

l)r a debtor to it, I endure it through My love

the Father." This He saith, that He may

rouse their souls, and that they may learn


I* The words ** that I Am " are not read here, but in c. xlli. 19.
!• «a«' h. * i.e. to the Father.

I' Gr. " we are." » " talk much," N. T.

' And as the Father gave Me commandment, even so I do."
IT.


that not unwillingly but willingly He goeth to
this thing, and that He doth it despising the
devil. It was not enough for Him to have said,
"Yet a little while I am with you " (c. vii. 33),
but He continually handleth this painful subject,
(with good reason,) until He should make it ac-
ceptable to them, by weaving along with it pleas-
ant things. Wherefore at one time He saith, " I
go, and I come again " ; and, " That where I am,
there ye may be also " ; and, " Ye cannot follow
Me now, but afterwards ye shall follow Me " ;
and, " I go to the Father " ; and, " The Father
is greater than I " ; and, " Before it come to
pass, I have told you " ; and, " I do not suffer
these things from constraint, but from love for
the Father." So that they might consider, that
the action could not be destmctive nor hurtful,
if at least He who greatly loved Him, and was
greatly loved by Him, so willed. On this ac-
count, while intermingling these pleasant words.
He continually uttered the painful ones also,
practicing their minds. For both the, " remain-
eth with you" (c. xvi. 7), and, "My departure
is expedient for you," were expressions of One
giving comfort. For this reason He spake by
anticipation ten thousand sayings concerning the
Spirit,' the, "Is in you," and, "The world can-
not receive," and, " He shall bring all things to
your remembrance," and, " Spirit of truth," and,
" Holy Spirit," and, " Comforter," and that " It
is expedient for you," in order that they might
not despond, as though there would be none to
stand before and help them. " It is expedient,"
He saith, showing that It* would make them
spiritual.

[5.] This at least, we see, was what took
place. For they who now trembled and feared,
after they had received the Spirit sprang into the
midst of dangers, and stripped themselves for
the contest against steel, and fire, and wild
beasts, and seas, and every kind of punish-
ment ; and they, the unlettered and ignorant,
discoursed so boldly as to astonish their hearers.
For the Spirit made them men of iron instead of
men of clay, gave them wings, and allowed them
to be cast down by nothing human. For such is
that grace ; if it find despondency, it disperses
it ; if evil desires, it consumes them ; if coward-
ice, it casts it out, and doth not allow one who
has partaken of it to be afterwards mere man,
but as it were removing him to heaven itself,
causes him to image to himself all that is
there. (Acts iv. 32, and ii. 46.) On this
account no one said that any of the things that
he possessed was his own, but they continued
in prayer, in praise, and in singleness of heart.
For this the Holy Spirit most requireth, for " the
fruit of the Spirit is joy, peace — faith, meek-


' al. " cottceming It."


' i.e. the Holy Spirit.


278


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMiLV LXXVI.


ness." (Gal. v. 22, 23.) "And yet spiritual
persons often grieve," saith some one. But that
sorrow is sweeter than joy. Cain was sorrowful,
but with the sorrow of the world ; Paul was sor-
rowful, but with godly sorrow. Everything that
is spiritual brings the greatest gain, just as every-
thing that is worldly the utmost loss. Let us
then draw to us the invincible aid of the Spirit,
by keeping the commandments, and then we
shall be nothing inferior to the Angels. For
neither are they therefore of this character,' be-
cause they are incorporeal, for were this the case,
no incorporeal being would have become wicked,
but the will is in every case the cause of all.
Wherefore among incorporeal beings some have
been found worse than men or things irrational,
and among those having bodies some better than
the incorporeal. All just men, for instance,
whatever were their righteous deeds, did them
while dwelling on earth, and having bodies.
For they dwelt on earth as those who were
pilgrims and strangers ; but in heaven, as citi-
zens. Then say not thou either, " I am clothed
with flesh, I cannot get the mastery, nor under-
take the toils ^ which are for the sake of virtue."
Do not accuse the Creator. For if the wearing
the flesh make virtue impossible, then the fault
is not ours. But that it does not make it im-
possible, the band of saints has shown. A
nature of flesh did not prevent Paul from be-
coming what he was, nor Peter from receiving
the keys of heaven ; and Enoch also, having


worn flesh, was translated, and not found. So
also Elias was caught up with the flesh. Abra-
ham also with Isaac and his grandson shone
brightly, having the flesh ; and Joseph in the
flesh struggled against that abandoned woman.
But why speak I of the flesh ? For though thou
place a chain upon the flesh, no harm is done.
" Though I am bound," saith Paul, yet " the
word of God is not bound." (2 Tim. ii. 9.)
And why speak I of bonds and chains ? Add to
these the prison,' and bars, yet neither are these
any hindrance to virtue ; at least so Paul hath
instructed us. For the bond of the soul is not
iron but cowardice, and the desire of wealth,
and the ten thousand passions. These bind us,
though our body be free. " But," saith some
one, " these have their origin from the body."
An excuse this, and a false pretense. For had
they been produced from the body, all would have
undergone them. For as we cannot escape weari-
ness, and sleep, and hunger, and thirst, since
they belong to our nature ; so too these, if they
were of the same kind, would not allow any one
to be exempt from their tyranny; but since
many escape them, it is clear that such things
are the faults of a careless soul. Let us then
put a stop to this, and not accuse the body, but
subdue it to the soul, that having it under com-
mand, we may enjoy the everlasting good things,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever ■
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXXVI.

John xiv. 31 ; xv. i.


" Arise, let us go hence. I am the true Vine, (ye are
the branches,') and My Father is the Husbandman."

[i.] Ignorance makes the soul timid and
unmanly, just as instruction in heavenly doc-
trines makes it great and sublime. For when it
has enjoyed no care, it is in a manner timid, not
by nature but by will.^ For when I see the man
who once was brave," now become a coward, I
say that this latter feeling no longer belongs to
nature, for what is natural is immutable. Again,
when I see those who but now were cowards all
at once become daring, I pass the same judg-
ment, and refer all to will. Since even the dis-
ciples were very fearful, before they had learned
what they ought, and had been deemed worthy


* i.e. keeping God's commands.

* al. " 1 cannot master the toils.'

* from ver. 5.


• irpoaLpttTiv.

8 al. " a brave darer.*


of the gift of the Spirit ; yet after^vards they be-
came bolder than lions. So Peter, who couldl
not bear the threat of a damsel, was hung with "
his head downwards, and was scourged, and
though he endured ten thousand dangers, would
not be silent, but enduring what he endured a^
though it were a dream, in such a situation spake j
boldly; but not so before the Crucifixion.f
Wherefore Christ said, "Arise, let us go hence.' I
" But why, tell me ? Did he not know the houiJ
at which Judas would come upon Him ? Or perl
haps He feared lest he should come and seial
them, and lest the plotters should be upon hin
before he had furnished his most excellent teachl
ing." Away with the thought ! these things an j
far from His dignity. " If then He did not feaij
why did He remove them, and then after finisbJ

" al. " prisons."


Homily LXXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


279


ing His discourse lead them into a garden known
to Judas? And even had Judas come, could He
not have blinded their eyes, as He also did when
the traitor was not present?' Why did He re-
move them?" He alloweth the disciples a
little breathing time. For it was likely that they,
is being in a conspicuous place, would tremble
md fear, both on the account of the time and
i;he place, (for it was the depth of night,) and
|Vould not give ^ heed to His words, but would
ie continually turning about, and imagining that
hey heard those who were to set upon them ;
iind that more especially when their Master's
upeech made them expect evil. For, "yet a
little while," He saith, "and I am not with
ou," and, " the ruler of this world cometh."
)ince now when they heard these and the like
fords they were troubled, as though they should
:ertainly be taken immediately, He leadeth them
another place, in order that thinking them-
elves in safety, they might listen to Him with-
ut fear. For they were about to hear lofty
octrines. Therefore He saith, " Arise, let us go
ence." Then He addeth, and sailh,^ " I am
le Vine, ye are the branches." What willeth
le to imply by the comparison? That the
lan who gives no heed to His words can have
o life, and that the miracles about to take
lace, would be wrought by the power of Christ.
My Father is the Husbandman." " How then ?
toth the Son need a power'' working within ? "
way with the thought ! this example does not
gnify this. Observe with what exactness He
aeth through the comparison. He saith not
lat the " root " enjoys the care of the Hus-
mdman, but, " the branches." And the root
brought in in this place for no other purpose,
at that they may learn that they can work
jthing without His power, and, that they ought
be united with Him by faith as the branch
ith the vine.

Ver. 2. " Every branch in Me that beareth not
it the Father ° taketh away."
Here He alludeth to the manner of life, show-
g that without works it is not possible to be in
im.

" And every branch that beareth fruit. He
rgeth it." '

That is, " causeth it to enjoy great care." Yet
e root requires care rather than the branches,
being dug about, and cleared, yet about this
! saith nothing here, but all about the branches.
lOwing that He is sufficient to Himself, and
it the disciples need much help from the
isbandman, although they be very excellent,
lerefore He saith, " that which beareth fruit.


' to persons present.'
nd it 1


' al. " an<J it was not even possible to give.'
' fll. " having led them away. He saith."
I iruytiw. » " He," N.

^toat it may bring forth more fruit," N. T.


He purgeth it." The one branch, because it is
fruitless, cannot even remain in the Vine, but for
the other, because it beareth fruit. He rendereth
it more fruitful. This, some one might assert,
was said with relation also to the persecutions
then coming upon them. For the " purgeth it,"
is " pruneth," which makes the branch bear
better. Whence it is shown, that persecutions
rather make men stronger. Then, lest they
should ask concerning whom He said these
things, and lest He should throw them back into
anxiety. He saith,

Ver. 3. " Now ye are clean through the word
which I have spoken unto you."

Seest thou how He introduceth Himself as
tending the branches? "I have cleansed you,"
He saith ; yet above He declareth that the Father
doth this. But there is no separation^ between
the Father and the Son. " And now your part
also must be performed." Then to show that
He did not this as needing their ministry,* but
for their advancement. He addeth,

Ver. 4.'-' " As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself except it abide in the vine, so neither can
he who abideth not in Me." "*

For that they might not be separated from
Him by timidity. He fasteneth and glueth to
Himself their souls slackened through fear, and
holdeth out to them good hopes for the future.
For the root remains, but to be taken away, or
to be left, belongs to the branches. Then having
urged them on in both ways, by things pleasant
and things painful. He requireth first what is to
be done on our side.

Ver. 5. " He that abideth in Me, and I in
him.""

Seest thou that the Son contributeth not less
than the Father towards the care of the disci-
ples? The Father purgeth, but He keepeth
them in Himself. The abiding in the root is
that which maketh the branches to be fruit-bear-
ing. For that which is not purged, if it remain
on the root, bears fruit, though perhaps not so
much as it ought ; but that which remains not,
bears none at all. But still the " purging " also
hath been shown to belong to the Son, and the
" abiding in the root," to the Father, who also
begat the Root. Seest thou how all is common,'^
both the " purging," and the enjoying the virtue
which is from the root?

[2.] Now it were a great penalty, the being
able to do nothing, but He stayeth not the
punishment at this point, but carrieth on His dis-
course farther.


^ fiitrov. * al. " teaching."

» Ver. 4: " Abide in Me, and I in you. As," &c. N. T.

^^ " so neither can ye, except ye abide in Me." N. T.

J* Ver. 5. " I am the Vine, ye are the branches. He that abtd.
eth in Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for
without Me ye can do nothing." N. T.

" i.e. to the Father and the Son.


28o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVI.


Ver. 6. " He is cast forth," ' He saith.

No longer enjoying the benefit of the hus-
bandman's hand. " And is withered." That is,
if he had aught of the root, he loses it ; if any
grace, he is stripped of this, and is bereft of the
help and life which proceed from it. And what
the end ? " He is cast into the fire." Not such
he who abideth with Him. Then He showeth
what it is to " abide," and saith,

Ver. 7. " If My words abide in you." ^

Seest thou that with reason I said above, that
He seeketh the proof by works? For when He
had said, " Whatsoever ye shall ask I will do it "
(c. xiv. 14, 15), He added, "If ye love Me, ye
\vill keep^ My commandments." And here, "If
ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you."

"Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be
done unto you."

This He said to show that they who plotted
against Him should be burnt up, but that " they "
should bear fruit. Then transferring the fear
from them to the others, and showing that they
should be invincible, He saith,

Ver. 8. " Herein is My Father glorified, that
ye be My disciples, and bear much fruit."

Hence He maketh His discourse credible, for
if the bearing fruit pertains to the glory of the
Father, He will not neglect His own glory.
"And ye shall be My disciples." Seest thou
how he that beareth fruit, he is the disciple?
But what is, " In this is the Father glorified "?
" He rejoiceth when ye abide in Me, when ye
bear fruit."

Ver. 9. " As the Father hath loved Me, so
have I loved you."

Here at length He speaketh in a more human
manner, for this, as spoken to men,* has its
peculiar force. Since what a measure of love
did He manifest, who chose to die, who counted
worthy of such honor those who were His
slaves. His haters. His open enemies, and led
them up to the heavens ! " If then I love you,
be bold ; if it be the glory of My Father that
ye bear fruit, imagine nothing ill." Then that
He may not make them supine, observe how He
braceth them again,

" Continue ye in My love."

" For this ye have the power to do." And
how shall this be ?

Ver. 10. " If ye keep My commandments,
even as I have kept my Father's command-
ments."'

Again, His discourse proceedeth in a human
way ; for certainly the Lawgiver would not be


* Ver. 6. " If a man abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a branch,
and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire,
and they are burned." N. T.

^ " If ye abide in Me, and My words," &c. N. T.
2 " If ye love me, keep," &c. N. T.

* al. suitably to a man."
^ Ver. 10. ** If ye keep," &c., "ye shall abide in My love;


subject to commandments. Seest thou that here
also, as I am always saying, this is declared be-
cause of the infirmity of the hearers? For He
chiefly speaketh to their suspicions, and by every
means showeth them that they are in safety, and
that their enemies are being lost, and that all,
whatever they have, they have from the Son, and
that, if they show forth a pure life, none shall
ever have the mastery over them. And observe
that He discourseth with them in a very authori-
tative manner, for He said not, " abide in the
love of My Father," but, " in Mine " ; then, lest
they should say, " when Thou hast set us at war
with all men. Thou leavest us, and departest,"
He showeth that He doth not leave them, but
is so joined to them if they will, as the branch
in the vine. Then, lest from confidence they
should become supine. He saith not that the
blessing cannot be removed if they are slack-
minded. And in order not to refer the action
to Himself, and so make them more apt to fall,
He saith, " Herein is My Father glorified." For
everywhere He manifesteth His own and His
Father's love towards them. Not the things of
the Jews, then, were " glory," but those which
they'' were about to receive. And that they
might not say, " we have been driven from the
possessions of our fathers, we have been de-
serted, we have become naked, and destitute of
all things," "Look," He saith, "on Me. I am
loved by the Father, yet still I suffer these things
appointed. And so I am not now leaving you
because I love you not. For if I am slain, and
take not this for a proof of not being loved by
the Father, neither ought ye to be troubled.
For, if ye continue in My love, these dangers
shall not be able to do you any mischief on the
score of love."

[3.] Since then love is a thing mighty and
irresistible, not a bare word, let us manifest il
by our actions. He reconciled us when we wart
His enemies, let us, now that we have becom(
His friends, remain so. He led the way, let ui
at least follow ; He loveth us not for His owi
advantage, (for He needeth nothing,) let u:
at least love Him for our profit ; He loved us be
ing His enemies, let us at least love Him bein()
our friend. At present we do the contrary
for every day God is blasphemed through tK^
through our plunderings, through our covetoi
ness. And perhaps one of you will say, " Ev(
day thy discourse is about covetousness." W(
that I could speak about it every night t(
would that I could do so, following you al
in the market-place, and at your table ; wi
that both wives, and friends, and children,
domestics, and tillers of the soil, and neighboi
and the very pavement and walls, could ev(


* i.e. the disciples.


[OMILY LXXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


281


lOut forth this word, that so we might per-
hance have relaxed a little. For this malady
ath seized upon all the world, and occupies the
3uls of all, and great is the tyranny of Mammon.
/e have been ransomed by Christ, and are the
aves of gold. We proclaim the sovereignty of
le one, and obey the other. Whatever " he "
ommands we readily obey, and we have ra-
ised to know family, or friendship, or nature,
r laws, or anything, for him. No one looks up
) Heaven, no one thinks about things to come,
ut there will be a time, when there will be no
rofit even in' these words. " In the grave," it
lith, " who shall confess to Thee ? " Gold is a
ssirable thing, and procures us much luxury,
id makes us to be honored, but not in like
anner as doth Heaven. For from the wealthy
an many even turn aside, and hate him, but
m who lives virtuously they respect and honor.
But," saith some one, " the poor man is de-
ded, even though he be virtuous." Not among
en, but brutes.^ Wherefore he ought not so
uch as to notice them. For if asses were to
ay and daws chatter at us, while all wise men
mmended us, we should not, losing sight of
is latter audience, have regard to clamors of
e brutes ; for like to daws, and worse than
3es, are they who admire present things.
oreover, if an earthly king approve thee, thou
ikest no account of the many, though they all
ride thee ; but if the Lord of the universe
lise thee, seekest thou the good words of
etles and gnats? For this is what these men
compared with God, or rather not even this,
something viler, if there be aught such. How
do we wallow in the mire ? How long do
set sluggards and belly-gods for our judges ?
ey can prove dicers well, drunkards, those
live for the belly, but as for virtue and vice,


»g


they cannot imagine so much as a dream. If
any one taunt thee because thou hast not skill
to draw the channels of the watercourses,'' thou
wilt not think it any terrible thing, but wilt even
laugh at him who objects to thee ignorance of
this kind ; and dost thou, when thou desirest to
practice virtue, appoint as judges those who
know nothing of it ? On this account we never
reach that art. We commit our case not to the
practiced, but to the unlearned, and they judge
not according to the rules of art, but according
to their own ignorance. Wherefore, I exhort
you, let us despise the many ; or rather let us
desire neither praises, nor possessions, nor
wealth, nor deem poverty any evil. For poverty
is to us a teacher of pnidence, and endurance,
and all true wisdom. Thus Lazarus lived in
poverty, and received a crown ; Jacob desired
to get bread only ; and Joseph was in the ex-
treme of poverty, being not merely a slave, but
also a prisoner ; and on this account we admire
him the more, and we do not so much praise
him when he distributed the corn, as when he
dwelt in the dungeon ; not when he wore the
diadem, but when the chain ; not when he sat
upon the throne, but when he was plotted against
and sold.* Considering then all these things,
and the crowns twined for us after the conflicts,
let us admire not wealth, and honor, and luxury,
and power, but poverty, and the chain, and
bonds, and endurance in the cause of virtue.
For the end of those things is full of troubles
and confusion, and their lot is bound up with
this present life ; but the fruit of these, heaven,
and the good things in the heavens, which neither
eye hath seen, nor ear heard ; which may we all
obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXXVII.

John xv. ii, 12.


lese things have I spoken unto you, that My joy might
remain in you, and that your joy might be full. This
is My commandment, that ye love one another, as I
liave loved you."

I.] All things good then have their reward,

:n they arrive at their proper end, but if they

;ut off midway, shipwreck ensues. And as a

i of immense burden, if it reach not the

T in time, but founder in the midst of the

gains nothing from the length of the voyage.


' no time for.'


* aAdyots.


but even makes the calamity greater, in propor-
tion as it has endured more toils ; so are those
souls which fall back when near the end of their
labors, and faint in the midst of the struggle.
Wherefore Paul said, that glory, and honor, and
peace, should meet those who ran their course
with patient continuance in well-doing. A thing
which Christ now effecteth in the case of the

' Tou? oveTous Twv afiapiav ^Kk^lv. An instance of employment
requiring skill and practice, v. liiad xxi. 257.

* 'EirtoAeiTo. So Morel. Ben. and MSS. Sav. reads cTroAeineiTo,
" was warred against."


282


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVII.


disciples. (Rom. ii. 7.) For since He had ac-
cepted them, and they rejoiced in Him, and
then the sudden coming of the Passion and His
sad words were hkely to cut short their pleasure ;
after having conversed with them sufficiently to
soothe them, He addeth, "These things have I
spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be fulfilled " ; that
is, " that ye might not be separated from Me,
that ye might not cut short your course. Ye
were rejoicing in Me, and ye were rejoicing ex-
ceedingly, but despondency hath fallen upon you.
This then I remove, that joy may come at the
last, showing that your present circumstances
are fit cause, not for pain, but for pleasure. I
saw you offended ; I despised you not ; I said
not, ' Why do ye not continue noble ? ' But I
spake to you words which brought comfort with
them. And so I wish ever to keep you in the
same love. Ye have heard concerning a king-
dom, ye rejoiced. In order therefore that your
joy might be fulfilled, I have spoken these things
unto you." But " this is the commandment, that
ye love one another as I have loved you." Seest
thou that the love of God is intertwined with our
own, and connected like a sort of chain ? Where-
fore it sometimes saith that there are two com-
mandments, sometimes only one. For it is not
possible that the man who hath taken hold on
the first should not possess the second also.
For at one time He said, " On this the Law and
the Prophets hang"' (Matt. xxii. 40) ; and at
another, " Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the
Law and the Prophets." (Matt. vii. 12.) And,
" Love is the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. xiii.
10.) Which He saith also here ; for if to abide
proceeds from love, and love from the keeping of
the commandments, and the commandment is
that we love one another, then the abiding in God
proceeds from love towards each other. And He
doth not simply speak of love, but declareth also
the manner, " As I have loved you." Again He
showeth, that His very departure was not of ha-
tred but of love. " So that I ought rather to be
admired on this account, for I lay down My life
for you."^ Yet nowhere doth He say this in
these words, but in a former place, by sketching
the best shepherd, and here by exhorting them,
and by showing the greatness of His love, and
Himself, who He is. But wherefore doth He
everywhere exalt love ? Because this is the mark
of the disciples, this the bond of virtue.' On
this account Paul saith such great things of it, as
being a genuine disciple of Christ, and having
had experience of it.


* *' On these two commandments," &c.

' Ver, 13. "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man
lay down his life for his friends.** N. T.
' TO avyKftoTOvv Trtv ap.


Ver. 14, 15. "Ye are My friends'* — hence-
forth I call you not servants, for the servant
knoweth not what his lord doeth. Ye are My
friends, for" all things which I have heard of My
Father I have made known unto you."

How then saith He, " I have many things to
tell you, but ye cannot bear them now " ? (c. xvi.
12.) By the " all " and the " hearing " He show-
eth nothing else, but that He uttered nothing alien,
but only what was of the Father. And since to
speak of secrets appears to be the strongest
proof of friendship, " ye have," He saith, " been
deemed worthy even of this communion."
When however He saith " all," He meaneth,
" whatever things it was fit that they should
hear." Then He putteth also another sure
proof of friendship, no common one. Of what
sort was that?

Ver. 16. " Ye have not chosen Me, but I have
chosen you."

That is, I ran upon your friendship. And He
stayed not here, but,

" I set you," * He saith, (that is, " I planted
you,") "that ye should go," (He still use th the
metaphor of the vine,) that is, " that ye should
extend yourselves " ; " and bring forth fruit, ana
that your fruit should remain."

" Now if your fniit remain, much more shall
ye. For I have not only loved you," He saith
" but have done you the greatest benefits, by ex-
tending your branches through all the world.'
Seest thou in how many ways He showeth Hi:
love ? By telling them things secret, by havin)
in the first instance run to meet their friendship
by granting them the greatest blessings, by suf
fering for them what then He suffered. Afte
this. He showeth that He also remaineth contin
ually with those who shall bring forth fruit ; fc
it is needful to enjoy His aid, and so to bear frui f

"That whatsoever ye shall ask of the Fathej
in My Name, He may give it you."

Yet it is the part of the person asked to d|
the thing asked ; but if the Father is asked, hoi
is it that the Son doeth it? It is that thou raa;(
est learn that the Son is not inferior to the Fathe

Ver. 17. "These things I command you, thj
ye love one another."

That is, " It is not to upbraid, that I tell y(^
that I lay down My life for you, or that I ran
meet you, but in order to lead you into frieni
ship." Then, since the being persecuted ail
insulted by the many was a grievous and intoUl
able thing, and enough to humble even a lo'T
soul, therefore, after having said ten thousa)!
things first, Christ entered upon this matte|


* " if ye do whatsoever I command you," N. T.
^ " But I have called you friends, for," &c. N. T.

* " ordained," E. V.
^ What follows seems to be a commentary on ver. i8, omit I

" If the world hate you, ye know that it hated Me before it h!|
you."


lOMILY LXXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


283


Having first smoothed their minds, He thus
Droceedeth to these points, showing that these
;hings too were for their exceeding advantage,
IS He had also shown that the others were. For
IS He had told them that they ought not to
grieve, but rather to rejoice, " because I go to
:he Father," (since He did this not as desert-
ng but as greatly loving them,) so here also He
ihoweth that they ought to rejoice, not grieve.
\nd observe how He effecteth this. He said
lot, " I know that the action is grievous, but
)ear for My sake, since for My sake also ye
;uffer," for this reason was not yet sufficient to
•-onsole them ; wherefore letting this pass. He
')utteth forward another. And what is that?
1 1 is that this thing ' would be a sure proof of
heir former virtue. " And, on the contrary, ye
lught to grieve, not because ye are hated now,
lut if ye were likely to be loved " ; for this He
mplieth by saying,
Ver. 19. " If ye were of the world, the world
ould love its own." "

So that had ye been loved it would be very
lear that ye had shown forth signs of wicked-
ess. Then, when by saying this first. He did
ot effect his purpose. He goeth on again with
discourse.
Ver. 20. " The servant is not greater than
lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will
Iso persecute you."'
He showed that in this point they would be
lost His imitators. For while Christ was in the
esh, men had war with Him, but when He was
anslated, the battle came in the next place
Don them. Then because owing to their few-
ss they were terrified at being about to en-
mnter the attack of so great a multitude. He
iseth their souls by telling them that it was
especial subject of joy that they were hated
them ; " For so ye shall share My sufferings,
should not therefore be troubled, for ye are
It better than I," as I before told you, " The
rvant is not greater than his lord." Then
re is also a third source of consolation, that
e Father also is insulted together with them.
Ver. 21. "But all these things will they do
to you for My Name's sake, because they
ow not Him that sent Me."
That is, " they insult Him also." Besides
s, depriving those others of excuse, and put-
g also another source of comfort. He saith,
Ver. 22. " If I had not come and spoken unto
sin, they had not had sin." *
Showing that they shall do unjustly both what
y do against Him and against them. " Why


l.e. persecution.

" But because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
of the world, therefore the world hateth you." N. T.

Ver. 20. " Remember the word that I said unto you, The
ant,'* &c., adding, " If they have kept My saying, they will
I yinirs also." N. T.

" but now they have no cloke for their sin," N. T.


then didst Thou ' bring us into such calamities ?
Didst Thou not foreknow the wars, the hatred ? "
Therefore again He saith,

Ver. 23. "He that hateth Me, hateth My
Father also."

From this also proclaiming beforehand no
small punishment against them. For, since they
continually pretended that they persecuted Him
on account of the Father, to deprive them of
this excuse He spake these words. " They have
no excuse. I gave them the teaching which
is by words, that by works I added, according
to the Law of Moses, who bade all men obey
one speaking and doing such things, when he
should both lead to piety, and exhibit the great-
est miracles." ° And He spake not simply of
" signs," but,
Ver. 24. " Which none other man did." '
And of this they themselves are witnesses,
speaking in this way ; " It was never so seen in
Israel " (Matt. ix. 33) ; and, " Since the world
began was it not heard that any man opened
the eyes of one that was born blind " (c. ix. 32) ;
and the matter of Lazarus was of the same kind,
and all the other acts the same, and the mode
of wonder-working new, and all beyond' thought.
" Why then," saith one, " do they persecute
both Thee and us ? " " Because ye are not of the
world. If ye were of the world, the world would
love its own." (Ver. 19.) He first remindeth
them of the words which He spake also to His
own brethren (c. vii. 7) ; but there he spake
more by way of a reflection,^ lest He should
offend them, while here, on the contrary. He
revealed all. " And how is it clear that it is on
this account that we are hated?" " From what
was done to Me. For, tell Me, which of My
words or deeds could they lay hold on, that
they would not receive Me?" Then since the
thing would be astounding to us. He telleth the
cause ; that is, their wickedness. And He stayeth
not here either, but introduceth the Prophet
(Ps. XXXV. 19 ; Ixix. 4), showing him proclaiming
before of old time, and saying, that,

Ver. 25. "They hated Me without a cause.""
[3.] \Vhich Paul doth also. For when many
wondered how that the Jews believed not, he
brings in Prophets foretelling it of old, and de-
claring the cause ; that their wickedness and
pride were the cause of their unbelief. " Well
then ; if they kept not Thy saying, neither will
they keep ours ; if they persecuted Thee, there-
fore they will persecute us also ; if they saw
signs, such as none other man wrought ; if they

5 al. '■didHe."
'^ Implied in Deut. xiii. where it is written, that the prophet or

dreamer who teaches idolatry is uoi to be followed.

' Ver. 24. " If I had not done among them the works that none

other man did, they had not had sin ; but now have they both seen

and hated botli Me and My Father." N. T. ^

* Ben. " new and beyond." * riHtKwTipov.

"» Ver. 25. " But that the word might be fulfilled that is written

in their law, They," &c. N. T.


284


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


i


[Homily LXXVII.


heard words such as none other spake, and
profited nothing ; if they hate Thy Father and
Thee with Him, wherefore," saith one, "hast
Thou sent us in among them ? How after this
shall we be worthy of belief? which of our kin-
dred will give heed to us?" That they may
not therefore be troubled by such thoughts, see
what sort of comfort he addeth.

Ver. 26, 27. "When the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father,
even the Spirit of Tnith, which proceedeth from
the Father, He shall testify of Me. And ye
also shall bear witness, because ye have been
with Me from the beginning."

" He shall be worthy of belief, for He is the
Spirit of Truth." On this account He called It
not " Holy Spirit," but " Spirit of Truth." But
the, " proceedeth from the Father," showeth
that He' knoweth all things exactly, as Christ
also saith of Himself, that " I know whence I
come and whither I go " (c. viii. 14), speaking
in that place also concerning truth. " Whom I
will send." Behold, it is no longer the Father
alone, but the Son also who sendeth. " And
ye too," He saith, " have a right to be believed,
who have been with Me, who have not heard
from others." Indeed, the Apostles confidently
rely on this circumstance, saying, " We who did
eat and drink with Him." (Acts x. 41.) And to
show that this was not merely said to please, the
Spirit beareth witness to the words spoken. (Acts
X. 44.)

Ch. xvi. ver. i . " These things have I spoken
unto you, that ye should not be offended."

That is, " when ye see many disbelieve, and
yourselves ill-treated."

Ver. 2. " They shall put you out of the syna-
gogues."

(For " the Jews had already agreed, that if
any one should confess Christ, he should be put
out of the synagogues " — c. ix. 22.)

" Yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth
you will think that he doeth God service."

"They shall so seek after ^ your murder, as
of an action pious and pleasing to God." Then
again He addeth the consolation,

Ver. 3. " And these things will they do," be-
cause they have not known the Father, nor Me."

" It is sufficient for your comfort that ye
endure these things for My sake, and the
Father's." Here He remindeth them of the
blessedness of which He spake at the begin-
ning, " Blessed are ye, when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and shall say all man-
ner of evil against you falsely, for My sake.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad ; for great is
your reward in heaven." (Matt. v. 11, 12.)

Ver. 4. " These things have I told you, that


' i.e. the Holy Ghost.
^ al. " think of."


* " do unto you," N. T.


when the time shall come, ye may remember
them." *

" So, judging from these words, deem the
rest also trustworthy. For ye will not be able
to say, that I flatteringly told you only those
things which would please you, nor that the
words were words of deceit ; for one who in-
tended to deceive, would not have told you be-
forehand of matters likely to turn you away.
I have therefore told you before, that these
things might not fall upon you unexpectedly,
and trouble you ; and for another reason be-
sides, that ye might not say, that I did not fore-
know that these things would be. Remember
then that I have told you." And indeed the
heathen always covered their persecutions of
them by a pretense of their wickedness, driving
them out as corrupters ; but this did not trouble
the disciples who had heard beforehand, and
knew for what they suffered. The cause of
what took place was sufficient to rouse their
courage. Therefore He everywhere handletli !
this, saying, " they have not known Me " ; and,
" for My sake they shall do it " ; and, " for
My Name's sake, and for the Father's sake " •
and, " I suffered first " ; and, " from no just cause
they dare these things."

[4.] Let us too consider these things in our
temptations, when we suffer anything from wicked
men, "looking to the Beginner' and Finisher
of our faith " (Heb. xii. 2), and considering that
it is by wicked men, and that it is for virtue':
sake, and for His sake. For if we reflect or
these things, all will be most easy and tolerable
Since if one suffering for those he loves is ever
proud of it, what feeling of things dreadful wil
he have who suffers for the sake of God ? Fo
if He, for our sake, calleth that shameful thing
the Cross, "glory" (c. xiii. 31), much mor
ought we to be thus disposed. And if we car
so despise sufferings, much more shall we be abl
to despise riches, and covetousness. We ough
then, when about to endure anything unpleasani
to think not of the toils but of the crowns ; fo
as merchants take into account not the sea
only, but also the profits, so ought we to recko
on heaven and confidence towards God. An
if the getting more seem a pleasant thing, thin
that Christ willeth it not, and straightway it wi
appear displeasing. And if it be grievous t
you to give to the poor, stay not your reckonir
at the expense, but straightway transport yet
thoughts to the harvest which results from tl
sowing; and when it is hard to despise the loi
of a strange woman, think of the crown \vhi(
comes after the struggle, and thou shalt easi
bear the struggle. For if fear diverts a mi
from unseemly things, much more should tl


' " may remember that I told you of them," N. T.
' apxijybv, so rendered in margin of E. V.


lOMILY LXXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


285


)ve of Christ. Difficult is virtue ; but let us
ast around her form the greatness of the prom-
;e of things to come. Indeed those who are
irtuous, even apart from these promises, see
er beautiful in herself, and on this account go
fter her, and work because it seems good to
iod, not for hire; and they think it a great
ling to be sober-minded, not in order that they
lay not be punished, but because God hatli
pmmanded it. But if any one is too weak for
lis, let him think of the prizes. So let us do
|i respect of alms-doing, let us pity our fellow-
lien, let us not, I entreat,' neglect them when
srishing with hunger. How can it be ether-
ise than an unseemly thing, that we should sit
; the table laughing and enjoying ourselves,
id when we hear others wailing as they pass
ough the street, should not even turn at their
ies, but be wroth with them, and call them
cheat"? "What meanest thou, man? Doth
ly one plan a cheat for a single loaf of bread ? "
Yes," saith some one. Then in this case above
let him be pitied ; in this case above all let
m be delivered from his need. Or if thou art
minded to give, do not insult either ; if thou
It not save the wreck, do not thrust it into the
If For consider, when thou thrustest away
poor man who comes to thee, who thou
It be when thou callest upon God. "With
lat measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
u again." (Matt. vii. 2.) Consider how he
parts, crushed, bowed down, lamenting ; be-
les his poverty having received also the blow
m your insolence. For if ye count the beg-
ig a curse, think what a tempest it makes,
gging to get nothing, but to go away insulted.
)w long shall we be like wild beasts, and know
nature itself through greediness? Many
)an at these words ; but I desire them not
w, but always, to have this feeling of compas-
Think, I pray you, of that day when we
ill stand before the judgment-seat of Christ,
n we shall beg for mercy, and Christ, bring-
them forward, shall say, " For the sake of
ingle loaf, of a single obol, so great a surge
ye raise in these souls ! " What shall we
ly? What defense shall we make? To
w that He will bring them forward, hear
.t He saith ; " Inasmuch as ye did it not to
; of these, ye did it not to Me." (Matt. xxv.
y They will no more say anything to us, but
" on their behalf will upbraid us. Since the
I man saw Lazarus too,^ and Lazarus said
ing to him, but Abraham spake for him ;
thus it will be in the case of the poor who
now despised by us. We shall not see them
Itching out their hands in pitiful state, but
ig in rest ; and we shall take the state which


laL " nor let us."


^ i.e. as well as Abraham.


was theirs (and would that it were that state
only, and not one much more grievous) as a
punishment. For neither did the rich man
desire to be filled with crumbs " there," but
was scorched and tormented sharply, and was
told, " Thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things." (Luke
xvi. 25.) Let us not then deem wealth any
great thing ; it will help us on our way to pun-
ishment, if we take not heed, just as, if we take
heed, poverty also becomes to us an addition of
enjoyment and rest. For we both put off our
sins if we bear it with thankfulness, and gain
great boldness before God.

[5.] Let us then not be ever seeking security
here, in order that we may enjoy security there ;
but let us accept the labors which are in behalf
of virtue, and cut off superfluities, and seek
nothing more than we need, and spend all our
substance on those who want. Since what ex-
cuse can we have, when God promiseth heaven
to us, and we will not even give Him bread?
when He indeed for thee maketh the sun to rise,
and supplieth all the ministry of the Creation,
but thou dost not even give Him a garment, nor
allow Him to share thy roof? But why speak
I of sun and moon? He hath set His Body
before thee. He hath given thee His Precious
Blood ; and dost thou not even impart to Him
of thy cup ? But hast thou done so for once ?
This is not mercy ; as long as, having the means,
thou helpest not, thou hast not yet fulfilled the
whole duty. Thus the virgins who had the
lamps, had oil, but npt in abundance. Why,
thou oughtest, even didst thou give from thine
own, not to be so miserly, but now when thou
givest what is thy Lord's, why countest thou
every little ? Will ye that I tell you the cause
of this inhumanity? When men get together
their wealth through greediness, these same are
slow to give alms ; for one who has learnt so to
gain, knows not how to spend. For how can a
man prepared for rapine adapt himself to its
contrary ? He who takes from others, how shall
he be able to give up his own to another? A
dog accustomed to feed on flesh cannot guard
the flock ; therefore the shepherds kill such.
That this be not our fate, let us refrain from
such feasting. For these men too feed on flesh,
when they bring on death by hunger. Seest
thou not how God hath allowed to us all things
in common ? If amid riches He hath suffered
men to be poor, it is for the consolation of the
rich, that they may be able by showing mercy
towards them to put off their sins. But thou
even in this hast been cruel and inhuman ;
whence it is evident, that if thou hadst received
this same power in greater things, thou would-
est have committed" ten thousand murders,
and wouldest have debarred men from light,


286


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVIII.


and from life altogether.' That this might not
take place, necessity hath cut short insatiable-
ness in such matters.

If ye are pained when ye hear these things,,
much more I when I see them taking place.
How long shalt thou be rich, and that man poor?
Till evening, but no farther ; for so short is life,
and all things so near their end,^ and all things
henceforth so stand at the door, that the whole
must be deemed but a little hour. What need
hast thou of bursting ' storehouses, of a multitude
of domestics and house-keepers ? Why hast thou
not ten thousand proclaimers of thy almsdoing ?
The storehouse utters no voice, yet will it bring
upon thee many robbers ; but the storehouses


of the poor will go up to God Himself, and will
make thy present life sweet, and put away all thy
sins, and thou shalt gain glory from God, and
honor from men. Why then grudgest thou thy-
self such good things ? For thou wilt not do so
much good to the poor, as to thyself, when thou
benefitest them. Thou wilt right their present
state ; but for thyself thou wilt lay up before-
hand the glory and confidence which shall be
hereafter. And this may we all obtain, by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost be the glory and the might for ever.
Amen.


HOMILY LXXVIII.

John xvi. 4-6.


" These things I said not unto you at the beginning, be-
cause I was with you. But now I go My way to
Him that sent Me; and none of you asketh Me,
Whither goest Thou? But because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart."

[ I .] Great is the tyranny of despondency, and
much courage do we need so as to stand man-
fully against the feeling, and after gathering from
it what is useful, to let the superfluous go. It
hath somewhat useful ; for when we ourselves or
others sin, then only is it good to grieve ; but
when we fall into human vicissitudes, then de-
spondency is useless. And now when it has
overthrown the disciples who were not yet per-
fect, see how Christ raiseth them again by His
rebuke. They who before this had asked Him
ten thousand questions, (for Peter said, "Whither
goest Thou?" [c. xiii. 36] ; and Thomas, " We
know not whither Thou goest, and how can we
know the way?" [c. xiv. 5 and 8] ; and Philip,
"Show us Thy Father" ;) these men, I say, now
hearing, "they will put you out of the syna-
gogues," and "will hate you," and "whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God ser-
vice," were so cast down as to be struck dumb,
so that they spake nothing to Him. This then
He maketh a reproach to them, and saith,
" These things I said not unto you at the be-
ginning, because I was with you ; but now I go
unto Him that sent Me, and none of you asketh
Me, Whither goest Thou ? but because I have
said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled
your heart." For a dreadful thing is immod-


' lit. " all life."


' Ben. omiti " all things lo near their end.'


erate sorrow, dreadful and eflfective of death
Wherefore Paul said, " Lest perhaps such a one
should be swallowed up by overmuch sorrow.'
(2 Cor. ii. 7.)

" And these things," saith He, " I told yoi
not at the beginning." Why did He not tel
them at the beginning? That none might sa;
that He spake guessing from the ordinary course
of events. And why did He enter on a matte
of such unpleasantness ? " I knew these things, \
He saith, " from the beginning, and spake not c
them; not because I did not know them, bi|
' because I was with you.' " And this again ws^
spoken after a human manner, as though He ha
said, " Because ye were in safety, and it was i :
your power to question Me when ye would, aUi
all the storm blew upon Me, and it was supei
fluous to tell you these things at the beginnings
"But did He not tell them this? Did He mi
call the twelve, and say unto them, ' Ye shf ^
be brought before governors and kings for ^f|l
sake,' and, 'they shall scourge you in the synj
gogues '? (Matt. x. 18, 17). How then saith H!i
' I told you not at the beginning ' ? " Becau \
He had proclaimed before the scourgings ai?
bringing before princes, still not that thfi
death should appear so desirable that the actiit
should even be deemed a service to God. F'
this more than anything was suited to terrj ;
them, that they were to be judged as impiof
and corrupters. This too may be said, that
that place He spake of what they should suf
from the Gentiles, but here He hath added ir
stronger way the acts of the Jews also, and tc
them that it was at their doors.


Homily LXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


287


" But now I go to Him that sent Me, and no
man of you saith, Whither goest Thou ? But be-
cause I have said these things unto you, sorrow
hath filled your heart." It was no slight com-
fort to them to learn that He knew the excess
of their despondency. For they were beside
themselves from the anguish caused by their
being left by Him, and from their awaiting the
terrible things which were to come, since they
knew not whether they should be able to bear
them manfully. " Why then after this did He
not tell them that they had been vouchsafed the
Spirit?" That thou mightest learn that they
were exceedingly virtuous. For if, when they
had not yet been vouchsafed the Spirit, they
started not back, though overwhelmed with sor-
row, consider what sort of men they were likely
to be after having enjoyed the grace.' If they
had heard this at that time, and so had endured,
we should have attributed the whole to the
Spirit, but now it is entirely the fruit of their
Dwn state of mind, it is a clear manifestation of
their love for Christ, who applieth a touchstone
i:o their mind as yet defenseless.

!Ver. 7. " But I tell you the truth." "
Observe how He consoleth them again. " I
jpeak not," He saith, " to please you, and al-
hough you be grieved ten thousand fold, yet must
e hear what is for your good ; it is indeed to
our liking that I should be with you, but what
; expedient for you is different. And it is the
lart of one caring for others, not to be over
entle with his friends in matters which concern
leir interests, or to lead them away from what

good for them."

" For if I go not away, the Comforter will not
ome." ^

What here say those who hold not the fitting
(pinion concerning the Spirit? Is it " expedi-
it " that the master depart, and the servant
5me ? Seest thou how great is the honor of the
Wt?

"But if I depart, I will send Him unto you."
Jnd what the gain ?

Ver. 8. " He, when He is come, will reprove*
i|e world." "

That is, " they shall not do these things un-

nished if He come. For indeed, the things

!~it have been already done, are sufficient to
)p their mouths ; but when these things are
o done by Him, when doctrines are more
^rfect and miracles greater, much more shall
tj!y be condemned when they see such things

;ne in My Name, which make the proof of the
surrection more certain. For now they are
to say, ' this is the carpenter's son, whose


^r, *' gift."

" The truth; it is expedient for you that I go away." N. T.

" come unto you," N. T. * or. " convince."

" Will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of

lu mem." N. T.


father and mother we know ' ; but when they see
the bands of death loosed, wickedness cast out,
natural lameness straightened, devils expelled,
abundant supply of the Spirit, and all this
effected by My being called on, what will they
say? The Father hath borne witness of Me,
and the Spirit will bear witness also." Yet He
bare witness at the beginning. Yea, and shall
also do it now. But the, " will convince,"

Ver. 9. "Of sin." «

This meaneth, " will cut off all their excuses,
and show that they have transgressed unpardon-
ably."

Ver. 10. "Of righteousness, because I go to
the^ Father, and ye see Me no more."

That is, " I have exhibited a blameless * life,
and this is the proof, that, ' I go to the Father.' "
For since they continually urged this against
Him, that He was not from God, and therefore
called Him a sinner and transgressor, He saith,
that the Spirit shall take from them this excuse
also. " For if My being deemed not to be from
God, showeth Me to be a transgressor, when the
Spirit shall have shown that I am gone thither,
not merely for a season, but to abide there, (for
the, ' Ye see Me no more,' is the expression of
one declaring this,) what will they say then?"
Observe how by these two things, their evil
suspicion is removed ; since neither doth work-
ing miracles belong to a sinner, (for a sinner
cannot work them,) nor doth the being with
God continually belong to a sinner. "So that
ye can ^ no longer say, that ' this man is a sinner,'
that ' this man is not from God.' "

Ver. II." Of judgment, because the prince of
this world is judged."

Here again He mooteth the argument con-
cerning righteousness, that He had overthrown
His opponent. Now had He been a sinner. He
could not have overthrown him ; a thing which
not even any just man had been strong enough
to do. " But that he hath been condemned
through Me, they shall know who trample on
him hereafter, and who clearly know My Resur-
rection, which is the mark of Him who con-
demneth him. For he was not able to hold Me.
And whereas they said that I had a devil, and
that I was a deceiver, these things also shall
hereafter appear to be false ; *" for I could not
have prevailed against him, had I been subject
to sin ; but now he is condemned and cast out."

[2.] Ver. 12. "I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now."

"Therefore it is expedient for you that I
depart, if ye then will bear them when I am
departed." " And what hath come to pass ? Is
the Spirit greater than Thou, that now indeed


" " of sin, because they believe not i

' '_' My," N. T.

* aXrfiTTov, * al. '* he can."


1 Me." N. T.

" lu\a, lit. " sule."


288


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVIU


we bear not, but It will fit us to bear? Is It
working more powerful and more perfect?"
" Not so ; for He too shall speak My words."
Wherefore He saith,

Ver. 13-15. '"He shall not speak of Him-
self; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall
He speak; and He will show you things to
come. He shall glorify Me ; for He shall receive
of Mine, and shall show it unto you. All things
that the Father hath are Mine." ^

For since He had told them, that " ' He shall
teach you, and bring to your remembrance '
(c. xiv. 26), and shall comfort you in your afflic-
tions," (which He Himself did not,) and that
" it is expedient for you that I should depart "
(ver. 7), and that He should come, and, " 'now
ye are not able to bear ' (ver. 12), but then ye shall
be able," and, that " He shall lead you into all
truth" (ver. 13) ; lest hearing these things they
should suppose the Spirit to be the greater, and
so fall into an extreme opinion of impiety, there-
fore He saith, " He shall receive of Mine," that
is, " whatsoever things I have told you. He shall
also tell you." When He saith, " He shall speak
nothing of Himself," He meaneth, "nothing
contrary, nothing of His own opposed to My
words." As then in saying respecting Himself,
" I speak not of Myself" (c. xiv. 10), He mean-
eth that He speaketh nothing beside what the
Father saith, nothing of His own against Him,
or differing from Him, so also with respect to
the Spirit. But the, " of Mine," meaneth, "of
what I know," " of My own knowledge " ; " for
the knowledge of Me and of the Spirit is one."

" And He will tell you things to come." He
excited their minds, for the race of man is for
nothing so greedy,^ as for learning the future.
This, for instance, they continually asked Him,
" Whither goest Thou ? " "Which is the way?"
To free them therefore from this anxiety. He
saith, " He shall foretell you all things, so that
ye shall not meet with them without warning."

" He shall glorify Me." How ? " In My name
He shall grant His inward workings." For since
at the coming of the Spirit they were about to
do greater miracles, therefore, again introducing
the Equality of Honor, He saith, " He shall
glorify Me."

What meaneth He by, " all tmth " ? for this
also He testifieth of Him, that " He shall guide
us into all truth." (Ver. 13.) Because He was
clothed with the flesh, and because He would
not seem to speak concerning Himself, and be-
cause they did not yet know clearly concern-
ing the Resurrection, and were too imperfect,
and also because of the Jews, that they might


' Ver. 13. ** Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come,
He will guide yoii into all truth ; for He shall not speak," &c. N. T.

2 '* are Mine, therefore said I, that He shall take of Mine, and
shall show it unto you." N. T.


not think they were punishing Him as a trans
gressor ; therefore He spake no great thing con
tinually, nor plainly drew them away from th
Law. But when the disciples were cut off fror
them,* and were for the future without ; an(
when many were about to believe, and to b
released from their sins ; and when there wer
others who spake of Him, He with good reaso:
spake not great things concerning Himself. " S
that it proceeded not from ignorance of Mine,
He saith, "that I told you not what I shoul(
have told you, but from the infirmity of th
hearers." On this account having said, " H
shall lead you into all truth," He added, " H
shall not speak of Himself." For to show th;
the Spirit needeth not teaching, hear Paul sayinj
" So also the things of God knoweth no mai
but the Spirit of God." (i Cor. ii. 11.) " ^
then the spirit of man, not learning from anothe
knoweth ; so also the Holy Spirit ' shall recei\
of Mine,' " that is, " shall speak in unison wit
what is Mine."

" All things that the Father hath are Mine
" Since then those things are Mine, and He shr
speak from the things of the Father, He sha,
speak from Mine."

[3.] " But why did not the Spirit come befo
He departed?" Because the curse not havii
yet been taken away, sin not yet loosed, but
being yet subject to vengeance. He could n
come. " It is necessary then," saith He,
the enmity be put away, that we be reconciled
God, and then receive that Ciift." But why saj
He, "I will send Him " ? (Ver. 7.) It meaner
" I will prepare you beforehand to receive Hin:
For, how can that which Is everywhere,
"sent"? Besides, He also showeth the d
tinction of the Persons. On these two accouj
He thus speaketh ; and also, since they w(
hardly to be drawn away from Himself, exho
ing them to hold fast to the Spirit, and in on
that they might cherish It. For He Him!
was able to have wrought these things, but '.
concedeth to the Spirit'' the working of mi
cles," on this account, that they might undersi
His" dignity. For as the Father could hi
brought into being things which are, yet the i
did so, that we might understand His poweri
also is it in this case. On this account He H -
self was made Flesh, reserving the inward w< •
ing' for the Spirit, shutting up the mouths if
those who take the argument of His ineff: ,e
love for an occasion of impiety. For when 1 'y
say that the Son was made flesh because He is
inferior to the leather, we will reply to thn,
" what then will ye say of the Spirit ? " He ( >k
not the flesh, and yet certainly on this acci nt


* i.e. the Jews. " eKeivw.

" al. " concedeth that It should work," &c.
' i.e. the Spirit's. " al. " nobleness."


tH


Homily LXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


289


yc will not call Him greater than the Son, nor
the Son inferior to Him Therefore, in the case
of baptism also the Trinity is included. The
Father is able to effect the whole, as is the Son,
and the Holy Ghost ; yet, since concerning the
Father no man doubts, but the doubt was con-
cerning the Son, and the Holy Ghost, They are
included in the rite, that by Their community
in supplying those unspeakable blessings, we
may also fully learn Their community in dignity.
For that both the Son is able by Himself to do
that which in the case of baptism * He is able
to do with the Father, and the Holy Ghost the
same, hear these things said plainly. For to the
Jews He said, " That ye may know that the Son
of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins"
(Mark ii. 10) ; and again, "That ye may be-
come children of light" (c. xii. 36) : and, "I
give to them eternal life." (c. x. 28.) Then
after this, "That they might have life, and might
have it more abundantly." (c. x. 10.) Now let
us see the Spirit also performing the same thing.
Where can we see it ? " But the manifestation
of the Spirit," it saith, " is given to every man
to profit withal" (i Cor. xii. 7 ; c. vi. 63) ; He
then that giveth these things, much more re-
mitteth sins. And again, " It is the Spirit that
quickeneth " ; and, " Shall quicken you^ by His
Spirit which dwelleth in you" (Rom. viii. 11) ;
and, " The Spirit is Life because of righteous-
ness " (Rom. viii. 10) ; and, " If ye are led by
the Spirit, ye are not under the Law." (Gal. v.
18.) " For ye have not received the Spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the
Spirit of adoption." (Rom. viii. 15.) All the
wonders too which they then wrought, they
wrought at the coming of the Spirit. And Paul
writing to the Corinthians, said, " But ye have
been washed, but ye have been sanctified in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ,' and by the Spirit
of our God." (i Cor. vi. II.) Since then they
had heard many things of the Father, and had
seen the Son work many things, but as yet knew
nothing clearly of the Spirit, that Spirit doeth
miracles, and bringeth in the perfect knowledge.
I But (as I said before) that He may not thence
be supposed to be greater, on this account Christ
I saith, " Whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He
'speak ; and He will show you things to come."
Since, if this be not so, how could it be othenvise
ihan absurd, if He was about to hear then, and
on account of those who were being made dis-
ciples? For according to you,* He would not
1 ven then know, except on account of those who
^^ ere about to hear. What could be more unlaw-
ful than this saying? Besides, what would He
liave to hear? Did He not speak'' all these


' al. " upon the Throne" (firtttaToi) .
' *' your mortal bodies,** N. T.
' "Lord Jesus," N. T.


* i.e. heretical objectors.
'* al. "foretell."


things by the Prophets ? For if He was about
to teach concerning the dissolution of the Law,
it had been spoken of: if concerning Christ,
His Divinity and the Dispensation, these had
been spoken of also. What could He say more
clearly after this ?

"And shall show you things to come." Here
most of all Christ showeth His" Dignity, for to
foretell things to come is especially the property
of God. Now if He' also learn this from others,
He will have nothing more than the Prophets,
but here Christ declareth a knowledge brought
into exact accordance with God, that it is im-
possible that He should speak anything else.
But the, "shall receive of Mine," meaneth,
" shall receive, either of the grace ' which came
into My Flesh, or of the knowledge which I also
have, not as needing it, nor as learning it from
another, but because it is One and the same."
"And wherefore spake He thus, and not other-
wise ? " Because they understand not yet the
word concerning the Spirit, wherefore He pro-
videth for one thing only, that the Spirit should
be believed and received by them, and that they
should not be offended. For since He had said,
" One is your Teacher, even Christ " (Matt, xxiii.
10), that they might not deem that they should
disobey Him in obeying the Spirit, He saith,
" His teaching and Mine are One ; of what I
should have taught, of those things shall He also
speak. Do not suppose His words are other
than Mine, for those words are Mine, and con-
firm My opinion.' For One is the will of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."
Thus also He willeth us to be, when He saith,
"That they may be one, as Thou and I are
One."'" (c. xvii. 11.)

[4.] There is nothing equal to unanimity and
concord ; for so one is manifold. If two or ten
are of one mind, the one is one no longer, but
each one is multiplied tenfold, and thou wilt find
the one in the ten, and the ten in the one ; and
if they have an enemy, he who attacks the one,
as having attacked the ten, is vanquished ; for he
is the mark not for one, but for ten opponents."
Is one in want? No, he is not in want, for he
is wealthy in his greater part, that is, in the nine ;
and the needy part, the lesser, is concealed by
the wealthy part, the greater. Each of these
hath twenty hands, twenty eyes, and as many
feet. For he sees not with his own eyes alone,
but with those of others ; he walks'^ not with his
own feet alone, but with those of others ; he
works not with his own hands alone, but with
theirs. He hath ten souls, for not only doth he
take thought for himself, but those souls also for


• i.e. the Spirit*s.


' Gr.


ipit


or, *' luaintain my glory.'


i» " as We," N. T.

^* or, " edges," aTOtiaTuv,

" al. " bears."


29©


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVIII.


him. And if they be made a hundred, it will
still be the same, and their power will be ex-
tended. Seest thou the excess of love, how it
makes the one both irresistible and manifold,
how one can even be in many places, the same
both in Persia and in Rome, and that what
nature cannot do, love can? for one part of him
will be here, and one there, or rather he will be
wholly here and wholly there. If then he have
a thousand or two thousand friends, consider
again whither his power will extend. Seest thou
what an increase-giving thing is love? for the
wonderful thing is this, its making one a thou-
sand. Why then do we not acquire this power
and place ourselves in safety? This is better
than all power or riches,' this is more than
health, than light itself, it is the groundwork of
good courage. How long do we set our love on
one or two? Consider also the action in the
contrary way. Suppose a man without a friend,
a mark of the utmost folly, (for a fool will say,
"I have no friend,") what sort of life will such
a one lead ? For though he be infinitely rich,
in plenty and luxury, possessed of ten thousand
good things, yet is he desolate and bare of all.
But in the case of friends not so ; though they
be poor men, yet are they better provided than
the wealthy ; and the things which a man under-
takes not to say for himself, a friend will say for
him, and whatever gratifications he is not able to
procure for himself, he will be enabled to obtain.
by means of another, and much more ; and it
will be to us the groundwork of all enjoyment
and safety, since one who is guarded by so many
spearmen cannot suffer harm. For the king's body
guards are not equal in their strictness to these.
The one perform their watch through compul-
sion and fear, the others through kindness and
love ; and love is far mightier than fear. The
king fears his own guards ; the friend is more
confident in them than in himself, and by reason
of them fears none of those that plot against him.
Let us then engage in this traffic ; the poor man,
that he may have consolation in his poverty ; the
rich, that he may possess his wealth in safety ;
the ruler, that he may rule with safety;^ the


* al. " than all riches."

s Sav. edition has, iVa /irra d{r(/>aActaf dff^oAei'f apx^t which
■eeizis to be an error of the press.


ruled, that he may have benevolent rulers. This
is the source of kindness, this the groundwork of
gentleness ; since even among beasts, those are
the most fierce and untamable which are not
gregarious. For this cause we dwell in cities,
and have public places, that- we may converse
with one another. This also Paul commanded,
saying, " Not forsaking the assembling of our-
selves together'.' (Heb. x. 25) ; for no evil is so
great as solitariness, and the state which is with-
out compact and intercourse. "What then,"
saith some one, " of the solitaries, and of those
who have occupied the summits of the moun-
tains?" That neither are they without friends
they have indeed fled from the turmoil of com-
mon life, but they have many of one soul, wit!
them, and closely bound together one to another
and they have retired that they might rightl;
accomplish this thing.^ For since the rivalry o
business causes many disputes, therefore, remov
ing from among men, they cultivate* love wit)
much exactness. " But how," saith some one
" if a man be alone can he have ten thousan(
friends ? " I, for my part, desire, if it be possible
that men should know how to dwell one wit'
another ; but for the present let the propertie
of friendship remain unshaken." For it is nc
place which makes friends. They, for instance
have many who admire them ; now these woul
not have admired had they not loved then
Again, they pray for all the world, which is th
greatest proof of friendship. For this cause w
salute one another at the Mysteries, that beir
many we may become one ; and in the case <
the uninitiated,* we make our prayers commo
supplicating for the sick, and for the, produce
the world, for land and sea. Seest thou all t!
power of love ? in the prayers, in the Mysterie
in the exhortations ? This is that which cause
all good things. If we hold carefully to this, \
shall both rightly dispense things present, ai
also obtain the Kingdom ; which may we ;
obtain through the grace and lovingkindness ^
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whoi
to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory,
ever and ever. Amen.


* i.e. might perfect love. * yeiapyoiKri, lit. " till.'

8 i.e. the objection does not shake my argument.
^ i.e. noQ-communicants.


Homily LXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


391


HOMILY LXXIX.


John xvi. 16, 17.


" A little while, and ye shall not see ' Me : and again, a
little while, and ye shall see Me, because I go to
the Father. Then said some of His disciples among
themselves, What is this that He saith?" [And
what follows."] .

[i.] NoTHrNG is wont so to cast down the soul
that is anguished and possessed by deep despon-
dency, as when words which cause pain are con-
tinually dwelt upon. Why then did Christ, after
saying, "I go," and, "Hereafter I will not speak
wth you," continually dwell on the same sub-
ject, saying, " A little while, and ye shall not see
Me, because I go to Him that sent Me"?^
When He had recovered them by His words
concerning the Spirit, He again casteth down
their courage. Wherefore doth He this? He
testeth their feelings, and rendereth them more
proved, and well accustometh them by hearing
sad things, manfully to bear separation from
Him; for they who had practiced this when
spoken of in words, were likely in actions also
easily to bear it afterwards. And if one enquire
closely, this very thing is a consolation,* the
saying that, " I go to the Father." For it is the
expression of One, who declares that He shall
not perish, but that His end is a kind of trans-
lation. He addeth too another consolation ; for
He saith not merely, "A little while, and ye
shall not see Me," but also, "A htde while, and
ye shall see Me " ; showing that He will both
come to them again, and that their separation
would be but for a little while, and His presence
with them continual. This, however, they did
not understand. Whence one may with reason
wonder how, after having often heard these
things, they doubt, as though they had heard
nothing. How then is it that they did not
understand? It was either through grief, as I
suppose, for that drove what was said from their
understanding ; or through the obscurity of the
words. Because He seemed to them to set
forth two contraries, which were not contrary.
" If," saith one of them, " we shall see Thee,
whither goest Thou ? And if Thou goest, how
shall we see Thee ? " Therefore they say, " We
cannot tell what He saith." That He was about
to depart, they knew ; but they knew not that
He would shortly come to them. On which


J a!. " yc no longer see."

" Part of vcr. 17 and vcr. 18. "A little while, and yc shall not see
Me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see Me: and. Because I
10 to the Falher. They said therefore, What is this that He saith,

• vf *''■''=' »'= cannot tell what He saith."

• to the Father," N. T. ' al. " is of consolation,"


account He rebuketh them, because they did
not understand His saying. For, desiring to
infix in* them the doctrine concerning His
death, what saith He ?

Ver. 20.° " Verily, verily, I say unto you. That
ye shall weep and lament" — which belonged
to the Death and the Cross — "but the world
shall rejoice."

Because by reason of their not desiring His
death, they quickly ran into the belief that He
would not die, and then when they heard that
He would die, cast about, not knowing what that
" little " meant, He saith, " Ye shall mourn and
lament."

" But your sorrow shall be turned into joy."'

Then having shown that after grief comes joy,
and that grief gendereth joy, and that grief is
short, but the pleasure endless. He passeth to a
common' example ; and what saith He?

Ver. 21. "A woman when she is in travail hath
sorrow."'

And He hath used a comparison which the
Prophets also use continually, likening despon-
dencies to the exceeding pains, of childbirth.
But what He saith is of this kind : " Travail
pains shall lay hold on you, but the pang of
childbirth is the cause of joy" ; both confirming
His words relative to the Resurrection, and
showing that the departing hence is like passing
from the womb into the light of day. As though
He had said, " Marvel not that I bring you to
your advantage through such sorrow, since even
a mother to become a mother, passeth in like
manner through pain." Here also He implieth
something mystical, that He hath loosened the
travail pangs of death, and caused a new man
to be bom of them.'° And He said not, that the
pain shall pass away only, but, " she doth not
even remember it," so great is the joy which
succeedeth ; so also shall it be with the Saints.
And yet the woman doth not rejoice because
" a man hath come into the world," but because
a son hath been bom to her; since, had this
been the case, nothing would have hindered the
barren from rejoicing over another who beareth.


' al. *' to strike. into."

* Ver. ig, omitted. ** Now Jesus knew that they were desirous
to ask Hinij and said unto them. Do yc enquire among yourselves
of that 1 satd, A little while, and ye shall not see Me: and again, a
little while, and ye shall see Me.' N. T.

' " And yc shall be sorrowful, but," &c., N. T.

' lit. " worldly."

*• "hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as sha
is delivered of the child, she remcmbereth no more the anguish, for
joy that a man is born into the world." N. T.


292


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIX.


Why then spake He thus? Because He intro-
duced this example for this purpose only, to
show that sorrow is for a season, but joy lasting :
and to show that (death) is a translation unto
life ; and to show the great profit of their pangs.
He said not, "a child hath been born," but,
" A man." For to my mind He here alludeth
to His own Resurrection, and that He should
be born not unto that death which bare the
birth-pang, but unto the Kingdom. Therefore
He said not, "a child hath been born unto her,"
but, " A man hath been born into the world."

Ver. 22, 23.^ "And ye now therefore have
sorrow — [but I will see you again, and your
sorrow shall be turned into joy]."* Then, to
show that He shall die no more. He saith, "And
no man taketh it from you. And in that day ye
shall ask Me nothing."

Again He proveth nothing else by these words,
but that He is from God. " For then ye shall
for the time to come know all things." But
what is, "Ye shall not ask Me"? "Ye shall
need no intercessor, but it is sufficient that ye
call on My Name, and so gain all things."

"Verily, verily, I say unto you. Whatsoever
ye shall ask My Father in My Name."'

He showeth the power of His Name, if at
least being neither seen nor called upon, but
only named, He even maketh us approved^ by
the Father. But where hath this taken place ?
Where they say, " Lord, behold their threaten-
ings, and grant unto Thy servants that with
boldness they may speak Thy word " (Acts iv.
29, 31), "and work miracles in Thy Name."
" And the place was shaken where they were."

Ver. 24. " Hitherto ye have asked nothing." "

[2.] Hence He showeth it to be good that He
should depart, if hitherto they had asked noth-
ing, and if then they should receive all things
whatsoever they should ask. " For do not sup-
pose, because I shall no longer be with you, that
ye are deserted ; My Name shall give you greater
boldness." Since then the words which He had
used had been veiled. He saith,

Ver. 25. "These things have I spoken unto
you in proverbs, but the time cometh when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs."

"There shall be a time when ye shall know
all things clearly." He speaketh of the time of
the Resurrection. "Then,"

" I shall tell you plainly of the Father."

(For He was with them, and talked with them
forty days, being assembled with them, and
speaking of the things concerning the kingdom


* Ver. aa. ** And ye now therefore have sorrow, but 1 will see
you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man," &c.
N. T.

' from ver. 10. * " In My Name, He will give it you." N. T.

* lit. '* admired."

^ "nothing in My Name; ask, and ye shall receive, that your
icy may be full," N. T. The words, " Hitherto," &c., are inserted
Dv Savile.


of God — Acts i. 3, 4,) — "because now being
in fear, ye give no heed to My words ; but then
when ye see Me risen again, and converse with
Me, ye will be able to learn all things plainly,
for the Father Himself will love you, when your
faith in Me hath been made firm."

Ver. 26. " And I will not ask the Father." °

"Your love for Me sufficeth to be your
advocate."

Ver. 27, 28. "Because' ye have loved Me,
and have believed that I came out from God.
I came forth from the Father, and am come
into the world ; again I leave the world, and go
to the Father."

For since His discourse concerning the Resur-
rection, and together with this, the hearing that
" I came out from God, and thither I go," gave
them no common comfort. He continually han-
dleth these things. He gave a pledge, in the
first place, that they were right in believing or
Him ; in the second, that they should be h
safety. When therefore He said, " A little while
and ye shall not see Me ; and again a litth
while, and ye shall see Me" (ver. 17), they will
reason did not understand Him. But now it i!J
no longer so. What then is, " Ye shall not asi
Me " ? "Ye shall not say, ' Show us the Father,
and, ' Whither goest Thou ? ' for ye shall kno\i
all knowledge, and the Father shall be dispose*
towards you even as I am." It was this espe
cially which made them breathe again, the learr
ing that they should be the Father's friends
wherefore they say,

Ver. 30.* " Now we know that Thou knowei-
all things."

Seest thou that He made answer to what we;
secretly harboring^ in their minds?

" And needest not that any man should aa
Thee." '»

That is, " Before hearing, Thou knowest tli
things which made us stumble, and Thou ha
given us rest, since Thou hast said, 'The Fathi
loveth you, because ye have loved Me.' " Afti
so many and so great matters, they say, " Nc
we know." Seest thou in what an imperfei
state they were? Then, when, as though co
ferring a favor upon Him, they say, " Now
know," He replieth, " Ye still require ma
other things to come to perfection ; nothing I
as yet achieved by you. Ye shall presently I {
tray Me to My enemies, and such fear sh |
seize you, that ye shall not even be able to
tire one with another, yet from this I shall sul |
nothing dreadful." Seest thou again how C( '


" Ver. 26. "At that day ye shall ask in My Name; nml 1 jr
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you." N. T.
^ " For the Father Himself loveth you, because," &c. X. '1
8 Ver. 29. *' His disciples said unto Him, Lo, now sjfc ;i «
Thou plainly, and speakcst no parable." N. T. i

"^ " .isk Thee; by this we believe that Thou earnest forth ! p
God." N. T.


Homily LXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


293


descending His speech is? And indeed He
makes this a charge against them, that they con-
tinually needed condescension. For when they
say, " Lo, now Thou speakest plainly, and speakest
no parable" (ver. 29), "and therefore we believe
Thee," He showeth them that now, when they
believe, they do not yet believe, neither doth He
accept their words. This He saith, referring
them to another season. But the,
Ver. 32.' "The Father is with Me,"
He hath again put on their account ; for this
they^ everywhere wished to learn. Then, to
show that He did not give them perfect knowl-
edge by saying this, but in order that their rea-
son might not rebel, (for it was probable that
they might form some human ideas, and think
that they should not enjoy any assistance from
Him,) He saith,

Ver. 33. "These things I have spoken unto
you, that in Me ye might have peace." '

That is, " that ye should not cast Me from your
thoughts, but receive Me." Let no one, then,
drag these words into a doctrine ; they are
spoken for our comfort and love. " For not
even when we suffer such things as I have men-
tioned shall your troubles stop there,^ but as
long as ye are in the world ye shall have sorrow,
not only now when I am betrayed, but also after-
wards. But rouse your minds, for ye shall suffer
nothing terrible. When the master hath gotten
the better of his enemies, the disciples must not
despond." "And how," tell me, "hast Thou
'conquered the world'?" I have told you al-
ready, that I have cast down its ruler, but ye
shall know hereafter, when all things yield and
give place to you.

[3.] But it is permitted to us also to con-
aJ quer, looking to the Author of our faith, and
walking on that road which He cut for us.
il So neither shall death get the mastery of us.
"What then, shall we not die? " saith some one.
Why, from this very thing' it is clear that he
shall not gain the mastery over us. The cham-
pion truly will then be glorious, not when he hath
not closed with his opponent, but when having
closed he is not holden by him. We therefore
are not mortal, because of our struggle with
death, but immortal, because of our victory ;
then should we have been mortal, had we re-
mained with him always. As then I should not
call the longest-lived animals immortal, although
they long remain free from death, so neither
him who shall rise after death mortal, because
he is dissolved by death. For, tell me, if a man
blush a little, should we say that he was continu-


ij-ii


* Ver. 31,32. " Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? Be-
hold, the hour Cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and shall leave Me alone; but I am not
alone, because," &c. N. T. ' al. " he," or, " one."

' * have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation ; but be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world." N. T.

* " shall 1 stay your dangers." " i.e. our death.


ally ruddy? Not so, for the action is not a
habit. If one become pale, should we call him
jaundiced ? No, for the affection is but tempo-
rary. And so you would not call him mortal, who
hath been for but a short time in the hands of
death. Since in this way we may speak of those
who sleep, for they are dead, so to say, and with-
out action. But doth death corrupt our bodies ?
What of that ? It is not that they may remain in
corruption, but that they be made better. Let
us then conquer the world, let us run to immor-
tality, let us follow our King, let us too set up a
trophy," let us despise the world's pleasures.
We need no toil to do so ; let us transfer our
souls to ' heaven, and all the world is conquered.
If thou desirest it not, it is conquered ; if thou
deride it, it is worsted. Strangers are we and
sojourners, let us then not grieve at any of its
painful things. For if, being sprung from a re-
nowned country, and from illustrious ancestors,
thou hadst gone into some distant land, being
known to no one, having with thee neither ser-
vants nor wealth, and then some one had insulted
thee, thou wouldest not grieve as though thou
hadst suffered these things at home. For the
knowing clearly that thou wast in a strange and
foreign land, would persuade thee to bear all
easily, and to despise hunger, and thirst, and any
suffering whatever. Consider this also now, that
thou art a stranger and a sojourner, and let noth-
ing disturb thee in this foreign land ; for thou
hast a City whose Artificer and Creator is God,
and the * sojourning itself is but for a short and
little time. Let whoever will strike, insult, re-
vile ; we are in a strange land, and live but
meanly ; the dreadful thing would be, to suffer
so in our own country, before our fellow-citizens,
then is the greatest unseemliness and loss. For
if a man be where he had none that knows him,
he endures all easily, because insult becomes
more grievous from the intention of those who
offer it. For instance, if a man insult the gov-
ernor, knowing that he is governor, then the in-
sult is bitter ; but if he insult, supposing him to
be a private man, he cannot even touch him who
undergoeth the insult. So let us reason also.
For neither do our revilers know what we are,
as, that we are citizens of heaven, registered for
the country which is above, fellow-choristers of
the Cherubim. Let us not then grieve nor deem
their insult to be insult ; had they known, they
would not have insulted us. Do they deem us
poor and mean? Neither let us count this an
insult. For tell me, if a. traveler having got be-
fore his servants, were sitting a little space in the
inn waiting for them, and then the innkeeper,
or some travelers, should behave rudely to him,
and revile him, would he not laugh at the other's


" al.

' al.


' a trophy for Him."
' into."


' al. " and if the."


294


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIX.


ignorance ? would not their mistake rather give
him pleasure ? would he not feel a satisfaction as
though not he but some one else were insulted ?
Let us too behave thus. We too sit in an inn,
waiting for our friends who travel the same road ;
when we are all collected, then they shall know
whom they insult. These men then shall hang '
their heads ; then they shall say, " This is he
whom we " fools " had in derision." (Wisd. v. 3.)
[4.] With these two things then let us com-
fort ourselves, that we are not insulted, for they
know not who we are, and that, if we wish to
obtain satisfaction, they shall hereafter give us a
most bitter one. But God forbid that any should
have a soul so cruel and inhuman. " What then,
if we be insulted by our kinsmen ? For this is
the burdensome thing." Nay, this is the light
thing. " Why, pray? " Because we do not bear
those whom we love when they insult us, in the
same way as we bear those whom we do not
know. For instance, in consoling those who
have been injured, we often say, " It is a brother
who hath injured you, bear it nobly ; it is a
father; it is an uncle." But if the name of
" father " and " brother " puts you to shame,
much more if I name to you a relationship more
intimate than these ; for we are not only breth-
ren one to another, but also members, and one
body. Now if the name of brother shame you,
much more that of member. Hast thou not
heard that Gentile proverb, which saith, that " it
behooveth to keep friends with their defects " ?
Hast thou not heard Paul say, " Bear ye one
another's burdens"? Seest thou not lovers?
For I am compelled, since I cannot draw an
instance from you, to bring my discourse to that
ground of argument. This also Paul doth, thus
saying, "Furthermore we have had fathers in
our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence." (Heb. xii. 9.) Or rather, that is
more apt which he saith to the Romans, " As ye
have yielded your members servants to unclean-
ness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now
yield your members servants to righteousness."
For this reason let us confidently keep hold of
the illustration. Now dost thou not observe
lovers, what miseries these suffer when inflamed
with desire for harlots, cuffed, beaten, and
laughed at, enduring a harlot, who turns away
from and insults them in ten thousand ways ;
yet if they see but once anything sweet or gen-
tle, all is well to do with them, all former things
are gone, all goes on with a fair wind, be it pov-
erty, be it sickness, be it anything else besides
these. For they count their own^ life as miser-
able or blessed, according as they may have her
whom they love disposed towards them. They
know nothing of mortal honor or disgrace, but


even if one insult, they bear all easily through
the great pleasure and delight which they re-
ceive from her ; and though she revile, though
she spit in their face, they think, when they are
enduring this, that they are being pelted with
roses. And what wonder, if such are their feel-
ings as to her person ? for her very house they
think to be more splendid than any, though it
be but of mud, though it be falling down. But
why speak I of walls? when they even see the
places which they frequent in the evening, they
are excited. Allow me now for what follows to
speak the word of the Apostle. As he saith,
" As ye have yielded your members ser\'ants to
uncleanness, so yield your members servants
unto righteousness " ; so in like manner now 1
say, " as we have loved these women, let us love
one another, and we shall not think that we suf-
fer anything terrible." ' And why say I, " one
another " ? Let us so love God. Do ye shud-
der, when ye hear that I require as- much love
in the case of God, as we have shown towards
a harlot ? But I shudder that we do not show
even thus much. And, if you will, let us go on 1
with the argument, though what is said be very
painful. The woman beloved promises her lov-
ers nothing good, but dishonor, shame, and in-
solence. For this is what the waiting upon ji
harlot makes a man, ridiculous, shameful, dis
honored. But God promiseth us heaven, and
the good things which are in heaven ; He hath
made us sons, and brethren of the Only-begot*
ten, and hath given thee ten thousand things
while living, and when thou diest, resurrection!
and promiseth that He will give us such gooo
things as it is not possible even to imagine, ano
maketh us honored and revered. Again, thai
woman compels her lovers to spend all thel
substance for the pit and for destruction ; bui
God biddeth us sow the heaven, and giveth us ai
hundred-fold, and eternal life. Again, she us«
her lover like a slave, giving commands mon
hardly than any tyrant ; but God saith, " I ni
longer call you servants, but friends." (c. xv. 15.
[5.] Have ye seen the excess both of th)
evils here and the blessings there * ? What thi
comes next? For this woman's sake, man
lie awake, and whatever she commands, readil
obey ; give up house, and father, and mothe;
and friends, and money, and patronage, am
leave all that belongs to them in want and des<
lation ; but for the sake of God, or rather ft
the sake of ourselves, we often do not choose 1
expend even the third portion of our substana
but we look on the hungry, we overlook hir
and run past the naked, and do not even besto
a word upon him. But the lovers, if they s(
but a little servant girl pf their mistress and hi


' al. " thea haog."


* aL " we touch."


' i.e. in being insulted.


al. " thence."


Homily LXXIX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


295


a barbarian, they stand in the middle of the
market-place, and talk with her, as if they were
proud and glad to do so, unrolling an intermin-
able round of words ; ' and for her sake they
count all their living as nothing, deem rulers and
rule nothing, (they know it, all who have had
experience of the malady,) and thank her more
when she commands, than others when they
serve. Is there not with good reason a hell?
Are there not with good reason ten thousand
punishments? Let us then become sober, let
u^ apply to the service of God as much, or half,
or even the third part of what others supply to
the harlot. Perhaps again ye shudder ; for so
do I myself. But I would not that ye should
shudder at words only, but at the actions ; as it
is, here indeed our^ hearts are made orderly,
but we go forth and cast all away. What then
is the gain? For there, if it be required to
spend money, no one laments his poverty, but
even borrows it to give, perchance, when smit-
ten. But here, if we do but mention almsgiving,
they pretend to us children, and wife, and
house, and patronage, and ten thousand ex-
cuses. " But," saith some one, " the pleasure is
great there." This it is that I lament and
mourn. What if I show that the pleasure here
is greater? For there shame, and insult, and
expense, cut away no little of the pleasure, and
after these' the quarreling and enmity ; but here
there is nothing of the kind. What is there, tell
me, equal to this pleasure, to sit expecting
heaven and the kingdom there, and the glory
of the saints, and the Ufe that is endless ? " But
these things," saith some one, " are in expecta-
tion, the others in experience." What kind of
experience? Wilt thou that I tell thee the
pleasures which are here also by experience?
Consider what freedom thou enjoyest, and how
thou fearest and tremblest at no man when
: thou livest in company with virtue, neither en-


l tiaxptiiy Xoyittv avf^iTTOvrt^ 2iauAovf. The dc'avAoc was the
doable coune, which cadcd where it began, * al. " your."


emy, nor plotter, nor informer, nor rival in credit
or in love, nor envious person, nor poverty,
nor sickness, nor any other human thing. But
there, although ten thousand things be accord-
ing to thy mind, though riches flow in as from
a fountain, yet the war with rivals, and the
plots, and ambuscades, will rriake more miser-
able than any the life of him who . wallows with
those women.'* For when that abominable one
is haughty, and. insolent, you needs must kindle
quarrel to flatter her. This therefore is more
grievous than ten thousand deaths, more intol-
erable than any punishment. But here there is
nothing of the kind. For " the fruit," it saith,
" of the Spirit is love, joy, peace." (Gal. v. 22.)
Here is no quarreling, nor unseasonable pecu-
niary expense, nor disgrace and expense too ;
and if thou give but a farthing, or a loaf, or a
cup of cold water. He will be much beholden to
thee, and He doth nothing to pain or grieve
thee, but all so as to make thee glorious, and
free thee from all shame. What defense there-
fore shall we have, what pardon shall we gain,
if, leaving these things, we give ourselves up to
the contrary, and voluntarily cast ourselves into
the furnace that bums with fire ? Wherefore I
exhort those who are sick of this malady, to re-
cover themselves, and return to health, and not
allow themselves to fall into despair. Since that
son * also was in a far more grievous state than
this, yet when he returned to his father's house,
he came to his former honor, and appeared
more glorious than him who had ever been well-
pleasing. Let us also imitate him, and returning
to our Father, even though it be late, let us de-
part from that captivity, and transfer ourselves
to freedom, that we may enjoy the Kingdom of
heaven, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.


' This seems to be the meaning of roC /irr* ^ctVMi' vAvvo/Urov*
* the prodigal, Luke xv.


296


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX.


HOMILY LXXX.


John xvii. i.


"These words spake Jesus, and lifted up His eyes to
heaven, and saith, Father, the hour is come; glorify
Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee."


[i.] "He that hath done and taught,"' it
saith, "the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of heaven." And with much reason ;
for to show true wisdom in words, is easy, but
the proof which is by works is the part of some
noble and great one. Wherefore also Christ,
speaking of the endurance of evil, putteth Him-
self forth, bidding us take example from Him.
On this account too, after this admonition. He
betaketh Himself to prayer, teaching us in our
temptations to leave all things, and flee to God.
For because He had said, "In the world ye
shall have tribulation," and had shaken their
souls, by the prayer He raiseth them again. As
yet they gave heed unto Him as to a man ; and
for their sake He acteth thus, just as He did in
the case of Lazarus, and there telleth the rea-
son; "Because of the people that stand by I
said it, that they might believe that Thou hast
sent Me." (c. xi. 42.) "Yea," saith some
one, "this took place with good cause in the
case of the Jews ; but wherefore in that of the
disciples? " With good cause in the case of the
disciples also. For they who, after all that had
been said and done, said, " Now we know that
Thou knowest " (c. xvi. 30), most of all needed
to be established. Besides, the Evangelist doth
not even call the action prayer ; but what saith
he? "He lifted up His eyes to heaven," and
saith rather that it was a discoursing with the
Father. And if elsewhere he speaks of prayer,
and at one time shows Him kneehng on His
knees, at another lifting His eyes to heaven, be
not thou troubled ; for by these means we are
taught the earnestness which should be in our
petitions, that standing we should look up, not
with the eyes of the flesh only, but of the mind,
and that we should bend our knees, bruising our
own hearts. For Christ came not merely to
manifest Himself, but also about to teach virtue
ineffable. But it behooveth the teacher to teach,
not by words only, but also by actions. Let us
hear then what He saith in this place.

" Father, the hour is come ; glorify Thy Son,
that Thy Son also may glorify Thee."

Again He showeth us, that not unwiOing He
cometh to the Cross. For how could He be
unwilling, who prayed that this might come to

» " Whosoever shall do," &c., N. T.


pass, and called the action " glory," not only
for Himself the Crucified, but also for the Father ?
since this was the case, for not the Son only, but
the Father also was glorified. For before the
Crucifixion, not even the Jews knew Him ; *
" Israel," it saith, " hath not known Me " (Isa.'i.
3) ; but after the Crucifixion, all the world ran
to Him. Then He speaketh also of the manner
of the glory, and how He will glorify Him.

Ver. 2. " As Thou hast given Him power over
all flesh," " that nothing which Thou hast given
Him should perish." ^

For to be always doing good, is glory to God.
But what is, " As Thou hast given Him power
over all flesh"? He now showeth, that what
belongs to the preaching is not confined to the
Jews alone, but is extended to all the world, and
layeth down beforehand the first invitations to
the Gentiles. And since He had said, " Go not
into the way of the Gentiles " (Matt. x. 5), and
after this time is about to say, "Go ye, and make
disciples of all nations" (Matt, xxviii. 19), He
showeth that the Father also willeth this. For
this greatly offended the Jews, and the disciples
too ; nor indeed after this did they easily endure
to lay hold on the Gentiles, until they received
the teaching-of the Spirit ; because hence arose
no small stumblingblock for the Jews. There-
fore, when Peter after such a manifestation of
the Spirit came to Jerusalem, he could scarcely,
by relating the vision of the sheet, escape the
charges brought against him. But what is, "Thou
hast given Him power over all flesh"? I will
ask the heretics, "When did He receive tiiisi
power? was it before He formed them, or after?"
He himself saith, that it was after that He had
been crucified,* and had risen again; at least
then He said, " All power is given unto Me "
(Matt, xxviii. 18), and, "Go ye and make dis
ciples of all nations." What then, had He no,
authority over His own works? Did He mak«
them, and had He not authority over them afte»
having made them ? Yet He is seen doing al
in times of old, punishing some as sinners,' (for
" Surely I will not hide," it saith, " from Mj
servant Abraham, that which I am about to do '
— Gen. xviii. 17, LXX.,) and honoring others a
righteous. Had He then the power at that time
and now had He lost it, and did He again receiv


* i.e. the Father.

= N. T. " That He should give eternal life to as many as '.
hast given Him." < Morel. " had been made flesh."

I » Some MSS. add, " and setting right some who turn."


IOMII.Y LXXX.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


297


t? What devil could assert this? But if His
lower was the same both then and now, (for,
aith He, "as the Father raiseth up tlie dead
nd (juickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth
^hom He will" — c.v. 21,) what is the meaning
if the words? He was about to send them to
he Gentiles ; in order therefore that they might
ot think tluit this was an innovation, because
ie had said, " I am not sent, save unto the lost
|heep of the house of Israel " (Matt. xv. 24), He
[doweth that this seemeth good to the Father
jlso. And if He saith this with great meanness
If circumstance, it is not wonderful. For so He
dified both those at that time, and those who
ime afterwards ; and as I have before said. He
Iways by the excess of meanness firmly per-
laded them that the words were those of con-
escension.
[2.] But what is, "Of all flesh"? For cer-
.inly not all believed. Yet, for His part, all
;lieved ; and if men gave no heed to His
ords, the fault was not in the teacher, but in
lOse who received them not.
" That He should give eternal life to as many
Thou hast given Him."

If here also He speaketh in a more human

anner, wonder not. For He doth so both on

count of the reasons I have given, and to avoid

e saying anything great concerning Himself;

ice this was a stumblingblock to the hearers,

cause as yet they imagined nothing great con-

ming Him. John, for example, when He

eaks in his own person, doth not so, but leadeth

his language to greater sublimity, saying, "All

ings were made by Him, and without Him was

t anything made " (c. i. 3, 4, 9, 11) ; and that

was "Life" ; and that He was "Light" ; and

It "He came to His own " : he saith not, that

would not have had power, had He not re-

ved it, but that He gave to others also " power

become sons of God." And Paul in like

inner calleth Him equal with God. But He

mself asketh in a more human way, saying

IS, " That He should give eternal life to as

ny as Thou hast given Him." (Phil. ii. 6.)

^er. 3. " And this is life eternal, that they

;ht know Thee the only true God, and Jesus

rist whom Thou hast sent."

■'The only true God," He saith, by way of

Tjtinction from those which are not gods ; for

h was about to send them to the Gentiles. But

iJhey ' will not allow this, but on account of this

■«^rd " only " reject the Son from being true God,

iichis way as they proceed they reject Him from

bing God at all.^ For He also saith, " Ye seek

n; the glory which is from the only God." (c.

V 14.) Well then ; shall not the Son be God ?

f the Son be God, and the Son of the Father


It. the heretics: some MSS. to ixovov,
al. "even reject God."


who is called the Only God, it is clear that He
also is true, and the Son of Him who is called
the Only true God. Why, when Paul saith, " Or
I only and Barnabas" (i Cor. ix. 6), doth he
exclude Barnabas? Not at all ; for the " only "
is put by way of distinction from others. And,
if He be not true God, how is He "Truth"?
for truth far surpasses what is tnie. What shall
we call the not being a " true" man, tell me?
shall we not call it the not being a man at all ?
so if the Son is not true God, how is He God ?
And how maketh He us gods and sons, if He is
not true ? But on these matters we have spoken
more particularly in another place ; wherefore
let us apply ourselves to what follows.

Ver. 4. " I have glorified Thee on the earth."

Well said He, " on the earth " ; for in heaven
He had been already glorified, having His own
natural glory, and being worshiped by the
Angels. Christ then speaketh not of that glory
which is bound up with His^ Essence, (for that
glory, though none glorify Him, He ever pos-
sesseth in its fullness,) but of that which cometh
from the service of men. And so the, " Glorify
Me," is of this kind ; and that thou mayest
understand that He speaketh of this manner of
glory, hear what follows.

" I have finished the work which Thou gavest
Me that I should do it."

And yet the action was still but beginning, or
rather was not yet beginning. How then said
He, " I have finished " ? Either He meaneth,
that " I have done all My part " ; or He speak-
eth of the future, as having already come to
pass ; or, which one may say most of all, that
all was already effected, because the root of
blessings had been laid, which fruits would cer-
tainly and necessarily follow, and from His be-
ing* present at and assisting in those things
which should take place after these. On this
account He saith again in a condescending way,
" Which Thou gavest Me." For had He indeed
waited to hear and learn, this would have fallen
far short of His glory. For that He came to
this' of His own will, is clear from many pas-
sages. As when Paul saith, that " He so loved
us, as to give Himself for us " (Eph. v. 2) ;
and, " He emptied Himself, and took upon Him
the form of a servant " (Phil. ii. 7) ; and, " As
the Father hath loved Me, so have I loved you."

(C. XV. 9.)

Ver. 5. "And now, O Father, glorify Thou
Me with Thine Own Self," with the glory which
I had with Thee before the world was."

Where is that glory? For allowing that He
was' with reason unhonored among men, be-
cause of the covering* which was put around


3 i.e. the Father's.

* Ben. " and His being."

° i.e. to His death.


" irapa treavTc^.
' al. *' Thou wast.'
^ i.e. the flesh.


298


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX.


Him ; how seeketh He ' to be glorified with the
Father ? What then saith He here ? The say-
ing refers to the Dispensation ; since His fleshly
nature had not yet been glorified, not having as
yet enjoyed incorruption, nor shared the kingly
throne. Therefore He said not "on earth,"
but " with Thee."

[3.] This glory we also shall enjoy according
to our measure, if we be sober. Wherefore Paul
saith, "If so be that we suffer with Him, that
we may also be glorified together." (Rom. viii.
1 7.) Ten thousand tears then do- they merit,
who through sluggishness and sleep plot against
themselves when such glory is set before them ;
and, were there no hell, they would be more
wretched than any, who, when it is in their
power to reign and to be glorified with the Son
of God, deprive themselves of so great blessings.
Since if it were necessary to be cut in pieces, if
to die ten thousand deaths, if to give up every
day ten thousand lives and as many bodies,
ought we not to submit to such things^ for such
glory ? But now we do not even despise money,
which hereafter, though unwilling, we shall leave :
we do not despise money, which brings about
us ten thousand mischiefs, which remains here,
which is not our own. For we are but stewards
of that which is not our own, although we receive
it from our fathers. But when there is hell be-
sides, and the worm that dieth not, and the fire
that is not quenched, and the gnashing of teeth,
how, tell me, shall we bear these things ? How
long will we refuse to see clearly, and spend our
all on daily fightings, and contentions, and un-
profitable talk, feeding, cultivating earth, fatten-
ing the body and neglecting the soul, making
no account of necessary things, but much care
about things superfluous and unprofitable ? And
we build splendid tombs, and buy costly houses,
and draw about wth us herds of all kinds of
servants, and devise different stewards, appoint-
ing managers of lands, of houses, of money, and
managers of those managers ; but as to our
desolate soul, we care nothing for that. And
what will be the Umit to this? Is it not one
belly that we fill, is it not one body that we
clothe ? What is this great bustle of business ?
Why and wherefore do we cut up and tear to
pieces the one' soul, which we have had as-
signed to us,* in attending to the service of such
things, contriving for ourselves a grievous slav-
ery? For he who needs many things is the
slave of many things, although he seem to be
their master. Since- the lord is the slave even
of his domestics, and brings in another and a
heavier mode of service ; and in another way
also he is their slave, not daring without them
to enter the agora, nor the bath, nor the field,


« al. '


locliest Thou."
all."


* one MS. " the precious.'*

* al. ** have received.'*


but they frequently go about in all directions
without him. He who seems to be master,
dares not, if his slaves be not present, to go
forth from home, and if whilst unattended he
do but put his head out of his house, he thinks
that he is laughed at. Perhaps some laugh at
us when we say this, y«t on this very account
they would be deserving of ten thousand tears.
For to show that this is slavery, I would gladly
ask you, wouldest thou wish to need some one
to put the morsel to thy mouth, and to apply
the cup to thy lips? Wouldest thou not deem
such a service worthy of tears? What if. thou
didst require continually supporters to enable
thee to walk, wouldest thou not think thyself
pitiable, and in this respect more wretched than
any? So then thou oughtest to be disposed
now. For it matters nothing whether one is so
treated by irrational things,' or by men.

Why, tell me, do not the Angels differ from
us in this respect, that they do not want so many
things as we do? Therefore the less we need,
the more we are on our way to them ; the more
we need, the more we sink down to this perish-
able life. And that thou mayest learn that these
things are so, ask those who have grown olr
which life they deem happiest, that when they'
were helplessly ' mastered, or now when they are !
masters of these things? We have mentioned ij
these persons, because those who are intoxicatec
with youth, do not even know the excess of theiii
slavery. For what of those in fever, do the]
call themselves happy when, thirsting much
they drink much and need more, or when, hav
ing recovered their health, they are free fron
the desire? Seest thou that in every instano
the needing much is pitiable, and far apart fron
true wisdom, and an aggravation of slavery anu
desire? Why then do we voluntarily increase
to ourselves wretchedness ? For, tell me, if :
were possible to live uninjured without roof c
walls, wouldest thou not prefer this ; wherefor
then dost thou increase the signs of thy weal
ness? Do we not for this call Adam hapg"
that he needed nothing, no house, no clothi
"Yes," saith some one, "but now we are in n<|
of them." Why then do we make our ai
greater? If many persons curtail many of til
things actually needed, (servants, I mean, arJ
houses, and money,) what excuse can we hasf
if we overstep the need ? The more thou puttt
about thee, the more slavish dost thou bee
for by whatever proportion thou requirest ;
in that proportion thou hast trenched upon til
freedom. For absolute' freedom is, to
nothing at all ; the next is, to want little ; ail
this the Angels and their imitators especiaij


' i.e. receives so much help from them.
* Toy oT« tKpaTovvro ftdniv, if rhv ore avTuv KpaTovn > I
There may he some words omiued.


iOMILY LXXXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


299


)0ssess. But for men to succeed in this while
arising in a mortal body, think how great praise
his hath. This also Paul said, when writing to
he Corinthians, " But I spare you," and, " lest
uch should have trouble in the flesh." * (i Cor.
ii. 28.) Riches are called "usables,"^ that we
lay "use" them rightly," and not keep and bury
hem ; for this is not to possess them, but to be
ossessed by them. Since if we are going to
lake this our aim how to multiply them, not that
e may employ them rightly, the order is re-
ersed, and they possess us, not we them. Let us
len free ourselves from this grievous bondage,
ad at last become frte. Why do we devise ten
lousand different chains for ourselves? Is not
le bond of nature enough for thee, and the ne-


cessity of life, and the crowd of ten thousand af-
fairs, but dost thou twine also other nets for thy-
self, and put them about thy feet ? And when wilt
thou lay hold on heaven, and be able to stand
on' that height? For a great thing, a great
thing is it, that even having cut asunder all these
cords, thou shouldest be 'able to lay hold on the
city which is above. So many other hindrances
are there ; all which that we may conquer, let
us keep to the mean estate' [and having put
away superfluities, let us keep to what is neces-
sary.] Thus shall we lay hold on eternal life,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXI.


John xvii. 6.


( have manifested Thy Name unto the men which
Thou gavest Me out of the world; Thine they were,
and Thou gavest them Me, and they have kept Thy
■word.''

[i.] "Messenger of great counsel" (Isa. ix.

LXX.), the Son of God is called, because of

e other things which He taught, and prin-

pally because He announced the Father to

;n, as also now He saith, " I have manifested

jy Name unto the men." For after having

id, " I have finished Thy work," He next ex-

Jiineth it in detail, telling what sort of work.

nw the Name indeed was well known. For

s said, "Ye shall swear' by the true God."

... Ixv. 16.) But what I have often told you

i ell you now, that though it was known, yet it

> s so only to Jews, and not to all of these :

It now He speaketh concerning the Gentiles.

In doth He declare this merely, but also that

t.'y knew Him as the Father. For it is not the

sue thing to learn that He is Creator, and that

I; hath a Son. But He "manifested His*

I me " both by words and actions.

' Whom Thou gavest Me out of the world."
/. He saith above, " No man cometh unto Me
e;ept it be given him " (c. vi. 65) ; and,
"Except My P'ather' draw him" (c. vi. 64) ;
S'here too, " Whom thou gavest Me." (c. xiv.
6 Now He calleth Himself "the Way";
vience it is clear that He establisheth two things
bwhat is said here, that He is not" opposed to


" such shall have," &c., N. T. > [inovtnai] LXX.

XpifiaTa. * I.e. the Father's.

" The Father which hath Mnt Me," &c., N, T.


the Father, and that it is the Father's will to
entrust them to the Son.

" Thine they were, and Thou gavest them Me."
Here He desireth to teach' that He is greatly
loved by the Father. For that He needed not
to receive them, is clear from this, He made
them, He care-th for them continually. How
then did He receive them? This, as I said
before, showeth His unanimity with the Father.
Now if a man choose to enquire into the mat-
ter in a human manner, and as the words
are spoken, they' will no longer belong to the
Father. For if when the Father had them, the
Son had them not, it is evident that when He
gave them to the Son, He withdrew from His
dominion over them. And again, there is a yet
more unseemly conclusion ; for they will be
found to have been imperfect while they yet
were with the Father, but to have become per-
fect when they came to the Son. But it is
mockery even to speak thus. What then doth
He declare by this ? ■" " That it hath seemed
good to the Father also that they should believe
on the Son."

" And they have kept Thy word."

Ver. 7. " Now they have known that all
things whatsoever Thou hast given Me are of
Thee."

How did they " keep Thy word " ? " By be-
lieving in Me, and giving no heed to the Jews.
For he that believeth in Him, it saith, ' hath set


« al. *' riie up to." ' evTcA^tat.

' SoiiXfTai 6iiafai, Ben. and MSS. Savile omits (SoilXerat.
* i.e. those given.
10 al. " by these words then He declaietb>"


300


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXI.


to his seal that God is true.' " (c. iii. 33.)
Some read, " Now I know that all things what-
soever Thou hast given Me are of Thee." But
this would have no reason ; for how would the
Son be ignorant of the things of the Father ? No,
the words are spoken of the disciples. "From
the time," He saith, " that I told them these
things, they have learnt that all that Thou hast
given Me is from Thee ; nothing is alien, nothing
peculiar to Me, with Thee." ' (For whatever
ii peculiar, puts most things in the condition of
being aUen.' "They therefore have known that
all things, whatsoever I teach, are Thy doctrines
and teachings." " And whence have they learnt
it?" From My words;' for so have I taught
them. And not only this have I taught them, but
also that " I came out from Thee." For this
He was anxious to prove through all the Gospel.

Ver. 9. " I pray for them." *

"What sayest Thou?" "Dost Thou teach
the Father, as though He were ignorant? Dost
Thou speak to Him as to a man who knoweth
not? " " What then meaneth this distinction? "
Seest thou that the prayer is for nothing else
than that they may understand the love which
He hath towards them ? For He who not only
giveth what He hath of His own, but also calleth
on Another to do the same, showeth greater
love. What then is, " I pray for them " ? "Not
for all the world," He saith, but " for them
whom Thou hast given Me." He continually
putteth the " hast given," that they might learn
that this seemeth good to the Father. Then,
because He had said continually, " they are
Thine," and, " Thou gavest them unto Me," to
remove any evil suspicion, and lest any one
should think that His authority was recent, and
that He had but now received them, what saith
He?

[2.] Ver. 10. "All Mine are Thine, and
Thine are Mine ; and I am glorified in them."

Seest thou the equality of honor? For lest
on hearing, " Thou hast given them Me," thou
shouldest deem that they were alienated from
the authority of the Father, or before this from
that of the Son, He removed both difficulties
by speaking as He did. It was as though He
said, " Do not when thou hearest that ' Thou
hast given them to Me,' deem that they are
alienated from the Father, for what is Mine is
His ; nor when thou hearest, ' Thine they were,'
think that they were aliens from Me, for what is


* irapa (Tot, i.e. in the Godhead, or with God. However, one
Vatican MS. and Catena favor .Savile's conjecture, irapa at, " be-
side Thee," since the Father is in a peculiar manner His own.

' TO yap ISiov w? eTr' aAAoTpt'iu Ta TToAAa riOTjat, i.e. when OJie
thing is specified as peculiar to a person, it is implied that other
things not specified do not belong to him.

■* Ver. 8. " Kor 1 have given unto them the words which Thou
gavest iMe; and they have received them, and have known surely
that 1 came out from Thee, and they have believed that Thou didst
send Me."

* Ver. Q, " I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for
them whicD Thou nafit given Me; for they are Thine."


His is Mine." So that the, " Thou hast given,"
is said only for condescension ; for what the
Father hath is the Son's, and what the Son hath
is the Father's. But this cannot even be said
of a son after the manner of man, but because
They^ are upon a greater Equality of honor."
For that what belongs to the less, belongs to the
greater also, is clear to every one, but the re-
verse not so ; but here He converteth ' these
terms, and the conversion declares' Equality.
And in another place, declaring this, He said,
" All things that the Father hath are Mine,"
speaking of knowledge. And the " hast given
Me," and the like expressions, are to show that
He did not come as an alien and draw them tc
Him, but received them as His own. Then Ht
putteth the cause and the proof, saying, " And ]
am glorified in them," that is, either that "]
have power over them," or, that "they shal
glorify Me, believing in Thee and Me, and shal
glorify Us alike." But if He is not glorifiec
equally in them, what is the Father's is no longe
His. For no one is glorified in those over whon
he hath no authority. Yet how is He glorifiei
equally? All die for Him equally as for thi
Father; they preach Him as they do th.
Father ; and as they say that all things are dom
in His Name, so also in the Name of the Son.

Ver. II. "And now I am no more in thi
world, but these are in the world." '

That is, " Although I appear no longer in th
flesh, yet by these am I glorified." But wh
doth He say contiiMiously, that, " I am not i
the world " ; and that, " because I leave them
commit them to Thee " ; and that, " when I we
in the world I kept them"? for if one shoul
take these words in their simple sense, man
absurdities will follow. For how could it b
reasonable to say, that He is no longer in tt
world, and that when He departeth He con
mitteth them to another? since these are tb
words of a mere man parting from them foreve
Seest thou how He speaketh for the most pa'
like a man, and in a way adapted to their sta
of mind, because they thought that they had
greater degree of safety from His presenc*
Wherefore He saith, " While I was with then
kept them." (c.xiv. 28.) Yet He telleth theno,|
come to you " ; and, " I am with you till the en
(Matt, xxviii. 20.) How then '" saith He
words, as if about to be parted from them ? I|
addresseth Himself, as I said before, to
thoughts," that they may take breath a little wh


^ i.e. the Father and the Son.

" v.fii,ovfK eio-tf iffoTi^t'a?. If tbis be the right readiitg, |
sense is, that the Father .and the Son are more Equal in honor t
human father and son. Sav. reads jixei^of. Ben. /xei^oi'Ot *tt\
omitting irr.

'' oKTiaTptf/jet. * al. " shows."

^ "in the world, and I come to Thee. Holy Father, 11

through Thine own Name those whom Thou hast given Me, ■"

they may be one as we are." N. T.

'" al. " how now." " Ben. " suspicion."


Homily LXXXI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


301


they hear Him speaking thus, and delivering them
over to the care of the Father. For since, after
liearing many exhortations from Him, they were
not persuaded. He then holdeth converse with
the Father, manifesting His affection for them.
As though He had said, " Since Thou callest Me
to Thyself, place these in safety ; for I come to
rhee." "What sayest Thou? Art Thou not
able to keep them?" "Yea, I am able."
" Wherefore then speakest Thou thus ? " " That
they may have My joy fulfilled "' (ver. 13) ; that
is, " may not be confounded, as being imper-
fect." And by these words He showed that He
lad spoken all these things so, to give them rest
Ind joy. For the saying appears to be contra-
jiictory. " Now I am no longer in the world,
|md these are in the world." This was what
hey were suspecting. For a while therefore
condescendeth to them, because had He
;aid, " I keep them," they would not have
well believed ; wherefore He saith, " Holy
ather, keep them through Thine own Name " ;
hat is, " by thy help."
Ver. 12." While I was with them in the world,
kept them in Thy Name."
Again He speaketh as a man and as a Prophet,
ince nowhere doth He appear to have done
ything by the Name of God.
"Those that Thou gavest Me I have kept,
nd none of them is lost, but the son of perdi-
ion, that the Scripture might be fulfilled."
And in another place He saith, " Of all that
hou gavest Me, I will surely lose nothing. " ^ (c.
39.) Yet not only was he^ lost, but also
jany afterwards ; how then saith He, " I will in
owise lose "?* " For My part, I will not lose."
in another place, declaring the matter more
[early, He said, " I will in nowise cast out."
vi. 37.) "Not through fault of Mine, not
cause I either instigate or abandon them, but
they start away of themselves, I draw them
t by necessity."

Ver. 13. " But now I come to thee."
Seest thou that the discourse is composed
ither in a human manner? So that should any
ih from these words to lower the Son, he will
war the Father also. Observe, in proof of this,
iw from the beginning He speaketh' partly
though informing and explaining to Him,
irtly as enjoining. Informing, as when He
1th, " I pray not for the world " ; enjoining, as,
t have kept them until now," " and none of
em is lost " ; and, " do Thou therefore now
ep them," He saith. And again, "Thine they
re, and Thou hast given them unto Me," and,
Vhile I was in the world I kept them." But


* to Thee, and these things I speak in the world, that they
)lt have My joy fulfilled in themselves." N. T.
* " which He hath given/' N. T. * ou /xt) air.

' ix. the traitor. ° Ben. " is."


the solution of all is, that the words were ad-
dressed to their infirmity.

But after having said that " none of them was
lost but the son of perdition," He added, " that
the Scripture might be fulfilled." Of what
Scripture doth He speak? That which foretell-
eth many things concerning Him. Not that He
perished on that account, in order that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. But we have before
spoken at length on this point, that this is the
peculiar manner of Scripture, which puts things
which fall out in accordance with it, as though
they were caused by it." And it is needful to
enquire exactly into all, both the manner of the
speaker, his argument, and the laws of Scripture,
if at least we are minded not to draw wrong con-
clusions. For, " Brethren, be not children in
your minds." (i Cor. xiv. 20.)

[3.] This it is necessary to consider well,' not
only for the understanding the Scriptures, but
also for earnestness in one's way of life. For so
little children do not desire great things, but are
wont to admire those which are worth nothing ;
they are pleased at seeing chariots, and horses,
and the muleteer, and wheels, all made out of
earthenware ; but if they see a king sitting upon
a chariot, and a pair of white mules, and great
magnificence, they do not even * turn their heads.
And they deck out as brides dolls made of the
same material, but the actual brides, real and
beautiful, they do not even notice ; and this is
their case in many other matters. Now this many
men also undergo at this time ; for when they hear
of heavenly things, they do not even give heed
to them, but toward all the things of clay they
are as eager as children, and stupidly admire the
wealth which is of earth, and honor the glory
and luxury of the present life. Yet these are
just as much toys as those ; but the other are the
causes of life, and glory, and repose. But as
children deprived of their playthings cry, and do
not know how even to desire the realities, so
also are many of those who seem to be men.
Wherefore it saith, " Be not children in your
minds." (i Cor. xiv. 20.) Desirest thou riches,
tell me, and desirest thou not the wealth that
lasteth, but childish toys? If thou shouldest
see a man admiring a leaden coin, and stooping
to pick it up, thou wouldest pronounce his pen-
ury to be extreme ; and dost thou, who collect-
est more worthless things than this, number thy-
self among the rich ? How can this consist with
reason ? We will call him rich who despises all
present things. For no one, no one will choose
to laugh at these little things, silver and gold,
and other things of show, unless he have the
desire of greater things ; just as the man would


'^ W alrioXoyiav TidcfAerT}9 ra «K T^r CK/3a(rewc wiJLpaivovra,
' or, ** to read (and understand),'* ayaytvuiaKtiy,
8 Ben. *' not at all."


302


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXII.


not despise the leaden coin,' unless he possessed
coins of gold. Do thou, therefore, when thou
seest a man running by all worldly things, deem
that he doth so from no other motive than be-
cause he looks to a greater world. So the hus-
bandman despises a few grains of wheat, when
he expects a larger harvest. But if, when the
hope is uncertain, we despise things which are,
much more ought we to do so in a case where
the expectation is sure. Wherefore I pray and
beseech you not to bring loss on yourselves, nor,
keeping hold of mire, rob yourselves of the
treasures which are above, bringing your vessel
to port laden with straw and chaff. Let each
say what he will concerning us, let him be angry
at our continual admonitions, let him call us
silly, tedious, tiresome, still we will not desist
from exhorting you on these matters continually,
and from continually repeating to you that of the
Prophet, " ' Break off thy sins by almsgiving, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor '
(Dan. iv. 27), and bind them upon thy neck."'
Do not act in this way to-day, and desist to-mor-
row. For even this body has need of daily food ;
and so too hath the soul, or rather that much
more ; and if it give not,' it becomes weaker and
more vile. Let us then not neglect it when it is
perishing, choking. Many wounds it receives
each day, by being lustful, angry, slothful, revil-
ing, revengeful, envious. It is therefore neces-
sary to prepare also remedies for it, and no
small remedy is that of almsgiving, which can


be placed on every \vound. For, " Give alms," it
saith, " of such things as ye have, and behold all
things are clean unto you." (Luke xi. 41.)
" Alms," not covetousness, for that which pro-
ceeds from covetousness endures not, though
thou give to those who need. For almsgiving is
that which is free from all injustice, "this"
makes all things clean. This is a thing better
even than fasting, or lying on the ground ; they
may be more painful and laborious, but this
more profitable. It enlightens the soul, makts
it sleek,* beautiful, and vigorous. Not so doth
the fruit of the olive hold up the athletes, as this
oil recovers the combatants of piety. Let us
then anoint our hands, that we may lift them
up well against our adversary. He that practic-
eth showing mercy to him that needeth, will
soon cease from covetousness, he who continues
in giving to the poor, will soon cease from anger,
and will never even be hijri-minded. For as the
physician continually tending wounded persons
is easily sobered, beholding human nature in
the calamities of others ; so we, if we enter
upon the work of aiding the poor, shall easily
become truly wise, and shall not admire riches,
nor deem present things any great matter, but
despise them all, and soaring aloft to heaven,
shall easily obtain the eternal blessings, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ ; to whom, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXII.

John xvii. 14.


" I have given them Thy word ; and the world hath hated
them, because they are not of the world, even as I
am not of the world."


[i.] When having become virtuous we are
persecuted by the wicked, or when being de-
sirous of virtue we are mocked at by them, let
us not be distracted or angry. For this is the
natural course of things, and everywhere virtue
is wont to engender hatred from wicked men.
For envying those who desire to live properly,
and thinking to prepare an excuse for them-
selves if they can overthrow the credit of others,
they hate them as having pursuits opposite to
their own, and use every means to shame their
way of life. But let not us grieve, for this is a


' al. " the lead.". • not found in the Chald. or LXX.

* w M KCLTopiXf, One MS, ieaT«Aa^I|, " if it get it not."


mark of virtue. Wherefore Christ also saith,
" If ye were of the world, the world would love
its own." (c. XV. 19.) And in another place
again, " Woe unto you when all men shall speal
well of you." (Luke vi. 26.) Wherefore als(
He saith here, " I have given them Thy word
and the world hath hated them." Again Hi
telleth the reason for which they were worthy t(
obtain much care from the Father; "ForTh;j
sake," He saith, "they have been hated, an(i
for Thy word's sake " ; so that they would b !
entitled to all providential care.

Ver. 15. "I pray not that Thou shouldesi*
take them out of the world, but that Tho
shouldest keep them from the evil."

Again He simplifieth ' His language ; again H:
rendereth it more clear ; which is the act of on


* XtirfluVfi*


^ aa^Tjvi(tl,


1


HoMiLV LXXXn.J


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


303


showing, by making entreaty for them with exact-
ness, nothing else but this, that He hath a very
tender care for them. Yet He Himself had told
them, that the Father would do all things what-
soever they should ask. How then doth He
here pray for them? As I said, for no other
purpose than to show His love.

Ver. 16. " They are not of the wjorld, even as
I am not of the world."

How then saith He in anotlier place, "Which
Thou gavest Me out of the world ; Thine they
were " ? (Ver. 6.) There He speaketh of their
■nature ; here of wicked actions. And He put-
teth together a long encomium of them ; first,
that " they were not of the world " ; then, that
" the Father Himself had given them " ; and
that "they had kept His word;" and that on
this account "they were hated." And if He
saith, " As I am not of the world," be not troub-
led ; for the " as " is not here expressive of un-
varying exactness. For as, when in the case of
Him and the Father the " as " is used, a great
Equality is signified, because of the Relationship
in Nature ; so when it is used of us and Him,
the interval is great, because of the great and
infinite interval between the respective natures.
For if He " did no sin, neither was guile found
in His mouth" (i Pet. ii. 22), how could the
\postles be reckoned equal to Him ? What is
t then that He saith, "They are not of the
vorld"? "They look to another world, they
lave nothing common with earth, but are be-
:ome citizens of heaven." And by these words
3e showeth His love, when He commendeth
hem to the Father, and committeth them to
iim who begat Him. When He saith, " Keep
hem," He doth not speak merely of delivering
hem from dangers, but also wth regard to their
ontinuance in the faith. WherefSre He addeth,
Ver. 17. "Sanctify them through Thy truth."
Make them holy by the gift of the Spirit, and
f right doctrines." As wHtn He saith, " Ye
re clean through the word which I spake unto
ou " (c. XV. 3) , so now He saith the same thing.
Instruct them, teach them the truth." " And
et He saith that the Spirit doth this. How
len dotk He now ask it from the Father?"
hat thou may^st again learn their equality of
!onor. For right doctrines asserted concerning
od sanctify the soul. And if He saith that
ley are sanctified by the word, marvel not. And
i show that He speaketh of doctrines. He add-
h,

"Thy word is truth."

That is, " there is no falsehood in it, and all
at is said in it must needs come to pass " ; and
ain, it signifieth nothing typical or bodily. As
iS» Paul saith concerning the Church, that He
i.th sanctified it by the Word. For the Word
< God is wont also to cleanse. (Eph. v. 26.)


Moreover, the, " sanctify them," seems to me to
signify something else, such as this, " Set them
apart for the Word and for preaching." And
this is made plain from what follows. For, He
saith,

Ver. 17. "As Thou hast sent Me ii\to the
world, even so have I also sent them into the
world."

As Paul also saith, " Having put in us the
word of reconciliation." (2 Cor. v. 19.) For
the same end for which Christ came, for the
same did these take possession of the world. In
this place again the "as" is not put to. signify
resemblance in the case of Himself and the
Apostles ; for how was it possible for men to be
sent otherwise ? But it was His custom to speak
of the future as having come to pass.*

Ver. 19. "And for their sakes I sanctify My-
self, that they also might be sanctified in the
truth."

What is, "I sanctify Myself"? "I offer to
Thee a sacrifice." Now all sacrifices are called
"holy," and those are specially called "holy
things," which are laid up for God. For whereas
of old in type the sanctification was by the sheep,
but now it is not' in type, but by the truth itself,
He therefore saith, "That they may be sanctified
in Thy truth." " For I both dedicate them to
Thee, and make them an offering"; this He
saith, either because their Head was being made
so,' or because they also were sacrificed ; for,
" Present," it saith, " your bodies a living sacri-
fice, holy" (Rom. xii. i) ; and, "We were
counted as sheep for the slaughter." (Ps. xliv.,
22.) And He maketh them, without death, a
sacrifice and offering; for that He alluded to
His own sacrifice, when He said, " I sanctify,"
is clear from what follows.

Ver. 20. " Neither pray I for these alone, but
for them also who shall believe." ■*

[2.] For since He was dying for them, and
said, that " For their sakes I sanctify Myself,"
lest any one should think that He did this for
the Apostles only. He added, " Neither pray I
for these only, but for them also who believe on
Me through their word." By this again He
revived their souls, showing that the disciples
should be many. For because He made com-
mon what they possessed peculiarly. He comfort-
eth them by showing that they were being made
the cause of the salvation of others.

After having thus spoken concerning their sal-
vation, and their being sanctified by faith and
the Sacrifice, He afterwards speaketh of con-
cord, and finally closeth his discourse with this,
having begun with it and ended ' in it. For at


* i.e. the words refer to the mission of the Ap. on the d^y of
Pentecost, * al. " is no longer."

' ita TO riji' KtittaXriv TOVTO yivtadttt^ al. yiverat.

* *' believe on Me through their word," N. T.

* NaroAv^ac, al. T«AcuT»)tras.


304


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXII.


the beginning He saith, "A new commandment
I give unto you " (c. xiii. 34) ; and here,

Ver. 21. "That they all may be one, as Thou,
Father, art in Me and I in Thee."

Here again the " as " doth not denote exact
similarity in their case, (for it was not possible
for them in so great a degree,) but only as far
as was possible for men. Just as when He saith,
" Be ye merciful, as your Father." (Luke vi. 36.)

But what is, " In Us " ? ' In the faith which is
on Us. Because nothing so offends all men as
divisions. He provideth that they should be
one. "What then," saith some one, "did He
effect this?" Certainly He effected it. For
all who believe through the Apostles are one,
though some from among them were torn away.
Nor did this escape His knowledge, He even
foretold it, and showed that it proceeded from
men's slack-mindedness.

" That the world may believe that Thou hast
sent Me."

As He said in the beginning, " By this shall
all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye
love one another." And how should they hence
believe? "Because," He saith, "Thou art a
God of peace." If therefore they observe the
same as those of whom they have learnt, their
hearers shall know the teacher by the disciples,
but if they quarrel, men shall deny that they are
the disciples of a God of peace, and will not
allow that I, not being peaceable, have been
sent from Thee. Seest thou how, unto the end.
He proveth His unanimity with the Father ?

Ver. 22. "And the glory which Thou gavest
Me, I have given them." '

That by miracles, that by doctrines,' and, that
they should be of one soul ; for this is glory,
that they should be one, and greater even than
miracles. As men * admire God because there
is no strife or discord in That Nature, and this
is His greatest glory, " so too let these," He
saith, "from this cause become glorious." "And
how," saith some one, " doth He ask the Father
to give this to them, when He saith that He
Himself giveth it?" Whether His discourse be
concerning miracles, or unanimity, or peace. He
is seen Himself to have given these things to
them ; whence it is clear that the petition is
made for the sake of their comfort.

Ver. 23. " I in them, and Thou in Me."

"How gave He the glory?" By being in
them, and having the Father with Him, so as to
weld them ' together. But in another place He
speaketh not so ; He saith not that the Father
Cometh by Him, but, " that He and the Father
come, and take up their abode with him," ^

* " that they also may be one in Us," N. T.

* "given them, that thiy may be one, even as We are One,"
N. T. «al. "we."

■ al. ** teaching." * al. " hold them."

* i.e. with him who keeps the commandoientj.


" there " removing the suspicion of Sabellius,
" here " that of Arius.'

" That they may be made perfect in one, and
that the world may know that Thou hast sent
Me." (c. xiv. 23.)

He saith these latter words immediately after
the other, to show that peace hath more power
to attract men than a miracle ; for as it is the
nature of strife* to separate, so it is that of
agreement to weld together.

" And I have " loved them as Thou hast loved
Me."

Here again the " as" means, as far as it is
possible for a man to be loved ; and the sure
proof of His love is His giving Himself for
them. After having told them that they shall
be in safety, that they shall not be overturned,
that they shall be holy, that many shall believe
through them, that they shall enjoy great glory,
that not He alone loved them, but the Father
also ; He next telleth them of what shall be after
their sojourning here,'" concerning the prizes and
crowns laid up for them.

Ver. 24. "Father," He saith, " I will that they
also whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me
where I am."

"Then dost Thou gain by prayer, and dost
Thou not yet possess that concerning which they
enquired continually, saying, ' Whither goest
Thou?' What sayestThou? How then didst
Thou say to them, 'Ye shall sit upon twelve
thrones ' ? (Matt. xix. 28.) How didst Thou
promise other things more and greater?" Seest
thou that He saith all " in the way of condescen-
sion? since how would He have said, "Thou
shalt follow afterwards " ? (c. xiii. 36.) But
He speaketh thus with a view to a fuller convic-
tion and demonstration of His love.

" That they may behold My glory which Thou
hast given Me."

This again is a sign of His being of one mind
with the Father, of a higher character than those
former, for He saith, " Before '^ the foundation
of the world," yet hath it also a certain conde-
scension ; for, " Thou hast given Me," He saith.
Now if this be not the case, I would gladly ask
the gainsayers a question. He that giveth, giveth
to one subsisting ; '' did the Father then, having
first begotten the Son, afterwards give Him
glory, having before allowed Him to be without
glory? And how could this be reasonable?
Seest that the " He gave," is, " He begat " ?

[3.] But why said He not, "That they may
share My glory," instead of, " That they may be-


' al. "there stopping the mouths of the Sabellians, heieie-B"^
moving the folly of Arius." The earlier passage, c. xiv. 23, pfov^^jf
the distinct Personality, the latter, c. xvii. 23, the Consubstantialityf
of the Son. F

* al. " division." * " and hast loved," N. T. |

^^ Sav. conject. "departure hence."

" al. "all is said."

" " For Thou lovedst Me before," &c., N. T. '■' v^<r


Homily LXXXII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


305


hold My glory"? Here He implieth, that all
that rest is, the looking on the Son of God. This
certainly it is which causes them to be glorified ,
as Paul saith, " With open face mirroring the
glory of the Lord." (2 Cor. iii. 18.) For as
they who look on the sunbeams, and enjoy a
very clear atmosphere, draw their enjoyment
from their sight, so then also, and in much
greater degree, this will cause us pleasure.' At
the same time also He showeth, that what they
should behold was not the body then seen, but
some awful Substance.

Ver. 25 "O righteous Father, the world hath
not known Thee." '

What meaneth this? What connection hath
It ? He here showeth that no man knoweth
God, save those only who have come to know
I the Son. .And what He saith is of this kind
" I wished all to be so,' yet they have not known
Thee, although they had no complaint against
Thee." For this is the meaning of, " O righteous
Father." And here He seemeth to me to speak
these words, as vexed that they would not know
One so just and good. For since the Jews had
said that they knew God, but that He knew Him
not, at this He aimeth, saying, " For Thou lovedst
Me before the foundation of the world " ; thus
putting together a defense against the accusa-
tions of the Jews. For how could He who
had received glory, who was loved before the
foundation of the world, who desired to have
them as witnesses of that glory, how could
He be opposed to the Father? "This then is
not true which the Jews say, that they know
Thee, and that I know Thee not ; on the con-
trary, I know Thee, and they have not known
rhee."

" And these have known that Thou hast sent
Vie."

Seest thou that He alludeth to those, who
laid that He was not from God, and all is finally
iummed up to meet this argument?

Ver. 26. " And I have declared unto them
rhy Name, and will declare it."

"Yet thou sayest that perfect knowledge is
irom the Spirit." " But the things of the Spirit
.t€ Mine."

"That the love wherewith Thou hast loved
de may remain* in them, and I in them."

" For if they learn who Thou art, then they
hall know that I am not separated from Thee,
lUt one of the greatly beloved, and a tnie Son,
ltd closely knit to Thee. And those who are
ightly persuaded of this, will keep both the faith
hich is on Me and perfect love ; and while
ey love as they ought, I remain in them."


Seest thou how He hath arrived ' at a good end,
finishing off the discourse with love, the mother
of all blessings?

[4.] Let us then believe and love God, that it
may not be said of us, " They profess that they
know God, but in their works they deny Him."
(Tit. i. 16.) And again, " He hath denied the faith,
and is worse than an infidel." (i Tim. v. 8.)
For when he« helps his domestics and kinsmen
and strangers, while thou dost not even succor
those who are related to thee by family, what
will henceforth be thy excuse, when God is
blasphemed and insulted by reason of thee?
Consider what opportunities of doing good God
hath given to us. " Have mercy on one," He
saith, "as a kinsman, on another as a friend, on
another as a neighbor, on another as a citizen,
on another as a man." And if none of these
things hold thee, but thou breakest through all
bonds, hear from Paul, that thou art "worse
than an infidel " , for he having heard nothing
of almsgiving, or of heavenly things, hath over-
shot thee in love for man , but thou who art
bidden to love thy very enemies, lookest upon
thy friends as enemies, and art more careful of
thy money than of their bodies. Yet the money
by being spent will sustain no injury, but thy
brother if neglected will perish. What madness
then to be careful of money, and careless about
one's kindred? Whence hath this craving for
riches burst in upon us?' Whence this inhu-
manity and cruelty? For if anyone could, as
though seated on the highest bench of a theater,
look down upon all the world, — or rather, if
you will, let us for the present take in hand a
single city, — if then a man seated on an ele-
vated spot could take in at a glance all the
doings of the men there, consider what folly he
would condemn, what tears he would weep, what
laughter he would laugh, with what hatred he
would hate , for we commit such actions as
deserve both laughter, and the charge of folly,
and tears, and hatred. One man keeps dogs to
catch* brute animals, himself sinking into bru-
tality , another keeps oxen and asses to trans-
port stones, but neglects men wasting with hun-
ger, and spends gold without limit to make
men of stone, but neglects real men, who are
becoming like stones through their evil state.
Another, collecting with great pains golden quar-
ries,^ puts them about his walls, but when he
beholds the naked bellies of the poor, is not
moved." Some again contrive garments over
their very garments, while their brother hath not
even wherewithal to cover his naked body.
Again, one hath swallowed up another in the


• al, '* will cause us Krcater pleasure."

* ** Iwiown Thee; but 1 know Thee," N. T.
'<i( * i e. knowing the Father.

♦ " may be." N. T.


* anrifrrnrev, according to Sav. conjcct. and some MSS. for

0 i.e. the infidel. ' tiatKi^naat.

■ <ra.yi)vfvaj}, " sweep as with a seine net."

" for mosaic work, ^))<>t5af. w tit. " bent."


3o6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM;


[Homily LXXXIft.


law-courts ; another hath spent his money on
•women and parasites, another on stage-players
and theatrical bands/ another on splendid edi-
fices, on purchases of fields and houses. Again,
one man is counting interest, another interest of
interest ; another is putting together' bands full
of many deaths, and doth not enjoy rest even at
night, lying awake for others' harm. Then, when
it is day, they run, one to his unjust gain, another
to his wanton expense, others to public robbery.'
And great is the earnestness about things super-
fluous and forbidden, but of things necessary no
account is taken ; and they who decide ques-
tions of law have indeed the name of jurymen,
but are really* thieves and murderers. And if
one should enquire into law suits and wills, he
would find there again ten thousand mischiefs,
frauds, robberies, plots, and about these things
is all time spent ; but for spiritual things there
is no care, and they all inconvenience the Church,
for the sake of seeing only. But this is not
what is required ; we need works, and a pure
mind.' But if thou spendest all the day in
grasping after riches, and then coming in sayest
a few words, thou hast not only not propitiated
God, but hast even angered Him more. Would-
est thou conciliate thy Lord, exhibit works, make
thyself acquainted with the mass of woes, look
upon the naked, the hungry, the wronged ; He
hath cut out for thee ten thousand ways of
showing love for men. Let us not then deceive
ourselves by living aimlessly and to no purpose,
nor presume, because we now are in health ; but
bearing in mind, that often when we have fallen


into sickness, and hav^ reached the extreme of
debility, we have been dead with fear and the
looking for things to come, let us expect to fall
again into the same state, let us get again the
same fear, and let us become better men ; since
what is done now deserves infinite condemna-
tion. For those in the courts of justice are like
lions and dogs ; those in the public places like
foxes ; and those who lead a life of leisure, even
they do not use their leisure as they ought,
speeding all their time on theaters and the
mischiefs arising from them. And there is no
one to reprove what is being done ; but there
are many who envy, and are vexed that they are
not in the like condition,' so that these in their
turn are punished, though not actually doing
wicked things. For they " not only do these
things, but also have pleasure in them that do
them." Because what belongs to their will is
alike ' corrupt ; whence it is plain, that the in-
tention also will be punished. These things I
say each day, and I will not cease to say thetn.
For if any listen, it is gain ; but if none give
heed, ye shall then hear these things, when
it will avail you nothing, and ye shall blame
yourselves, and we shall be free from fault. But
may it never come to pass that we should only
have this excuse, but that you may be our boast
before the judgment-seat of Christ, that together
we may enjoy the blessings, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXIII.

John xviii. i.


" When Jesus had spoken these words, He went forth
with His disciples over the brook Cedron, where was
a garden, into the which He entered, and His disci-
ples."

[i.] An awful thing is death, and very full of
terror, but not to those who have learnt the true
wisdom which is above. For he tljat knows
nothing certain concerning things to come, but
deems it' to be a certain dissolution and end
of life, with reason shudders and is afraid, as
though he were passing into non-existence. But
we who, by the grace of God, have learnt the
hidden and secret things of His wisdom, and


* opx^<rr/sa?, a!, opvijcrrclf , ** dancers." * al. " putting."
■ or, " robbing tbc State, kAotttji' htir\\LoiT\.tvii.ivT\y.

* Ht. " have the reaJity of." * or, " intention."
~ i.e. death, lit. " the action."


•».«


deem the action to Tdc a departure to another
place, should have no reason to tremble, but
rather to rejoice and be glad, that leaving this
perishable life we go to one far better and
brighter, and which hath no end. Which Christ
teaching by His actions, goeth to His Passion,
not by constraint and necessity, but willingly.
"These things," it saith, "Jesus spake, and
departed ' beyond the brook Cedron, where
was a garden, into the which He entered, and
His disciples.' "

Ver. 2. " Judas also, which betrayed Him,
knew the place; for Jesus ofttimes resorted
thither with His disciples."

He joumeyeth at midnight, and crosseth a


' or, " do not things like them."
* i.e. *' no less than the actions.*'


Homily LXXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


307


river, .ind hasteth to come to a place known to
the traitor, lessening the labor to those who
plotted against Him, and freeing them from all
trouble ; and showeth to the disciples that He
came willingly to the action, (a thing which was
most of ail sufficient to comfort them,) and
placeth Himself in the garden as m a prison.

" These things spake Jesus unto them." " What
sayest thou?' Surely He was speaking with
the Father, surely He was praying. Why then
dost thou not say that, ' having ceased from the
prayer,' He came there? " Because it was not
prayer, but a speech made on account of the
disciples. " And the disciples entered into the
garden." He had so freed them from fear,
that they no longer resisted, but entered with
Him into the garden. But how came Judas
there, or whence had he gained his information
when he came? It is evident from this circum-
stance, that Jesus generally ■' passed the night
out of doors.^ For had He been m the habit
of spending it at home, Judas would not have
come to the desert, but to the house, expecting
there to find Him asleep. And lest, hearing of
' garden," thou shouldest think that Jesus hid
Himself, it addeth, that " Judas knew the place " ;
and not simply so,' but that He " often resorted
thither with His disciples." For ofttimes He
was with them apart, conversing on necessary
matters, and such as it was not permitted to
others to hear. And He did this especially in
mountains and gardens, seeking a place free
from disturbance, that their attention might not
be distracted from listening.

Ver 3. " Judas then, having received a band
jf men and officers from the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns, and
orches, and weapons."
And these men had often at other times sent
seize Him, but had not been able ; whence
t is plain, that at this time He voluntarily sur-
endered Himself. And how did they persuade
lie band? They were soldiers,' who had made
i their practice to do anything for money.
Ver. 4. "Jesus therefore, knowing all things
lat should come upon Him, went forth, and
id. Whom seek ye?"

That is, He did not wait to learn this from
leir coming, but spake and acted without con-
sion, as knowing all these things. " But why
me they with weapons, when about to seize
im?" They feared His followers, and for
is reason they came upon Him late at night.
And He went forth, and said unto them, Whom
ek ye? "

Ver. 5. "They answered Him, Jesus of Naz-
eth.""


I J addressed to St. Juhn.
" Ta ifoAAa.

' <(-■

I* Ver. 5,6. "They answcied Hiin, Jesus of Nazareth,


or, " nol once, but often,*'

ffrpttTiu.Tat, mercenaries.


&c.


Jesus


Seest thou His invincible power, how being
in the midst of them He disabled their eyes?
for that the darkness was not the cause of their
not knowing Him, the Evangelist hath shown,
by saying, that they had torches also. And even
had there been no torches, they ought at least
to have known Him by His voice ; or if they
did not know it, how could Judas be ignorant,
who had been so continually with Him? for he
too stood with them, and knew Him no more
than they, but with them fell backward. And
Jesus did this to show, that not only they could
not seize Him, but could not even see Him
when in the midst, unless He gave permission.

Ver. 7. " He saith again. Whom seek ye? "'

What madness ! His word threw them back-
ward, yet not even so did they turn, when they
had learnt that His power was so great, but
again set themselves to the same attempt.
When therefore He had fulfilled all that was
His, then He gave Himself up.

Ver. 8. " He answered, I told you that I Am."
(Ver. 5. "And Judas also which betrayed Him
stood with them.")

See the forbearance' of the Evangelist, how
he doth not insult over the traitor, but relates
wliat took place, only desiring to prove one
thing, that the whole took place with His own
consent. Then, lest any one should say that He
Himself brought them to this, by having placed
Himself into their hands, and revealed Himself
to them ; after having shown to them all things
which should have been sufficient to repulse
them, when they persevered in their wickedness,
and had no excuse. He put Himself in their
hands, saying,

" If^ therefore ye seek Me, let these go their
way."

Manifesting until the last hour His lovingkind-
ness towards them. " If," He saith, " ye want
Me, have nothing to do with these, for, behold,
I give Myself up."

Ver. 9. "That the saying might be fulfilled
which He spake. Of those which Thou gavest
Me have I lost none."

By " loss " " He doth not here mean that
which is of death, but that which is eternal ;
though the F^vangelist in the present case in-
cludes the former also. And one might wonder
why they did not seize them with Him, and cut
them to pieces, especially when Peter had exas-
perated them by what he did to the servant.
Who then restrained them? No other than that
Power which cast them backward. And so the
Evangelist, to show that it did not come to pass
through their intention, but by the power and


saith unto them, 1 Am. And Judas also which betrayed Him stood
with them. As soon then as He had said unto them, 1 Am, they
went backward, and fell to the ground." N. T.

' " Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth." N. T,
^ TO aytnaj^^ii, ^ more exactly, " perdition."


3o8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIII.


decree of Him whom they had seized, has
added, "That the saying might be fulfilled
which He spake," that " not one, &c." (c. xvii.

12.)

[2.] Peter, therefore, taking courage from
His voice, and from what had already hap-
pened, arms himself against the assailants.'
" And how," saith some one, " doth he who
was bidden not to have a scrip, not to have two
coats, possess a sword?" Methinks he had pre-
pared it long before, as fearing this very thing
which came to pass. But if thou sayest, " How
doth he, who was forbidden even to strike a
blow with the hand, become a man-slayer?"
He certainly had been commanded not to de-
fend himself, but here he did not defend himself,
but his Master. And besides, they were not as
yet perfect or complete. But if thou dcsirest to
.5ee Peter endued with heavenly wisdom, thou
shall after this behold him wounded, and bear-
ing it meekly, suffering ten thousand dreadful
things, and not moved to anger. But Jesus here
also worketh a miracle, both showing that we
ought to do good to those who do evil to us,
and revealing His own power. He therefore
restored the servant's ear, and said to Peter,
that " All they that take the sword shall perish
by the sword " (Matt. xxvi. 52) ; and as He did
in the case of the basin, when He relaxed his
vehemence "^ by a threat, so also here. The
Evangelist adds the name of the servant, be-
cause the thing done was very great, not only
because He healed him, but because He healed
one who had come against Him, and who shortly
after would buffet Him, and because He stayed
the war which was like to have been kindled
from this circumstance against the disciples.
For this cause the Evangelist hath put the
name, so that the men of that time might
search and enquire diligently whether these
things had really come to pass. And not with-
out a cause doth he mention the " right ear,"
but as I think desiring to show the impetuosity
of the Apostle, that he almost aimed at the head
itself. Yet Jesus not only restraineth him by a
threat, but also calmeth him by other words,
saying,

Ver. II. "The cup which My Father hath
given Me, shall I not drink it?"'

Showing, that what was done proceeded not
from their power, but from His consent, and de-
claring that He was not one opposed to God,
,but obedient to the Father even unto death.

Ver. 12, 13. "Then Jesus was taken; and
they bound Him, and led Him away to Annas."*


* Ver. 10. " Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, and
smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The ser-
vant's name was Malchus." • * lit. *' tension."

* Ver. II. "Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword
into the sheath ; the cup," &c. N. T.

* Ver. 12, IT. " Then the band and the captain and oflficers of
the Jews took Je&us, and bound Him, and led Him away to Annas


Why to Annas ? In their pleasure they made
a show of what had been done, as though for-
sooth they had set up a trophy.

" And he was father-in-law to Caiaphas."

Ver. 14. " Now Caiaphas was be which gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that
one man should die for the people."

Why doth the Evangelist again remind us of
his prophecy ? To show that these things were
done for our salvation. And such is the exceed-
ing force of truth, that even enemies proclaimed
these things beforehand. For lest the listener,
hearing of bonds, should be confounded, he re-
minds him of that prophecy, that the death of
Jesus was the salvation of the world.

Ver. 15. "And Simon Peter followed Jesus,
and so did another disciple." *

Who is that other disciple ? It is the writer
himself. " And wherefore doth he not name
himself? When he lay on the bosom of Jesus,
he with reason concealed his name ; but now
why doth he this?" For the same reason, for
here too he mentions a great good deed, that
when all had started away,' he followed. There-
fore he conceals himself, and puts Peter before
him. He was obliged to mention himself, that
thou mightest understand that he narrates more
exactly than the rest what took place in the hall,
as having been himself within. But observe how
he detracts from his own praise ; for, lest any
one should ask, " How, when all had retreated,
did this man enter in farther than Simon?" he
saith, that he " was known to the high priest."
So that no one should wonder that he followed, .
or cry him up for his manliness. But the won-
der was that matter of Peter, that being in such 1
fear, he came even as far as the hall, when the •
others had retreated. His coming thither was 1
caused by love, his not entering within by dis-
tress and fear. For the Evangelist hath recorded f"
these things, to clear a way for excusing his de-
nial ; with regard to himself, he doth not set it^
down as any great matter that he was known to^
the high priest, but since he had said that
alone with Jesus went in, lest thou shoulde^
suppose that the action proceeded from any e;^
alted feelings, he puts also the cause. And th^
Peter would have also entered had he been pec
mitted, he shows by the sequel ; for when hi
went out, and bade the damsel who kept the!
door bring in Peter, he straightway came in4
But why did he not bring him in himself? Hd
clung to Christ, and followed Him; on


first; for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, which was the 1
priest that same year." N. T.

" or, " made a show of Him in."

'. Ver. 15, 16. "And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and 10 <
that other disciple; that disciple was known unto the high prio
and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. Bui
Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that otner discipkl
which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her tlll|I
kept the door, and brought in Peter." N. T. ' al. " retired."


Homily LXXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


309


account he bade ' the woman bring him in.
What then saith the woman?

Ver. 17. "Art not thou also one of this man's
disciples? And he saith, I am not.'"'

What sayest thou, Peter? Didst thou not

declare but now, " If need be that I lay down

my life for Thee, I will lay it down " ? What

hath happened then, that thou canst not even

endure the questioning of a door-keeper? Is it

a soldier who questions thee? Is it one of

those who seized Him? No, it is a mean and

abject door-keeper, nor is the questioning of a

rough kind.^ She saith not, "An thou a disciple

of that cheat and corrupter," but, " of that man,"

which was the expression rather of one pitying

and relenting.' But Peter could not bear any

of these words. The, "Art not thou also," is

[said on this account, that John was within. So

mildly did the woman speak. But he perceived

none of this, nor took it into his mind, neither

the first time, nor the second, nor the third, but

ivhen the cock crew ; nor did this even bring

lim to his senses, till Jesus gave him the bitter

ook. And he stood warming himself with the

lervants of the high priest, but Christ was kept

Dound within. This we say not as accusing

Peter, but showing the truth of what had been

aid by Christ.

Ver. 19. " The high priest then asked Jesus of
lis disciples, and of His doctrine."

[3.] O the wickedness ! Though he had
lontinually heard Him speaking in the temple
nd teaching openly, he now desires to be
iformed. For since they had no charge to
ring, they enquired concerning His disciples,
lerhaps where they were, and why He had col-
cted them, and with what intention, and on
■hat terms. And this he said, as desiring to
rove Him to be a seditious person and an
movator, sinpe no one gave heed to Him,
Kcept them alone, as though His were some
ictory of wickedness. What then saith Christ?
'o overthrow this. He saith,
Ver. 20. " I spake openly to the world, (not
the disciples privately,) I taught openly in
le temple.""

"What then, said He nothing in secret?"
!e did, but not, as they thought, from fear, and
make conspiracies, but if at any time His say-
were too high for the hearing of the many.
Ver. 21." Why askest thou Me ? Ask them
ich heard Me."'


l!


* al. " gave in charge."

* Ver. 17. *' Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto
lor. Art not," &c. N. T.

' Vpetffeia. * lit. '* bent," *(aTo«afiirTo^«i'Tj?.

* Ver. 18. " And the servants and officers stood there, who had
de a fire of coals; and they warmed themselves; and Peter
__ with them, and warmed himself."

* "Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world: I ever
ight in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews

ays resort; and in secret have I said nothing." N. T.

' " which heard Me, what I have said unto them: behold, they

3w what I said." N. T.


These are not the words of one speaking
arrogantly, but of one confiding in the truth of
what He had said. What therefore He said at
the beginning, " If I bear witness of Myself, My
witness is not true" (c. v. 31), this He now
implieth, desiring to render His testimony abun-
dantly credible. For when Annas mentioned
the disciples,' what saith He ? " Dost thou ask
Me concerning Mine? Ask Mine enemies, ask
those who have plotted against Me, who have
bound Me ; let them speak." This is an un-
questionable proof of truth, when one calls his
enemies to be witnesses to what he saith. What
then doth the high priest? When it would have
been right thus to have made the enquiry, that
person did not so.

Ver. 22. "And when He had thus spoken,
one of the officers which stood by smote Him
with the palm of his hand." "

What could be more audacious than this?
Shudder, O heaven, be astounded, O earth, at
the long-suffering of the Lord, and the senseless-
ness of the servants ! Yet what was it that He
said? He said not, "Why askest thou Me," as
if refusing to speak, but wishing to remove- every
pretext for senseless behavior ; and being upon
this buffeted, though He was able to shake, to
annihilate, or to remove all things. He doth not
any one of these, but speaketh words able to
relax any brutality.

Ver. 23. "And He saith. If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil." '"

That is, " If thou canst lay hold on My words,
declare it ; but if thou canst not, why strikest
thou Me?" Seest thou that the judgment-hall
is full of tumult, and trouble, and passion, and
confusion? The high priest asked deceitfully
and treacherously, Christ answered in a straight-
forward manner, and as was meet. What then
was next to be done? Either to refute, or to
accept what He said. This however is not done,
but a servant buffets Him. So far was this from
being a court of justice, and the proceedings
those of a conspiracy, and a deed of tyranny.
Then not having even so made any farther dis-
covery, they send Him bound to Caiaphas."

Ver. 25. "And Simon Peter stood and warmed
himself."

Wonderful, by what a lethargy " that hot and
furious one was possessed, when Jesus was being
led away ! After such things as had taken place,
he doth not move, but still warms himself, that
thou mayest learn how great is the weakness of


" al. " the disciples as disciples."

*• "of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the higW priest lo?*
N. T.

»o " of the evil ; but if well, why smilest thou Me? " N. T.

^t Ver. 24. " Annas sent (initrTti^fv) Him bound to Caiaphai
the high priest." St. C. makes this the order of the narrative, but
most commentators refer the words to an earlier period.


iio


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


fHoMILY LXXXllt.


our nature if God abandoneth. And, being
questioned, he denies again.'

Ver. 26. Then saith "the kinsman^ of him
whose ear Peter cut off, (grieving at what had
taken place,) Did I not see thee in the garden?"'

But neither did the garden bring him to re-
member what had taken place,'' nor the great
affection which Jesus there had shown by those
words, but all these from pressure of anxiety he
banished from his mind. But why have the
Evangelists with one accord written concerning
him ? Not as accusing the disciple, but as desir-
ing to teach us, how great an evil it is not to
commit all to God, but to trust to one's self.
But do thou admire the tender care of his Mas-
ter, who, though a prisoner and bound, took
great forethought for His disciple, raising Peter
up, when he was down, by His look, and launch-
ing him into a sea of tears.'

" They lead Him therefore from Caiaphas to
Pilate."*

This was done, in order that the number of
His judges might show, even against their will,
how fully tested was His truth. "And it was
early." Before cock crow He was brought to
Caiaphas, early in the morning to Pilate ; whence
the Evangelist shows, that being questioned by
Caiaphas during an entire half of the night, He
was in nothing proved guilty ; wherefore Caia-
phas sent Him on tp Pilate. But leaving these
things for the others to relate, John speaks of
what follows next. And observe the ridiculous
conduct of the Jews. They who had seized the
innocent, and taken up arras, do not enter into
the hall of judgment, " lest they should be pol-
luteid." And tell me, what kind of pollution
was it to set foot in a judgment-hall, where
wrong-doers suffer justice? They who paid
tithes of mint and anise, did not think they were
polluted when bent on killing unjustly, but thought
that they polluted themselves by even treading in
a court of justice. " And why did they not kill
Him, instead of bringing Him to Pilate?" In
the first place, the greater part of their rule and
authority had been cut away, when their affairs
were placed under the power of the Romans ;
and besides, they feared lest they should after-
wards be accused and punished by Him. " But
what is, 'That they might eat the Passover?'
For He had done this on the first day of
unleavened bread." Either he calls the whole
feast " the Passover," or means, that they were


1 Part of vcr. 25. " They said therefore unto him, Art not thou
also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, 1 am not."

2 Ver. 26. " one of the servants of the high priest, being his
kinsman," &c., " saith." N. T.

* "in the garden with him?" ver. 27. "Peter then denied
again ; and immediately the cock crew." N. T.

* a1, " hnd been said.'* ^ civ Baxpya Ka6i\Ku>v.
0 Ver. 28, " Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall

of judgment; and it was early: and they themselves went not into
the judgment-hall, lest they should be de61ed; but that they might
eat the Passover." Jl. T.


then keeping the Passover, while He delivered
it to His followers one day sooner, reserving His
own Sacrifice for' the Preparation-day, when
also of old the Passover was celebrated. But
they, though they had taken up arms, which was
unlawful, and were shedding blood, are scru-
pulous about the place, and bring forth Pilate
to them.

Ver. 29. "And having gone out, he said,
What accusation bring ye against this man?"

[4.] Seest thou that he was free from* fond-
ness for rule and from malice ? For seeing Jesus
bound, and led by so many persons, he did not
think that they had unquestionable proof of their
accusation, but questions them, thinking it a
strange thing that they should take for them-
selves the judgment, and then commit the
punishment without any judgment to him.
What then say they ?

Ver. 30. " If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him up unto thee."

O madness ! for why do ye not mention His
evil deeds, instead of concealing them? Why
do ye not prove the evil ? Seest thou that the)
everywhere avoid a direct accusation, and that
they can say nothing? That Annas questionec
Him about His doctrine, and having heard Him.
sent Him to Caiaphas ; and he having in his
turn questioned Him, and discovered nothing
sent Him to Pilate. Pilate saith, "What accu-
sation bring ye against this man?" Nor hert
have they anything to say, but again emplo;
certain' conjectures. At which Pilate bein;
perplexed saith,

Ver. 31, 32. "Take ye him and judge hin
according to your law. They therefore said, I
is not lawful for us to put any man to death.
But this they said, "that the saying of the Lon
might be fulfilled, which He spake, signifying b
what death He should die."

" And how did the expression, ' It is not law
ful for us to put any man to death,' declare this? '
Either the Evangelist means that He was aboiij
to be slain not by the Jews only, but by'T
Gentiles also, or that it was not lawful for the
to crucify. But if they say, " It is not law
for us to put any man to death," they say it wit"
reference to that season. For that they did slo
men, and that they slew them in a different wa
Stephen shows, being stoned. But they desire
to crucify Hira, that they might make a dispk
of the ma.nner of His death. Pilate, wishing I
be freed from trouble, doth not dismiss Hira f<
a long trial, but,

Ver. 33, 34. " Having entered in, he askf
Jesus, and said," Art thou the King of the Jew;


: Ian
lis? I

■"tbl
theJ
awin
witl


' or, " waiting for His,** &c., " on.** * al. ** from their."
"* al. " but in certain." ** Ben. ** not for," &c., ** but fo

^1 '* Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and cal
Jesus, and said unto Him." ^ '^


N. T.


Homily LXXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


311


Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of
thyself, or did others tell it thee of Me? "

Wherefore did Christ ask this? Hecause He
desired to expose the evil intentions of the
Jews. Pilate had heard this saying from many,
and, since the accusers had nothing to say, in
order that the enquiry might not be a long one,
he desires to bring forward that which was con-
tinually reported. But when he said to them,
"Judge him according to your law," wishing to
show that His offense was not a Jewish one,
they replied, " It is not lawful for us." " He
hath not sinned against our law, but the indict-
ment is general." ' Pilate then, having per-
ceived this, saith, as being (himselQ likely to be
endangered, "Art thou the King of the Jews?"
Then Jesus, not from ignorance, but from a de-
sire that the Jews should be accused even by
him, asked him, saying, " Did others tell it
thee?"- On this point then declaring himself,
Pilate replied,

Ver. 35. " Am I a Jew? Thine own nation
and the chief priests have delivered thee unto
me ; what hast thou done? "

Here desiring to clear himself of the matter.
Then because he had said, " Art thou the
ing?" Jesus reproving him answercth, "This
:hou hast heard from the Jews. Why dost thou
lot make accurate enquiry? They have said
hat I am a malefactor ; ask them what evil I
lave done. But this thou doest not, but art
limply framing charges against Me." " Jesus
inswered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself,"
)r from others ? Pilate then cannot at once say
hat he had heard it, but simply goes along with ^
he people, saying, " They have delivered thee
nto me." " I must needs therefore ask thee
hat thou hast done." What then saith Christ?
Ver. 36. " My Kingdom is not of this
irorld."

He leadeth upwards Pilate who was not a very
ncked man, nor after their fashion, and desireth
show that He is not a mere man, but God,
nd the Son of God And what saith He?

" If My Kingdom were of this world, then
rould My servants fight, that I should not be
elivered to the Jews." ■*
He undoeth that which Pilate for a while had
tared, namely, the suspicion of seizing kingly
ower, " Is then His kingdom not of this world
Iso?"' Certainly it is. " How then saith He
'is not'?" Not because He doth not rule
re, but because He hath his empire from
\x>\e, and because it is not human, but far
reater than this and more splendid. " If then


.e. against heathen law also.

• Ver. 30. *' Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thy-
If, or didothers tell it thee of Mei"' N. T.

"• intrai.

' •' 10 the Jews : but now in My kingdom not from hence," N. T.

• Ben. omiis " also."


it be greater, how was He m;ide captive by the
other?" By consenting, and giving Himself
up. But He doth not at present reveal ''' this, but
what saith He? " If I had been of this world,
' My seiVants would fight, that I should not be
delivered.'" Here He showeth the weakness of
kingship among us, that its strength lies in ser-
vants ; but that which is above is sufficient for
itself, needing nothing., From this the heretics
taking occasion say, that He is different from
the Creator. What then, when it saith, " He
came to His own"? (c. i. 11.) What, when
Himself saith, " They are not of this world, as
I am not of this world"? (c. xvii. 14.) So
also He saith that His kingdom is not from
hence, not depriving the world of His provi-
dence and superintendence, but showing, as I
said, that His power was not human or perish-
able. What then said Pilate ?

Ver. 37. "Art thou a king then? Jesus
answered. Thou sayest that I am a King. To
this end was I born."

If then He was bom a king, all His other at-
tributes are by Generation, and He hath nothing
which He received in addition. So that when
thou hearest that, " As the Father hath life in
Himself, so hath He given to the Son also to
have life " (c. v. 26), deem of nothing else but
His generation, and so of the rest.

" And for this cause came I,' that I should
bear witness unto the truth."

That is, " that I should speak this very thing,
and teach it, and persuade all men."

[5.] But do thou, O man,^when thou hearest
these things, and seest thy Lord bound and led
about, deem present things to be nought. For
how can it be otherwise than strange, if Christ
bore such things for thy sake, and thou often
canst not endure even words? He is spit upon,
and dost thou deck thyself with garments and
rings, and, if thou gain not good report from all,
think life unbearable? He is insulted, beareth
mockings, and scornful blows upon the cheek j
and dost thou wish everywhere to be honored,
and bearest thou not the reproaching of Christ?
Hearest thou not Paul saying, "Be ye imitators'
of me, even as I also am of Christ "? (i Cor. xi.
I.) When therefore any one makes a jest of
thee, remember thy Lord, that in mockery they
bowed the knee before Him, and worried '■' Him
both by words and deeds, and treated Him with
much irony ; but He not only did not defend
Himself, but even repaid them with the con-
traries, with mildness and gentleness. Him now
let us emulate ; so shall we be enabled even to
be delivered from all insult. For it is not the
insulter that gives effect to acts of insult, and
makes them biting, but he who is little of soul,


** al. *' hide." ■ fnnrtrat.

' '* came 1 into the world," N. T. ^ SUvvpov,


3'*


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[Homily LXXXIII.


»nd is pained by them. If thou art not pained,
thou hast not been insulted ; for the suffering
from injuries depends not on those who inflict,
but on those who undergo them. Why dost
thou grieve at all ? If a man hath insulted thee
unjustly, in this case surely thou oughtest not to
grieve at all, but to pity him; if justly, much
more oughtest thou to keep quiet. For should
any one address thee, a poor man, as though
thou wert rich, the praise contained in his words
is nothing to thee, but his encomium is rather
mockery ; and so if one insulting thee utter
things that are untrue, the reproach is nothing
to thee either. But if conscience takes hold of
what hath been said, be not grieved at the words,
but make correction in deeds. This I say with
regard to what really are insults. For if one re-
proach thee with poverty or low birth, laugh at
him.' These things are a reproach not to the
hearer, but to the speaker, as not knowing true
wisdom. "But," saith some one, "when these
things are said in the presence of many who
are ignorant of the truth, the wound becomes
unbearable." Nay, it is most bearable, when
you have an audience present of witnesses prais-
ing and applauding you, scoffing at and making
a jest of him. For not he that defends himself,
but he that saith nothing, is applauded by sensi-
ble persons. And if none of those present be a
sensible person, then laugh at him most of all,
and delight thyself in the audience of heaven.
For there all will praise and applaud and welcome
thee. For one Angel is as good as all the world.
But why speak I of Angels, when the Lord^Him-
self proclaimeth' thee? Let us exercise our-
selves with these reasonings. For it is no loss
to be silent when insulted, but it is, oh the con-
trary, to defend one's self when insulted. Since
were it a fault silently to bear what is said, Christ
would never have told us, "If one smite -thee on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also."


« ai , ,

* Sav. conj.


this is tn be laughed at.**
- " shall proclaim,'*


(Matt. V. 39.)' If then our enemy say what is
not true, let us on this account even pity him,
because he draws down upon him the punishment
and vengeance of the accusers,'' being unworthy
even to read the Scriptures. For to the sinner
God saith, "Why declares! thou My statutes,
and takest My covenant in thy mouth? Thou
satest and spakest against thy brother." (Ps.
1. 16 and 20, LXX.) And if he speak the truth,
so also he is to be pitied , since even the Phari-
see spake the truth ; yet he did no harm to him
who heard him, but rather good, while he de-
prived himself of ten thousand blessings, endur-
ing ship\yreck by this accusation. So that
either way it is he that suffers injury, not thou ;
but thou, if thou art sober, wilt have double
gain ; both the propitiating God by thy silence,
and the becoming yet more discreet, the gaining
an opportunity from what hath been said to
correct what has been done, and the despising
mortal glory. For this is the source of our pain,
that many gape upon the opinion of men. If
we are minded to be thus truly wise, we shall ;
know well that human things are nothing. Let j
us learn then, and having reckoned up our faults, i
let us accomplish their correction in time, ands
let us determine to correct one this monthj
another next month, and a third in that which
follows. And so mounting as it were by steps,
let us get to heaven by a Jacob's ladder. Foi
the ladder seems to me to signify in a riddle b)
that vision the gradual ascent by means of virtue
by which it is possible for us to ascend froir
earth to heaven, not using material steps, bu'
improvement and correction of manners. Le
us then lay hold on this means of departure anc
ascent, that having obtained heaven, we ma]
also enjoy all the blessings there, through tht
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesun
Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever;
Amen.


=* " whosoever shall," &c., N. T.
* Sav. conj. '* evil speaking.'*


loMiLY Lxxxiv.;]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


313


HOMILY LXXXIV.

John xviii. 37.


To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth My Voice."

[1.] A MARVELOUS thing is longsufTering ; it

ilaces the soul as in a quiet harbor, freeing it

rem tossings ' and evil spirits. And this every-

rhere Christ hath taught us, but especially now,

rhea He is judged, and dragged, and led about.

^or when He was brought to Annas, He answered

rith great gentleness, and, to the servant who

mote Him, said what had power to bring down

11 his insolence ; thence having gone to Caia-

has, then to Pilate, and having spent the whole

ight in these scenes. He all through exhibiteth

lis own mildness ; and when they said that He

'as a malefactor, and were not able to prove it,

[e stood silent ; but when He was questioned

oncerning the Kingdom, then He spake to

ilate, instructing him, and leading him in to"

igher matters. But why was it that Pilate made

\e enquiry not in their presence, but apart,

aving gone into the judgment hall? He sus-

ected something great respecting Him, and

(ished, without being troubled by the Jews, to

•am all accurately. Then when he said, " What

1st thou done?" on this point Jesus made no

iswer; but concerning that of which Pilate

lost desired to hear, namely, His Kingdom, He

iswered, saying, " My Kingdom is not of this

Olid." That is, " I am indeed a King, yet not

ich an one as thou suspectest, but far more

orious," declaring' by these words and those

hich follow, that no evil had been done by

!im. For one who saith, "To this end was I

orn, and for this cause came I into the world,

lat I should bear witness unto the truth," show-

h, that no evil hath been done by Him. Then

hen He saith, " Every one that is of the truth

jareth My voice," He draweth him on by these

leans, and persuadeth him to become a listener

I the words. " For if," saith He, "any one is

'ue, and desireth these things,* he will certainly

bar Me." And, in fact, He so took him by

ese short words, that he said,

Ver. 38. "What is truth?"

But for the present he applieth himself to

■lat was pressing, for he knew that this ques-

)n needed time, and desired to rescue Him

3m the violence of the Jews. Wherefore he

tnt out, and what said he ?


* or, " waves,*' or, *'

• Sav. conj. *' up."


winds."


* al. " hinting."

* i;e. Ihc things of truth.


"I find no fault in him."*

Consider how prudently he acted. He said
not, " Since he hath sinned, and is deserving of
death, forgive him on account of the Feast " ; *
but having first acquitted Him of all guilt, he
asks them over and above, if they were not
minded to dismiss Him as innocent, yet as
guilty to forgive Him on account of the time.
Wherefore he added,

Ver. 39, 40. " Ye have a custom that I should
release unto you one at the Passover " ; then in
a persuasory way, " Will ye therefore that I re-
lease the king of the Jews? Then cried they
all, Not this man, but Barabbas."'

O accursed decision ! They demand those like
mannered with themselves, and let the guilty
go ; but bid him punish the innocent. For
this was their custom from old time. But do
thou all through observe the lovingkindness
of the Lord in these circumstances. Pilate
scourged Him," perhaps desiring to exhaust and
to soothe the fury of the Jews. For when he
had not been able to deliver Him by his former
measures, being anxious to stay the evil at this
point, he scourged Him, and permitted to be
done what was done, the robe and crown to be
put on Him, so as to relax their anger. Where-
fore also he led Him forth to them crowned (ver.
5), that, seeing the insult which had been done to
Plim, they might recover a little from their pas-
sion, and vomit their venom. " And how would
the soldiers have done this, had it not been the
command of their ruler? " To gratify the Jews.
Since it was not by his command that they at
first went in° by night, but to please the Jews ;
they dared anything for money. But He, when
so many and such things were done, yet stood
silent, as He had done during the enquiry, and
answered nothing. And do thou not merely
hear these things, but keep them continually in
thy mind, and when thou beholdest the King
of the world and of all Angels, mocked of the
soldiers, by words and by actions, ind bearing
all silently, do thou imitate Him by deeds thy-
self. For when Pilate had called Him the King
of the Jews, and they now put about Him the ap-


' " And when he had said this, be went out again unto the Jews
and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all. N. T.

* lit. " grant him to the feast."

^ " Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber." N. T.

* Chap. xix. 1-3. "Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and
scourged Him. And the soldiers plaited a crown of thorns, and
put it on His head, and they put on Him a purple mbe, and said.
Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote Hin with their hands."

* i.e. to the garden.


314


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV LXXXIV


parel of mockery, then Pilate having led Him
out, said,

Ver. 4, 5. "I find no fault against him. He
therefore went forth, wearing the crown." ^

But not even so was their rage quenched, but
they cried out,

Ver. 6. " Crucify him, crucify him." "

Then Pilate, seeing that all was done in vain,
said,

"Take ye him, and crucify him."

Whence it is clear that he had permitted
what had been done before, because of their
madness.

" For I," he saith, " find no fault in him."

[2.] See in how many ways the judge makes
His defense, continually acquitting Him of the
charges ; but none of these things shamed the
dogs from their purpose. For the, "Take ye
him and crucify him," is the expression of one
clearing himself of the guilt, and thrusting them
forward to an action not permitted to them.
They therefore had brought Him, in order that
the thing might be done by the decision of the
governor ; but the contrary fell out, that He
was rather acquitted than condemned by the
governor's decision. Then, because they were
ashamed,

Ver. 7. "We have," they said, "a law, and
by our law he ought to die, because he made
himself the Son of God."

" How then when the judge said, ' Take ye
him, and judge him according to your law,' did
ye reply, ' It is not lawful for us to put any man
to death,' while here ye fly to the law? And
consider the charge, ' He made himself the Son
of God.' Tell me, is this a ground of accusa-
tion, that He who performed the deeds of the
Son of God should call Himself the Son of
God?" What then doth Christ? While they
held this dialogue one with the other. He held
His peace, fulfilling that saying of the Prophet,
that " He openeth not his mouth : in His humil-
iation His judgment was taken away." (Isa. liii.
7, 8, LXX.)

Then Pilate is alarmed ' when he hears from
them, that He made Himself the Son of God,
and dreads lest the assertion may possibly be
true, and he should seem to transgress; but
these men who had learnt this, both by His
deeds and words, did not shudder, but are put-
ting Him to death for the very reasons for which
they ought to have worshiped Him. On this
account he no more asks Him, " What hast thou


done ? " but, shaken by fear, he begins the en
quiry again, saying, " Art thou the Christ ? '
But He answered not. For he who had heard
" To this end was I born, and for this came I,'
and, " My Kingdom is not of this world," he
when he ought to have opposed His enemie:
and delivered Him, did not so, but secondec
the fury of the Jews. Then they being in ever)
way silenced, make their cry issue in a politica
charge, saying, " He that maketh himself
king, speaketh against Caesar." (Ver. 12.) Pilat
ought therefore to have accurately enquired
whether He had aimed at sovereignty, and sf
His hand to expel Caesar from the kingdom. Bi
he makes not an exact enquiry, and therefor
Christ answered him nothing, because He knc
that he asked all the questions idly.'* Beside;
since His works bare witness to Him, He woul
not prevail by word, nor compose any defensi
showing that He came voluntarily to this cond:
tion. When He was silent, Pilate saith,

Ver. 10. " Knowest thou not that I hav
power to crucify thee?"°

Seest thou how he condemned himself before
hand ; for, " if the whole rests with thee, wh
dost not thou let Him go, when thou hast foun(
no fault in Him?" When then Pilate had ut
tered the sentence against himself, then He saitl

Ver. II. "He that delivered Me unto the
hath the greater sin."

Showing that he also was guilty of sin. Ther
to pull down his pride and arrogance. He saitl

" Thou wouldst have no power except it wer
given thee." '

Showing that this did not come to pass merel
in the common order of events,' but that it w£
accomplished mystically. Then lest, when tho
hearest, " Except it were given thee," tho
shouldest deem that Pilate was exempt from a
blame, on this account therefore He sai(
"Therefore he that delivered Me unto thee hat
the greater sin." "And yet if it was givei
neither he nor they were liable to any charge.
" Thou objectest idly ; for the ' given ' in th
place means what is ' allowed ' ; as though H
had said, ' He hath permitted these things 1
be, yet not for that are ye clear of the wickei
ness.' " He awed Pilate by the words, an
proffered a clear defense. On which accou)
that person sought to release Him ; but the
again cried out, saying,'


1 Ver. 4, 5. " Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto
them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that
1 find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown
of thorns and the purple robe, and Pilate saith unto them, liehold
the man." N. T.

' Ver. 6. " When the chief priests therefore and officers saw
Him, they cried out, saying, Crucify Him." N. T.

* Ver. 8, g. " When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was
the more afraid; and went again into the judgment-hall, and saith


unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no
N. T.

* eiKJj ffat-Ta epwTwi/ra. Savile reads ipujTtov, with the
ture eptuv. The reading rendered above best suits the sense,
supported by MSS.

* Ver. 10. " Then saith Pilate unto Him, Speakest thou I
unto me? Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, >
have power to release thee?" N. T.

•^ " no power against Me, except it were given thee from abtn
therefore he that," &c. N. T.

^ T7)f Twv noWiiiv aKo\ov6iav, al. ruiv aAAcuc.

8 Ver. 12. " And from thenceforth Pilate sought to
Him; but the Jews cried out, saying." N. T.


jMii.Y LXXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


315


Ver. 12. "If thou let this man go, thou art
t Caesar's friend."

For when they profited nothing by bringing
arges drawn from their own law, they wickedly
took themselves to external laws, saying,
" Every one that maketh himself a king speak-
1 against Caesar."

And where hath this Man appeared as a

-ant ? Whence can ye prove it ? By the pur-

; robe? By the diadem? By the dress?'

the soldiers? Did not He ever walk unat-

ided, save by His twelve disciples, following

every point a humble mode of living, both as

food, and clothing, and habitation? But O

at shamelessness and ill-time cowardice ! For

ate, deeming that he should now incur some

iger were he to overlook these words, comes

th as though to enquire into the matter,'' (for

" sitting down " showed this,) but without

king ^ any enquiry, he gave Him up to them,

nking to shame them. For to prove that he

it for this purpose, hear what he saith.

V^er. 14, 15. " Behold your king ! " But when

y said, "Crucify him," he added again, "Shall

irucify your king? " But they cried out, " We

e no king but Caesar." *

pf their own will they subjected themselves

punishment ; therefore also God gave them

because they were the first to cast themselves

from His providence and superintendence ;

since with one voice they rejected His sov-

gnty. He allowed them to fall by their own

•ages. Still what had been said should have

n sufficient to calm their passion, but they

ed, lest, being let go. He should again draw

multitudes, and they did all they could to

ent this. For a dreadful thing is love of

, dreadful and able to destroy the soul ; it

on account of this that they had never heard

f>. And yet Pilate, in consequence of a few

s, desired to let Him go, but they pressed

jsaying, " Crucify him." And why did they

e to kill Him in this manner? It was a

eful death. Fearing therefore lest there

lid afterwards be any remembrance of Him,

desired to bring Him to the accursed

;hment, not knowing that truth is exalted

indrances. To prove that they had this

icion, listen to what they say ; ' " We have

id that that deceiver said. After three days

11 rise again" (Matt, xxvii. 63) ; on this

unt they made all this stir, turning things


'the chariot."
f«r. 13. " When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he
nt Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place
Icalled the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha." N. T.

* taking pains for."
ler. 14, t5. " And it was the preparation of the Passover,
out the sixth hour; and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your
Btil they cried out. Away with him, away with him, crucify
Pilate saith unto them. Shall I crucify your kiiig? The chief
luuwered. We have no king but Cxsar." N. T.
"one saith."


upside down," that they might ruin matters in
after time.' And the ill-ordered people, cor-
rupted by their rulers, cried out continually,
" Crucify him ! "

[3.] But let us not merely read of these
things, but bear them in our mind ; the crown
of thorns, the robe, the reed, the blows, the
smiting on the cheek, the spittings, the irony.
These things, if continually meditated on, are
sufficient to take down all anger ; and if we be
mocked at, if we suffer injustice, let us still say,
"The servant is not greater than his Lord"
(c. xiii. 16) ; and let us bring forward the
words of the Jews, which they uttered in their
madness, saying, "Thou art a Samaritan, and
hast a devil " (c. viii. 48) ; and, " He casteth out
devils by Beelzebub." (Luke xi. 15.) For on
this account He bare all these things, in order
that we might walk in His footsteps, and endure
those mockings which disturb more than any
other kind of reproach. Yet nevertheless He
not only bare these things, but even used every
means to save and deliver from the appointed
punishment those who did them. For He sent
the Apostles also for their salvation, at least
thou hearest them saying, that, " We ' know that
through ignorance ye did it" (Acts iii. 17);
and by these means drawing them to repent-
ance. This let us also imitate ; for nothing so
much maketh God propitious as the loving
enemies, and doing good to those who despite-
fully use us. When a man insults thee, look not
to him, but to the devil who moves him, and
against him empty all thy wrath, but pity the
man who is moved by him. For if lying is
from the devil, to be angry without a cause is
much more so. When thou seest one turning
another into ridicule, consider that it is the
devil who moves him, for mockings belong not
to Christians. For he who hath been bidden
to mourn, and hath heard, "Woe, ye that laugh"
(Luke vi. 25), and who after this insults, and
jests, and is excited, demands not reproach
from us, but sorrow, since Christ also was troub-
led when He thought on Judas. All these things
therefore let us practice in our actions, for if we
act not rightly in these, we have come to no pur-
pose and in vain into the world. Or rather we
have come to our harm, for faith is not sufficient
to bring men to the Kingdom, nay, it even hath
power " in this way most to condemn those who
exhibit an ill life ; for He " which knew his
Lord's will, and did it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes" (Luke xii. 47) ; and again, "If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they
had not had sin." (c. xv. 22.) What excuse
then shall we have, who have been set within


•* or, using every means,

T ware Ta fttra ravTa ^viinviurdat,

» " I," N. T.


" or, " the case admits," ix'i-


3i6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV


the palace, and deemed worthy to stoop ' down
and enter into the sanctuary, and have been
made partakers of the releasing Mysteries,^ and
who yet are worse than the Greeks, who have
shared in none of these things? For if they for
the sake of vainglory have shown so much true
wisdom, much more ought we to go after all
virtue, because it is pleasing to God. But at
present we do not even despise wealth ; while
they have often been careless of their life, and
in wars have given up their children to their
madness about devils,' and have despised nature
foi the sake of their devils, but we do not even
despise money for the sake of Christ, nor anger
on account of God's will, but are inflamed, and
in no better state than the fevered. And just
as they, when possessed by their malady, are all
burning, so we, suffocated as by some fire, can
stop at no point of desire, increasing both anger
and avarice. On this account I am ashamed and
astonished, when I behold among the Greeks
men despising riches, but all mad among our-
selves. For even if we could find some despis-
ing riches, we should find that they have been
made* captive by other vices, by passion or
envy ; and a hard thing it is to discover tnie
wisdom without a blemish.' But the reason is,
that we are not earnest to get our remedies
from the Scriptures, nor do we apply ourselves
to those Scriptures with compunction, and sor-
row, and groaning, but carelessly, if at any time
we chance to be at leisure. Therefore when a
great rush of worldly matters comes, it over-
whelms all ; and if there hath been any profit,
destroys it. For if a man have a wound, and
after putting on a plaster, do not tie it tight.


but allow it to fall off, and expose his sore t(
wet, and dust, and heat, and ten thousand othe
things able to irritate it, he will get no good
yet not by reason of the inefficacy of the reme
dies, but by reason of his own carelessness
And this also is wont to happen to us, when wi
attend but little to the divine oracles, but givi
ourselves up wholly and incessantly to things o
this life ; for thus all the seed is choked, and al
is made unfruitful. That this may not be thi
case, let us look carefully a little, let us look u)
to heaven, let us bend down to the tombs an(
coffins of the departed. For the same en-
awaiteth us, and the same necessity of depar
ure will often come upon us before the eveninj
Prepare we then for this expedition ; ° there
need of many supplies for the journey,'" for gres
is the heat there, and great the drought, ar
great the solitude. Henceforth there is no r(
posing at an inn, there is no buying anythin
when one hath not taken all from hence. He
at least what the virgins say, " Go ye to the
that sell" (Matt. xxv. 9) ; but they who we:
found not. Hear what Abraham saith, " A gu j
between us and you." (Luke xvi. 26.) He:i
what Ezekiel saith concerning that day, th i
Noah, and Job, and Daniel shall in nowise d|
liver their sons. (Ezek. xiv. 14.) But may i
never come to pass that we hear these wore i
but that having taken hence sufficient provisio
for our way to eternal life, we may behold wi
boldness our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, domi
ion, honor, now and ever, and world without en,,
Amen. Ii


HOMILY LXXXV.


John xix. 16-18.


"Then delivered he Him therefore unto them to be cru-
cified. And they took Jesus, and led Him away.
And He, bearing His Cross, went forth into a place
called the place of a skuU,^ where they crucified
Him."'

[i.] Successes have terrible power to cast
down or draw aside those who take not heed.
Thus the Jews, who at first enjoyed the influence'


' or, '* 10 peep," £ia«rui^ai.

^ Ken. " mvsterics releasing from sins.'*

' i.e. ihcir ncaihcn worship.

* al. " they arc made." '» icnSapai;

• '* place of a skuU, which is called in the Hebrew, Goleotha."
N. T.

' "Him, and two others with Him, on either side one, and Jesus
ia tbe midst." N. T. ■ /ioir^t.


of God, sought the law of royalty from the Gf .
tiles, and in the wilderness after the manna
membered the onions. In the same way ht
refusing the Kingdom of Christ, they invited
themselves that of Csesar. Wherefore God
a king over them, according to their own de'
ion. When then Pilate heard these things,
delivered Him to be crucified. Utterly with
reason. For when he ought to have enqui
whether Christ had aimed at sovereign pov
he pronounced the sentence through fear aic.
Yet that this might not befall him, Christ |
beforehand, " My kingdom is not of this worl


» itoloy.


10 iiboSiiav.


lOMILY LXXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


ii?


lut he having given himself wholly up to present
Kings, would practice no great amount of wis-
lom. And yet his wife's dream should have
leen sufficient to terrify him ; but by none of
hese things was he made better, nor did he
3ok to heaven, but delivered Him up. And
low the> laid the cross upon Him as a male-
actor. For even the wood they abominated,
,nd endured not even to touch it. This was
Iso the case in the type ; for Isaac bare the
/ood. But then the matter stopped at the will
if his father,' for it was the type ; while here it
iroceeded to action, for it was the reahty.

"And He came to the place of a skull." Some

ay that Adam died there, and there lieth ; and

:iat Jesus in this place where death had reigned,

lere also set up the trophy. For He went forth

earing the Cross as a trophy over the tyranny

f death-: and as conquerors do, so He bare

pon His shoulders the symbol of victory.

/^hat matter if the Jews did" these things with

different intent. They crucified Him too with

lieves, in this also unintentionally fulfilling pro-

hecy ; for what they did for insult contributed

) the truth, that thou-mayest leam how great is

5 power, since the Prophet had foretold of old,

lat " He was numbered with the transgressors."

[sa. liii. 12.) The devil therefore wished to cast

veil over what was done, but was unable ; for the

Tee were crucified, but Jesus alone was glorious,

at thou mayest leam, that His power effected all.

St the miracles took place when the three had

«n nailed to the cross ; but no one attributed

lything of what was done to either of those

hers, but to Jesus only; so entirely was the

ot of the devil rendered vain,' and all returned

(on his own head. For even of these two, one

IS saved. He therefore did not insult the

)iy of the Cross,* but contributed to it not a

tie. For it was not a less matter than shaking

E rocks, to change a thief upon the cross, and

bring him unto Paradise.

Ver. 19. "And Pilate wrote a title."'

At the same time requiting the Jews, and mak-

[ a defense for Christ. For since they had

'en Him up as worthless, and attempted to

afirm this sentence by making Him share the

nishment of the robbers, in order that for the

are it might be in no man's power to prefer

1 charges against him, or to accuse him as a

rthless and wicked person, to close moreover

^ir mouths and the mouths of all who might

diire to accuse Him, and to show that they

hi risen up against their own King, Pilate thus


i.e. only showed Abraham's willingness.

ai. "ordered." 3 iwXoc, lit. " stale."

al. " the Crucified.**

Ver. XQ, 20. ** And Pilate wrote a title, and_ put it on the
C :s, and tne writing was, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.
T . title then read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus
* crucified was nigh to llie city, and it >va5 written in Hebrew,
at Creek, and ;^tin,"


placed, as on a trophy, those letters, which utter
a clear voice, and show forth His victory, and
proclaim His Kingdom, though not in its com-
pleteness. And this he made manifest not in a
single tongue, but in three languages ; for since
it was likely that there would be a mixed multi-
tude among the Jews on account of the Feast,
in order that none might be ignorant of the de-
fense, he publicly recorded' the madness of the
Jews, in all the languages. For they bore mal-
ice against Him even when crucified.' " Yet
what did this harm you ? ' Nothing. For if He
was a mortal and weak, and was about to be-
come extinct, why did ye fear the letters assert-
ing that He is the King of the Jews?" And
what do they ask? "Say that 'he said.' For
now it is an assertion, and a general sentence,
but if ' he said ' be added, the charge is shown
to be one arising from his own rashness and ar-
rogance." Still Pilate was not turned aside, but
stood to his first decision. And it is no little
thing that is dispensed even from this circum-
stance, but the whole matter. For since the
wood of the cross was buried, because no one
was careful to take it up, inasmuch as fear was
pressing, and the believers were hurrying to
other urgent matters ; and since it was in after
times to be sought for, and it was likely that the
three crosses would lie together, in order that
the Lord's might not be unknown, it was made
manifest to all, first by its lying in the middle,
and then by the title. For those of the thieves
had no titles.

[2.] The soldiers parted the garments, but not
the coat.* See the prophecies in every instance
fulfilled by their wickednesses ; for this also had
been predicted of old ; yet there were three
crucified, but the matters of the prophecies '"
were fulfilled in Him. For why did they not
this in the case of the others, but in His case
only? Consider too, I pray you, the exactness
of the prophecy. For the Prophet saith not
only, that they " parted," but that they " did not
part." The rest therefore they divided, the coat
they divided not, but committed the matter to a
decision by lot. And the, "Woven from the
top " (ver. 23) is not put without a purpose ; but
some say that a figurative assertion is declared
by it, that the Crucified was not simply man,
but had also the Divinity from above." Others
say that the Evangelist describes the very form


* lit. " inscribed on a pillar.**

' Ver. 21, 22. "Then said the chief priests of the Jews to
Pilate, Write not , The King of the Jews, but that he said. I am
King of the Jews. Pilate answered. What I have written, 1 have
written.** N. T. ^ to the Jews.

• Ver. 23, 24. "Then the soldiers, when they had crucifitd
Jesus, took His garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a

fiart; and also His coat; now the coat was without seam, woven
rom the lop throughout- They said therefore among themselves.
Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled which saith, They parted My raiment
among them, and for My vesture they did cast lots.'* N. T.

^^ al, "of the prophetical.*' " or, " from the first,*' afwtfcv*


3i8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV


of the coat.* For since in Palestine they put
together two strips of cloth and so weave their
garments, John, to show that the coat was of
this kind, saith, " Woven from the top " ; and
to me he seems to say this, alluding to the poor-
ness of the garments, and that as in all other
things, so in dress also, He followed a simple ^
fashion.

Ver. 24. "These things the soldiers did."
But He on the Cross, committeth His mother
to the disciple,'' teaching us even to our last
breath to show every care for our parents. When
indeed she unseasonably troubled Him, He said,
" Woman, what have I to do with thee ? " (c. ii.
4.) And, "Who is My mother?" (Matt. xii.
48.) But here He showeth much loving affec-
tion, and committeth her to the disciple whom
He loved. Again John conceals himself, in
modesty ; for had he desired to boast, he would
have also put in the cause for which he was loved,
since probably it was some great and wonderful
one. But wherefore doth He converse on noth-
ing else with John, nor comfort him when de-
sponding? Because it was no time for comfort-
ing by words ; besides, it was no little thing for
him to be honored with such honor, and to re-
ceive the reward of steadfastness. But do thou
consider, I pray, how even on the cross He did
everything without being troubled, speaking with
the disciple concerning His mother, fulfilling
prophecies, holding forth good hopes to the
thief. Yet before He was crucified He appear-
eth sweating, agonized, fearing. What then can
this mean? Nothing difficult, nothing doubtful.
There indeed the weakness of nature had been
shown, here was being shown the excess of Power.
Besides, by these two things He teacheth us,
even if before things terrible we be troubled,
not on that account to shrink from things terri-
ble, but when we have embarked in the contest
to deem all things * possible and easy. Let us
then not tremble at death. Our soul hath by
nature the love of life, but it Ues with us either
to loose the bands of nature, and make this de-
sire weak ; or else to tighten them, and make
the desire more tyrannous. For as we have the
desire of sexual intercourse, but when we prac-
tice true wisdom we render the desire weak, so
also it falls out in the case of life ; and as God
hath annexed carnal desire to the generation of
children, to maintain a succession among us,
without however forbidding us from traveling
the higher road of continence ; so also He hath
implanted in us the love of life, forbidding us


1 lit. " little coat." ' >''r6y.

• Ver. 25-27. " Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus His
mother, and His mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and
Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw His mother, and the
dbciple .standing by whom He loved, He saith unto His mother,
Woman, behold thy son. Then saith He to the disciple, Behold thy
mother. And from that hour that disciple took her to his own
home." ' »'• »" 'hmgs are.


from destroying ourselves, but not hindering ou
despising the present life. And it behooves us
knowing this, to observe due measure, and neithe
to go at any time to death of our own accorc*
even though ten thousand terrible things posses
us ; nor yet when dragged to it, for the sake 0
what is pleasing to God, to shrink back from an'
fear it, but boldly to strip for it, preferring th
future to the present hfe.

But the women stood by the Cross, and th
weaker sex then appeared the manlier (ver. 25)
so entirely henceforth were all things tran
formed.

[3.] And He, having committed His moth
to John, said, "Behold thy Son." (Ver. 26
O the honor ! with what honor did He honor t
disciple ! when He Himself was now departir
He committed her to the disciple to take ca
of. For since it was likely that, being F
mother, she would grieve, and require prot(
tion. He with reason entrusted her to the 1
loved. To him He saith, " Behold thy mothe
(Ver. 27.) This He said, knitting them togetl
in charity ; which the disciple understandii
took her to his own home. " But why made '
no mention of any other woman, although
other stood there? " To teach us to pay m(
than ordinary respect to our mothers. For
when parents oppose us on spiritual matters,
must not even own them, so when they do
hinder us, we ought to pay them all becoim
respect, and to prefer them before others,
cause they begat us, because they bred us
because they bare for us ten thousand tern
things. And by these words He silenceth
shamelessness of Marcion ; for if He were
born according to the flesh, nor had a mot-
wherefore taketh He such forethought for
alone ?

Ver. 28. " After this, Jesus knowing that
things were now accompUshed."

That is, " that nothing was wanting to the
pensation." For He was everywhere desirou
show, that this Death was of a new kind, i
deed the whole lay in the power of the Pe
dying, and death came not on the Body be-
He willed it ; and He willed it after He
fulfilled all things. Therefore also He said
have power to lay down My life ; and I
power to take it again." (ex. 18.) Kno
therefore that all things were fulfilled. He sf
" I thirst." '

Here again fulfilling a prophecy. But
sider, I pray, the accursed nature of the bysv
ers. Though we have ten thousand ene
and have suffered intolerable things at
hands, yet when we see them perishing,
lent ; but they did not even so make peao


» " that the Scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst," 1


IIOMILY LXXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


ilim, nor were tamed by what they saw but
rather became more savage, and increased thdr
.rony ; and havmg brought to Him vinegar on a
sponge,' as men bring it to the condemned thus
they gave H.m to drink; since it Ton thk
account that the hyssop is added
saiAritTs-fi^iS"^ ''^'^'^^^ ---d it. He
Seest thou how He doth all things calmlv


That is, "died." Yet


come after the bowmg the head ; but here on
fte contrary it doth. For He did not when
He had exp.red, bow His head, as happen

: «th us, but when He had bent His head E
Heexp.red. By all which things the Ev'ant
ist hath shown, that He was Lord of a,,''^""^"-
Bat the Jews, on the other hand who swnl

• owed the camel and strained at thegn^t haS
^•rought so atrocious a deed, are vTry 'pS
oncemmg the day. ^ precise

Ver. 31. "Because it was the Prenantinn
at the bodies should not remainTpr'tTe

Seest thou how strong a thing is truth? Bv
cans of the very things which a?e th^ objects of

- er zeal, prophecy is fulfilled, for by occasion
f hose thmgs, this plain pr;diction, uncr
-'^ted with them « receives its accompl shment

4ofthr^?r'V''^'" '^'y ''^'' brake the
g. of the others, but not those of Christ Yet

1 near" !^T'' *'" ^T P'^^"^ «- «Se wTth

- spear, and now insulted the dead bodv O
I'oramable and accursed purpose ! Yef' be
,ved, be not thou confounded, be not thou

^spondmg; for the things which these men 5^^
j m a wicked will, fought on the side of ?he '
nh. Since there was a prophecy, saying /frZ

lorn thr''"'^''^.." ^'^^y ^halAook o^AK

dlt Zr^'r^K ^7"^- 37 ; Zech. xii. 10.)

Z '^'^°n'y. but the deed then dared was

eS W?h rV "' '°- '^''°™^^' ^"d those
Somni- ., J ^i" ^°° ^"^ ineffable mystery was
3-oraplished. For " there ramP fZth Z
al hlonH " \T^^ -.t ™^ '°rth water

1 blood. Not without a purpose, or by

Ver. 29.


Chance, did those founts come forth, but be-

consfstl'^r/ T'- '^' V'' '^' ' hu r'cl
consisteth And the initiated know it beini?

thUf V"^;'^ regenerate, and nour shed bf
t.\p^h if""^ '^-^ ^^^''^- "ence the Mysteries
S to t'hL ?r"r"^ ' '\'''"^^^^ thou app'S-
est to hat awful cup, thou mayest so approach
as drinking from the very side. PProacn,

Jer- 35. "And he that saw it bare record
and his record is true." " '

That is, « I heard it not from others, but was
rnyself present and saw it, and the test'imon;-


] f^Il,.^


sponge wi^'h^vinr^l/rnd.T^r' ''■'" f ^'"'^"^ -"
ith." "'"cgar, and put it upon hyssop, and put

[)rape'5w(ce 1 G T i •

■-he cross on .He Sabbath day. (Lr.t^, ^^s a hi,h


ve-^e'^^"^:;:^*''''"^"^--" ^-^


jlirst, and 'of ,he Jther whkh wa'. T^'fi"'!, ^"-^^'^^^ the legs of


an insult done ; Te Ss^not ^n^^hTng™
and admirable, that thou shouldest suspif hS
narrative; but securing the mouths of heretic
and loutlly proclaiming beforehand the Mysteries

Id in r^* \''""^' beholding the treasure laid
up in them, he is very exact concerning what

Ver' "6 ''f l""'' P^°P^^^y ^^° - f"'fi"ed
broken"^'" F ^°"^°f H™ «hall not be
oroken. (Ex. xu. 46 ; Num. ix. 12.)

}Ju' rr 'l^^'' '^^' '^''l ^ith reference to the

e"L that' lh"%'''" '' ^'' f°^ ^he sake of the
reality that the type preceded, and in Him
the prophecy was more fully accomplished On

ProXT^Fof ' ^''T'''' brought'forward t^e
i-rophet. For since by continually producine-
himself as witness he would have seemed un
worthy of credit, he brings Moses to help h^m
and saith, that neither dkl this come to paTs
without a purpose, but was written before of oH
And this IS the meaning of the words, "A bone
of H.ni shall not be broken." Again he con
"Th' ''^^ P'-^Ph^''^ -°rds by his fwn tkness"
These things," saith he, "I have told you that
ye might learn that great is the conne^crion of
the type with the reality." Seest thoii whnl
pams he takes to makJ that be leved whfch
seemed to be matter of reproach, and bring n^

fied " R,?t°l^'/'' ^'' T''' '^'"^ being cruci
heel But still, even these things," he saith
'I have told and told with much earnestness
that ye might believe." (Ver « ^ ilT^T'
then be unbelieving, nor tliSugf sLme "u"
our cause. For the things which app^r to h^
most shameful, are the vf ry veSraSe records «
of our good things." 'ci.urus

.K ^^'■- 38- "After this came Joseph of Arima-
thsea, being a disciple." " ^ ^

belJLJe/'NlT.™'' "" ''"''"''"' "■"' •"= ^'"' '^"«. 'hat ye might
shouu'^^i fuif>li;d,'7b;ne"Vc'"?f riT,''°"''' "■=",!•"= ^"P<""

'"l-:::!^l!t "" "■'"'^- .hef pa."-'^".^^'""-

discipl^of' JeTjs. bu1"ec;«Iv fo'^f J^'^h <,f Arimath^a, being a
that V mig^tTakelwry'hr S^^-^^-Jf "jV^

leave. He came therefore, and took ihA„T,'„? r '^"'^'^.gave him
came also Nicodemus, which "a' the" fir'sl'^camttoV^us V ^i^h't.'td


320


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV


Not one of the twelve, but perhaps one of the
seventy. For now deeming that the anger 0/
the Jews was quenched by the Cross, they ap-
proached without fear, and took charge of His
funeral. Joseph therefore came and asked the
favor from Pilate, which he granted ; why should
he not? Nicodemus also assists him, and fur-
nishes a costly burial. For they were still dis-
posed to think of Him as a mere man. And
they brought those ' spices whose especial nature
is to preserve the body for a long time, and not
to allow it quickly to yield to corruption, which
was an act of men imagining nothing great re-
specting Him ; but anyhow, they exhibited very
loving affection. But how did no one of the
twelve come, neither John, nor Peter, nor any
other of the more distinguished disciples ? Nor
doth the writer conceal this point. If any one
say that it was from fear of the Jews, these men
also ^ were occupied by the same fear ; for
Joseph too was, it saith, " A secret (disciple)
for fear of the Jews." And not one can say that
Joseph acted thus because he greatly despised
them,' but though himself afraid, still he came.
But John who was present, and had seen Him
expire, did nothing of the kind. It seems to
me that Joseph was a man of high rank, (as is
clear from the funeral,) and known ^ to Pilate,
on which account also he obtained the favor ;
and then he buried Him, not as a criminal, but
magnificently, after the Jewish fashion, as some
great and admirable one.

[4.] And because they were straitened by the
time, (since the Death took place at the ninth
hour, and it is probable, that what with going to
Pilate and what with taking down the body,
evening would come upon them when it was not
lawful to work,) they laid Him in the tomb that
was near.' And it is providentially ordered,*
that He should be placed in a new tomb, where-
in no one had been placed before, that His
Resurrection might not be deemed to be that
of some other who lay there with Him ; and
that the disciples might be able easily to come
and be spectators of what came to pass, because
the place \vas near ; and that not they alone
should be witnesses of His burial, but His ene-
mies also, for the placing seals on the tomb, and
the sitting by of the soldiers to watch it, wel-e
the actions of men testifying to the burial. For
Christ earnestly desired that this should be con-
fessed, no less than the Resurrection. Where-


fore also the disciples are very earnest abou
this, the showing that lie died. For the Resur
rection all succeeding time would confirm, bu
the Death, if at that time it had been partial!;
concealed, or not made very manifest, was like!;
to harm the account of the Resurrection. No
was it for these reasons only that He was laic
near, but also that the story about the stealinj
might be proved false.

"The first day of the week" (that is, thi
Lord's day) " cometh Mary Magdalene, ver
early in. the morning,^ and seeth the stone takei
away from the sepulcher." (Ch. xx. ver. i.)

For He arose while both stone and seals la;
over Him ; but because it was necessary tha
others should be fully satisfied, the tomb wa
opened after the Resurrection, and thus wha
had come to pass was confirmed. This the
was what moved Mary. For being entirely fu
of loving affection towards her Master, when th
Sabbath was past, she could not bear to res
but came very early in the morning, desiring t
find some consolation from the place. But whe
she saw the place, and the stone ' taken awa;
she neither entered in nor stooped down, bi
ran to the disciples,' in the greatness of ht
longing ; for this was what she earnestly desirec
she wished very speedily to learn what had b<
come of the body. This was the meaning c
hei running, and her words declare it.

Ver. 2. "They have taken away," slie sail
" my Lord,'" and I know not where they ha\
laid Him."

Seest thou how she knew not as yet anythii
clearly concerning the Resurrection, but thoug
there had been a removal of the body, and te
all simply to the disciples? And the Evangel
hath not deprived the woman of such a prai;
nor thought it shame that they should ha
learnt these things first from her who had pass
the night in watching. Thus everywhere dc
the truth-loving nature of his disposition shi
forth. When then she came and said th«
things, they hearing them, draw near with gn
eagerness to the sepulcher," and see the lir
clothes lying, which was a sign of the Resurn
tion. For neither, if any persons had remov
the body, would they before doing so h<'
stripped it ; nor if any had stolen it, would tl
have taken the trouble to remove the napli


broueht a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
weight. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in the
linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the lews is to bury."

• al. " such." ' i.e. Joseph and Nicodemus.

• al. " that the greatly despising them effected this."

• al. *' known in some way."

• Ver. 41, 43. " Now in the place where He was crucified there
was a garden, and in the gj-rdcn a new sepulcher, wherein was
never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus therefore because of the
Jews' preparation ; for the sepulcher was nigh at hand."

• lit. "dispented,"


' opdpov fiaSitji om. in Ben. N. T. " early, when it t
dark, unto the sepulcher, and seeth," &c.

8 al. '* saw the stone.

* Ver. a. " Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter,'
to the other disciple whom Jesus loved."

"> " the Lord out of the sepulcher," N. T.

1' Ver. 3-7. " Peter therefore went forth, and that other disc
and came to the sepulcher. So they ran both together; ant
other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepul
And he stooping dov/n, saw the linen clothes lying: yet we!
not in. Then cometh Simon_ Peter following him, and weni
the sepulcher, and seeth the linen clothes lie: and the napkir
was about His head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wra
together in a place by itself." N. X#


OMILY LXXXV.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


321


id roll it up, and lay it in a place by itself; but
)w ? they would have taken the body as it was.
n this account John tells us by anticipation
at it was buried with much myrrh, which glues
len to the body not less firmly than lead ; in
der that when thou hearest that the napkins
y apart, thou mayest not endure those who say
at He was stolen. For a thief would not have
;en so foolish as to spend so much trouble on
superfluous matter. For why should he undo
e clothes? and how could he have escaped
jtection if he had done so? since he would
obably have spent much time in so doing, and
; found out by delaying and loitering. But
!iy do the clothes lie apart, while the napkin
is wrapped together by itself? That thou
ayest learn that it was not the action of men
confusion or haste, the placing some in one
;ace, some in another, and the wrapping them
jether. From this they believed in the Resur-
:tion. On this account Christ afterwards ap-
ared to them, when they were convinced by
lat they had seen. Observe too here again
absence of boastfulness in the Evangelist,
he witnesses to the exactness of Peter's
rch. For he himself having gotten before
ter, and having seen the linen clothes, enquired
farther, but withdrew ; but that fervent one
;sing farther in, looked at everything carefully,
1 saw somewhat more, and then the other
was summoned to the sight.^ For he enter-
after Peter, saw the grave-clothes lying, and
arate. Now to separate, and to place one
ig by itself, and another, after rolling it up,
itself, was the act of some one doing things
fully, and not in a chance way, as if disturbed.
5.] But do thou, when thou hearest that thy
d arose naked, cease from thy madness
ut funerals ; for what is the meaning of that
irfluous and unprofitable ^ expense, which
igs much loss to the mourners, and no gain
,e departed, or (if we must say that it brings
hing) rather harm? For the costliness of
al hath often caused the breaking open of
bs, and hath caused him to be cast out naked
unburied, who had been buried with much
. But alas for vainglory ! How great the
ly which it exhibits even in sorrow ! how
the folly ! Many, that this may not hap-
having cut in pieces those fine clothes, and
them with many spices, so that they may
ubly useless to those who would insult the
, then commit them to the earth. Are not
the acts of madmen ? of men beside them-
s? to make a show of their ambition, and
to destroy it? "Yea," saith some one, "it
lOrder that they may lie safely with the dead


^^■tr. 8, 9. " Then went in also that other disciple which came
the sepulcher, and he saw, and believed. For as yet they
the Scripture, that He must rise again from the dead.
' al. " scaseless."


that we use all these contrivances." Well then,
if the robbers do not get them, will not the
moths get them, and the worms? Or if the
moths and worms get them not, will not time
and the moisture of putrefaction' destroy them?
But let us suppose that neither tomb-breakers,
nor moths, nor worms, nor time, nor anything
else, destroy what lies in the tomb, but that the
body itself remains untouched until the Resur-
rection, and these things are preserved new and
fresh and fine ; what advantage is there from
this to the departed, when the body is raised
naked, while these remain here, and profit us
nothing for those accounts which must be given ?
" Wherefore then," saith some one, " was it done
in the case of Christ?" First of all, do not
compare these with human matters, since the
harlot poured even ointment upon His holy feet.
But if we must speak on these things, we say,
that they were done when the doers knew not
the word of the Resurrection ; therefore it saith,
"As was the manner of the Jews." For they
who honored Christ * were not of the twelve, but
were those who did not honor Him greatly. The
twelve honored Him not in this way, but by
death and massacre and dangers for His sake.
That other indeed was honor, but far inferior to
this of which I have spoken. Besides, as I be-
gan by saying, we are now speaking of men, but
at that time these things were done with relation
to the Lord. And that thou mayest learn that
Christ made no account of these things, He said,
" Ye saw Me an hungered, and ye fed Me ; thirsty,
and ye gave Me drink ; naked, and ye clothed
Me" (Matt. xxv. 35) ; but nowhere did He say,
" dead, and ye buried Me." And this I say not
as taking away the custom of burial, (that be far
from me,) but as cutting short its extravagance
and unseasonable vanity. " But," saith some
one, " feeling and grief and sympathy for the de-
parted persuade to this practice." The practice
doth not proceed from sympathy for the de-
parted, but from vainglory. Since if thou desir-
est to sympathize with the dead, I will show thee
another way of mourning, and will teach thee to
put on him garments which shall rise again with
him, and make him glorious. For these gar-
ments are not consumed by worms, nor wasted
by time, nor stolen by tomb-breakers. Of what
sort then are these? The clothing of alms-
doing ; for this is a robe that shall rise again
with him, because the seal of almsdoing is with
him. With these garments shine they who then
hear, " Hungering ye fed Me." These make
men distinguished, these make them glorious,
these place them in safety ; but those used now
are only something for moths to consume, and
a table for worms. And this I say, not forbid-


* i.e. in His burial.


322


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX^


ding to use funeral observance, but bidding you
to do it with moderation, so as to cover the
body, and not commit it naked to the earth.
For if living He biddeth us have no more than
enough to cover us, much more when dead ;
since the dead body' hath not so much need of
garments as when it is living and breathing.
For when alive, on account of the cold, and for
decency's sake, we need the covering of gar-
ments, but when dead we require grave-clothes
for none of these reasons, but that the body
may not lie naked ; and better than grave-clothes
we have the earth, fairest of coverings, and more
suited for the nature of such bodies as ours. If
then where there are so many needs we must not
search for anything superfluous, much more,
where there is no such necessity, is the ostenta-
tion unseasonable.

[6.] " But the lookers-on will laugh," saith
some one. Most certainly if there be any laugh-
ter, we need not care much for one so exceed-
ingly foolish ; but at present there are many who
rather admire and accept our true wisdom. For
these are not the things which deserve laughter,
but those which we do at present, weeping, and
wailing, and burying ourselves with the departed ;
these things deserve ridicule and punishment.
But to show true wisdom, both in these respects
and in the modesty of the attire used, prepares
crowns and praises for us, and all will applaud
us, and will admire the power of Christ, and will
say, " Amazing ! How great is the power of the
Crucified One ! He hath persuaded those who
are perishing and wasting, that death is not
death ; they therefore do not act as perishing
men, but as men who send the dead before them
to a distant and better dwelling-place. He hath
persuaded them that this corruptible and earthy
body shall put on a garment more glorious than
silk or cloth of gold, the garment of immortal-
ity ; therefore they are not very anxious about
their burial, but deem a virtuous life to be an
admirable winding-sheet." These things they
will say, if they see us showing true wisdom ;
but if they behold us bent down with grief, play-
ing the woman, placing around troops of female
mourners, they will laugh, and mock, and find
fault in ten thousand ways, pulling to pieces our
foolish expense, our vain labor. With these
things we hear all finding fault ; and very rea-
sonably. For what excuse can we have, when
we adorn a body, which is consumed by^ cor-


* al. "body of the dead."

* or, " given over to," lit. " spent upon."


ruption and worms, and neglect Christ whe
thirsting, going about naked, and a strangei
Cease we then from this vain trouble. Let \
perform the obsequies of the departed, as is goo
both for us and them, to the glory of God : li
us do much alms for their sake, let us send wii
them the best provision for the way. For if tl
memory of admirable men, though dead, hal
protected the living, (for, " I will defend,"
saith, " this city for Mine Own sake, and for M
servant David's sake " — 2 Kings xix. 34,) muc
more will alms-doing effect this ; for this hal
raised even the dead, as when the widows stoc
round' showing what things Dorcas had mac
while she was with them. (Acts ix. 39.) Wh(
therefore one is about to die, let the friend of th
dying person prepare the obsequies,* and pe
suade ^ the departing one to leave somewhat to tl
needy. With these garments let him send him
the grave, leaving * Christ his heir. For if th'
who write kings among their heirs, leave a si
portion to their relations,' when one leaves Chr
heir with his children, consider how great go<
he will draw down upon himself and all h
These are the right ' sort of funerals, these pro
both those who remain and those who depa j
If we be so buried, we shall be glorious at
Resurrection-time. But if caring for the bO'
we neglect the soul, we then shall suffer ma
terrible things, and incur much ridicule,
neither is it a common unseemliness to dep;
without being clothed with virtue, nor is
body, though cast out without a tomb, so d
graced, as a soul appearing bare of virtue in tl
day. This let us put on, this let us wrap arou
us ; it is best to do so during all our lifetiir
but if we have in this life been negligent, let
at least in our end be sober, and charge our
lations to help us when we depart by alms-doir
that being thus assisted by each other, we n
attain ° to much confidence, through the gr:
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Chr
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
glory, dominion, and honor, now and ever t
world without end. Amen.


' al. " stood by."

* or, ** burial dress,** rei evrd^ta.
^ i.e. by persuading.

* Sav. reads, K\yjpov6ttov ai^ieVai rof X. a<ttUvTa may be
jectured. The Ben. ed. reads, TreLBirta xai kX, k.t.A.

"^ Ben. *' leave very great safety." One MS. has a slight ya.
of sense; " If they who write kings their heirs among their relat
leave that portion for the safety of the children.'*

* itaXa,

" eirtrvYutiev, without any conjunction preceding. Sav. coi


OMILY LXXXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


323


HOMILY LXXXVI.

John xx. 10, 11.


rhen the disciples went away again unto their own
home. But Mary stood without at the sepulcher,
weeping."


[i .] Full of feeling somehow is the female sex,
id more ' inclined to pity. I say this, lest thou
louldest wonder how it could be that Mary
ept bitterly at the tomb, while Peter was in no
ly so affected. For, " The disciples," it saith,
went away unto their own home " ; but she
3od shedding tears. Because hers was a feeble
ture, and she as yet knew not accurately the
count of the Resurrection ; whereas they hav-
l seen the linen clothes and believed, departed
their own homes in astonishment. And where-
re went they not straightway to Galilee, as had
en commanded them before the Passion ? They
ited for the others, perhaps, and besides they
re yet at the height of their amazement,
ese then went their way : but she stood at
place, for, as I have said, even the sight of
tomb tended greatly to comfort her. At any
e, thou seest her, the more to ease her grief,
oping down,^ and desiring to behold the place
ere the body lay. And therefore she received
small reward for this her great zeal. For
It the disciples saw not, this saw the woman
t, Angels' sitting, the one at the feet, the
er at the head, in white ; even the dress * was
of much radiance' and joy. Since the mind
;he woman was not sufficiently elevated to ac-
tthe Resurrection from the proof of the nap-
I, something more takes place, she beholdeth
lething more ; Angels sitting in shining gar-
its, so as to raise her thus awhile from her
rionate sorrow, and to comfort her. But they
nothing to her concerning the Resurrection,
is she gently led forward in this doctrine,
saw countenances bright and unusual ; she
shining garments, she heard a sympathizing
:e. For what saith (the Angel) ?
er. 13. "Woman, why weepest thou?"
jy all these circumstances, as though a door
being opened for her, she was led by little
little to the knowledge of the Resurrection,
the manner of their sitting invited her to
;tion them, for they showed that they knew


|.e. more than men.

. II, latter part. "And as she wept, she stooped down,
lol«d into the sepulcher." N. T.

fer. xa. " And seeth two Angels in white sitting, the one at
I and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had
». T.
, and the appearance, to ffx^/**** ' ^atSpoTTjToj.


what had taken place ; on which account they
did not sit together either, but apart from one
another. For because it was not likely that she
would dare at once to question them, both by
questioning her, and by the manner of their sit-
ting, they bring her to converse. What then
saith she ? She speaks very warmly and affec-
tionately ;

"They^ have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid Him."

"What sayest thou? Knowest thou not yet
anything concerning the Resurrection, but dost
thou still form fancies about His being laid"?"
Seest thou how she had not yet received the
sublime doctrine ?

Ver. 14. "And when she had thus said, she
turned herself back." '

And by what kind of consequence is it, that
she having spoken to them, and not having yet
heard anything from them, turned back? Me-
thinks that while she was speaking, Christ sud-
denly appearing behind her, struck the Angels
with awe ; and that they having beheld their
Ruler," showed immediately by their bearing,
their look, their movements, that they saw the
Lord ; '" and this drew the woman's attention
and caused her to turn herself backwards. To
them then He appeared on this wise, but not so
to the woman, in order not at the first sight to
terrify her, but in a meaner and ordinary form,
as is clear from her supposing that He was the
gardener. It was meet to lead one of so lowly
a mind to high matters, not all at once, but
gently. He therefore in turn asketh her,

Ver. 15. "Woman, why weepest thou? whom
seekest thou ? "

This showed that He knew what she wished
to ask, and led her to make answer. And the
woman, understanding this, doth not again men-
tion the name of Jesus, but as though her ques-
tioner knew the subject of her enquiry, replies,

" Sir," if thou have borne him hence, tell me
where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away."

Again she speaks of laying down, and taking
away, and carrying, as though speaking of a
corpse. But her meaning is this ; " If ye have
borne him hence for fear of the Jews, tell me.


" " because they," N. T. ' Biatv.

B " Turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not
that it was Jesus." N. T.

® SetriroTYji'. ^^ Kvpiof.

'1 " She, supposing Him to be the gardener, saitb unto Him, Sir,"
Sec. N. T.


324


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVI


and I will take him." Great is the kindness and
loving affection of the woman, but as yet there
is nothing lofty with her.' Wherefore He now
setteth the matter before her, not by appear-
ance, but by Voice. For as He was at one time
known to the Jews, and at another time unper-
ceived * though present ; so too in speaking.
He, when He chose, then made Himself known ;
as also when He said to the Jews, " Whom
seek ye?" they knew neither the Countenance
nor the Voice until He chose. And this was
the case here. And He named her name only,'
reproaching and blaming her that she enter-
tained such fancies concerning One who lived.
But how was it that,

Ver. 1 6. " She turned herself, and saith,"*
if so be that He was speaking to her? It seems
to me, that after having said, " Where have ye
laid him? " she turned to the Angels to ask why
they were astonished, and that then Christ, by
calling her by name, turned her to Himself from
them, and revealed Himself by His Voice ; for
when He called her " Mary," then she knew
Him ; so that the recognition was not by His
appearance, but by His Voice. And if any say,
" Whence is it clear that the Angels were awe-
struck, and that on this account the woman
turned herself," they will in this place say,
" whence is it clear that she would Jiave touched
Him, and fallen at His feet?" Now as this
is clear from His saying, " Touch Me not," so is
the other clear from its saying, that she turned
herself. But wherefore, said He,

Ver. 1 7. " Touch Me not " ?

[2.] Some assert, that she asked for spiritual
grace, because she had heard Him when with the
disciples say, " If I go to the Father, ' I will ask
Him, and He shall give you another Comforter.' "
(c. xiv. 3, 16.) But how could she who was not
present with the disciples have heard this ? Be-
sides, such an imagination is far from the mean-
ing here. And how should she ask, when He
had not yet gone to the Father? What then is
the sense? Methinks that she wished still to
converse with Him as before, and that in her joy
she perceived nothing great in Him, although
He had become far more excellent in the Flesh.
To lead her therefore from this idea, and that
she might speak to Him with much awe, (for
neither with the disciples doth He henceforth
appear so familiar as before,) He raiseth her
thoughts, that she should give more reverent
heed to Him. To have said, "Approach Me
not as ye did before, for matters are not in the
same state, nor shall I henceforth be with you
in the same way," would have been harsh and
high-sounding ; but the saying.


* al. "but nothing lofty from her." ' aSijAoc.

* Ver. 16. " Jesus sailh unto her, Mary."

* " and saith unto Him. Rabboni, which is to say, Master,"
N. T.


" I am not yet ascended to the' Father,"
though not painful to hear, was the saying o
One declaring the same thing. For by saying
" I am not yet ascended," He showeth that Hi
hasteth and presseth thither ; and that it was no
meet that One about to depart thither, and nc
longer to converse with men, should be lookec
on with the same feelings as before. And th«
sequel shows that this is the case.

" Go and say unto the brethren, that I go
unto My Father, and your Father, unto My Goc
and your God."

Yet He was not about to do so immediately
but after forty days. How then saith He this
With a desire to raise their minds, and to persuad
them that He departeth into the heavens. Bu
the, "To My Father and your Father, to M
God, and your God," belongs to the Disper
sation,' since the " ascending " also belongs t
His Flesh. For He speaketh these words t
one who had no high thoughts. " Is then th
Father His in one way, and ours in another?
Assuredly then He is. For if He is God of th
righteous in a manner different from that i
which He is God of other men, much more i
the case of the Son and us. For because h
had said, " Say to the brethren," in order th;
they might not imagine any equality from thi
He showed the difference. He was about to 1
on His Father's throne, but they to stand bj
So that albeit in His Subsistence according
the Flesh He became our Brother, yet in Honi
He greatly differed from' us, it cannot even I
told how much.

Ver. 18. "She therefore departeth, bearii
these tidings to the disciples." '"

So great a good is perseverance and endi
ance. But how was it that they did not
more grieve when He was about to depart, n
speak as they had done before? At that tii
they were affected in such a way, as supposi
that He was about to die ; but now that He v
risen again, what reason had they to griev
Moreover, Mary reported His appearance a
His words, which were enough to comfort the
Since then it was likely that the disciples
hearing these things would either not belit
the woman, or, believing, would grieve that
had not deemed them worthy of the visil
though He promised to meet them in GalUil
in order that they might not by dwelling on t|
be unsettled," He let not a single day pass, ,
having brought them to a state of longing,!
their knowledge that He was risen, and by » j


" " to My," N. T.

" " Go to Mybretliren, and say unto them, I ascend/' &c,

' i.e. the Incarnation.

^ rrapetTTayai. So Ben. and MSS. and it seems the best rea|
Savile reads Trtpitrrrivai. ^ or, *' surpassed."

^" Ver. 18. " Mary Magdalene came and told the disciple
she had seen the Lord, and that He had spoken these thii
her." N. T. " or, " distracted."


lOMILY LXXXVI.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


325


hey heard from the woman, when they were

hirsting to see Him, and were greatly afraid,

which thing itself especially made their yearn-

ig greater,) He then, when it was evening, pre-

ented' Himself before them, and that very

(larvelously." And why did He appear in the

evening " ? Because it was probable that they

TOuld then especially be very fearful. But the

aarvel was, why they did not suppose Him to

It an apparition ; for He entered, " when the

oors were shut," and suddenly. The chief

ause was, that the woman beforehand had

"rought great faith in them ; besides, He showed

[lip countenance to them clear and mild. He

ame not by day, in order that all might be

oUected together. For great was the amaze-

lent ; for neither did He knock at the door,

all at once stood in the midst, and showed

[is side and His hands.^ At the same time

so by His Voice He smoothed their tossing

ought, by saying,

Ver. 19. " Peace be unto you."

That is, " Be not troubled " ; at the same time

minding them of the word which He spake

them before the Crucifixion, " My peace I

ave* unto you" (c. xiv. 27) ; and again, " In

ye have " peace, but " " in the world ye shall

ive tribulation." (c. xvi. 33.)

Ver. 20. " Then were the disciples glad when

ey saw the Lord."

Seest thou the words issuing in deeds? For
lat He said before the Crucifixion, that " I
11 see you again, and your heart shall rejoice,
d your joy no man taketh from you" (c. xvi.
", this He now* accomplished in deed; but
these things led them to a most exact faith,
ir since they had a truceless war with the
ivs. He continually repeated the, " Peace be
to you,"' giving them, to counterbalance the
, the consolation. And so this was the first
rd that He spake to them after the Resur-
tion, (wherefore also Paul continually saith,
rrace be unto you and peace,") and to women
giveth good tidings of joy,^ because that sex
in sorrow, and had received this as the first
■se. Therefore He giveth good tidings suit-
respectively, to men, peace, because of
ir war ; joy to women, because of their sor-
Then having put away all painful things,
telleth of the successes ^ of the Cross, and
se were the " peace." " Since then all hin-


al. " presents."

Ver. iQ. *' Then the same day at evening, being the first day
le weeK, when the doors were shut where the disciples were
nbled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst."

i Ver. 20. " And when He had so said. He showed unto them
Hjhands and His side." * *' give."

" that in Me ye might have," N. T.

al. " this therefore He."

Ver. 21. '* Then said Jesus to them again. Peace," &c.

Matt, xxviii. 9. "Jesus met them (the women) saying, Re-
)o ." G. T. Xaiptrt. E. V. " All hail."

or, " perfect actions," fcaTopdwjuaTa.


drances have been removed," He saith, " and I
have made My '" victory glorious, and all hath
been achieved," (then He saith afterwards,)

Ver. 21. "As My Father hath sent Me, so
send I you."

"Ye have no difficulty, owing to what hath
already come to pass, and to the dignity of Me
who send you." Here He lifteth up their souls,
and showeth them their great cause of con-
fidence, if so be that they were about to under-
take His work. And no longer is an appeal
made to the Father, but with authority He
giveth to them the power. For,

Ver. 22, 23. " He breathed on them, and
said," Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained."

As a king sending forth governors, gives power
to cast " into prison and to deliver from it, so in
sending these forth, Christ investeth them with
the same power. But how saith He, " If I go
not away, He'^ will not come " (c. xvi. 7), and
yet giveth them the Spirit ? Some say that He
gave not the Spirit, but rendered them fit to
receive It, by breathing on them. For if Daniel
when he saw an Angel was afraid, what would
not they have suffered when they received that
unspeakable Gift, unless He had first made them
learners? Wherefore He said not, "Ye have
received the Holy Ghost," but, " Receive ye the
Holy Ghost." Yet one will not be wrong in
asserting that they then also received some spir-
itual power and grace ; not so as to raise the
dead, or to work miracles, but so as to remit
sins. For the gifts of the Spirit are of different
kinds ; wherefore He added, " Whosesoever sins
ye remit, they are remitted unto them," showing
what kind of power He was giving. But in the
other case," after forty " days, they received the
power of working miracles. Wherefore He
saith, "Ye shall receive power, after that the
Holy Ghost is come'" upon you, and ye shall be
My witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judaea." (Acts i. 8.) And witnesses they be-
came by means of miracles, for unspeakable is
the grace of the Spirit and multiform the gift.
But this comes to pass, that thou mayest learn
that the gift and the power of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, is One. For things
which appear to be peculiar to the Father, these
are seen also to belong to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost. " How then," saith some one,
" doth none come to the Son, ' except the Father
draw him'?" (c. vi. 44.) Why, this very


*o al. " all hindrances had been removed, and He had made His."

1* Ver. 22. " And when He had said this, He breathed on them,
and saith unto them," &c. N. T.

'2 al. '* having the power of casting," &c., " gives it."

" " The Comforter," N. T. " ««■'.

1^ The sense seems to require " fifty," but there is no other read*
ing than the above.

w or, " of the Holy Ghost coming."


326


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVI.


thing is shown to belong to the Son also. " I,"
He saith, " am the Way : no man cometh unto
the Father but by Me." (c. xiv. 6.) And observe
that it belongeth to the Spirit also ; for " No
man can call Jesus Christ Lord,' but by the
Holy Ghost." (i Cor. xii. 3.) Again, we see
that the Apostles were given to the Church at
one time by the Father, at another by the Son,
at another by the Holy Ghost, and that the
" diversities of gifts " ( i Cor. xii. 4) belong to
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

[4.] Let us then do all we can to have the
Holy Spirit with ourselves, and let us treat with
much honor those into whose hands its opera-
tion hath been committed. For great is the
dignity of the priests. "Whosesoever sins," it
saith, " ye remit, they are remitted unto them " ;
wherefore also Paul saith, " Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit yourselves." (Heb.
xiii. 17.) And hold them very exceedingly in
honor ; for thou indeed carest about thine own
affairs, and if thou orderest them well, thou giv-
est ^ no account for others, but the priest even if
he rightly order his own life, if he have not an
anxious care for thine, yea and that of all those
around him, will depart with the wicked into hell ;
and often when not betrayed by his own conduct,
he perishes by yours, if he have not rightly per-
formed all his part. Knowing therefore the
greatness of the danger, give them a large share
of your goodwill ; which Paul also implied when
he said, " For they watch for your souls," and
not simply so, but, " as they that shall give ac-
count." (Heb. xiii. 17.) They ought therefore
to receive great attention from you ; but if you
join with the rest in trampling upon them,
then neither shall your affairs be in a good
condition. For while the steersman continues
in good courage, the crew also will be in safety ;
but if he be tired out by their reviling him
and showing ill-will against him, he cannot
watch equally well, or retain his skill, and with-
out intending it, throws them into ten thousand
mischiefs. And so too the priest, if he enjoy
honor ' from you, will be able well to order your
affairs ; but if ye throw them into despondency,
ye weaken their hands, and render them, as well
as yourselves, an easy prey to the waves, although
they be very courageous. Consider what Christ
saith concerning the Jews. " The Scribes and
the 1-harisees sit on Moses' seat; all therefore
whatsoever they bid* you to do, do ye." (Matt.
xxiii. 2, 3.) Now we have not to say, " the
priests sit on Moses' seat," but " on that of
Christ " ; for they have successively received His
doctrine. Wherefore also Paul saith, "We are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did be-


'N.T.


* " call Jesus Lord,

* al. " attention."

* *' bid you observe, that observe and do," N. T.


' al. " wilt give."


seech you by us." (2 Cor. v. 20.) See ye not
that in the case of Gentile rulers, all bow to them,
and oftentimes even persons superior in family,
in life, in intelligence, to those who judge them ?
yet still because of him who hath given them,
they consider none of these things, but respect
the decision of their governor, whosoever he be
that receives the rule over them. Is there then
such fear when man appoints, but when God ap-
pointeth do we despise him who is appointed,
and abuse him, and besmirch him with ten thou-
sand reproaches, and though forbidden to judge
our brethren, do we sharpen our tongue against
our priests i" And how can this deserve excuse,
when we see not the beam in our own eye, but
are bitterly over-curious about the mote in an-
other's ? Knowest thou not that by so judging
thou makest thine own judgment the harder?
And this I say not as approving of those whc
exercise their priesthood unworthily, but as
greatly pitying and weeping for them ; yet dc
I not on this account allow that it is right thai
they should be judged by those over whom the)
are set." And although their life be very mucf,
spoken against, thou, if thou take heed to thy-
self, wilt not be harmed at all " in respect of the
things committed to them ' by God. For if H{
caused a voice to be uttered by an ass, and be-
stowed spiritual blessings by a diviner, working
by the foolish mouth and impure tongue o
Balaam, in behalf of the offending Jews, mud
more for the sake of you the right-minded ' wil
He, though the priests be exceedingly vile, worl
all the things that are His, and will send thi
Holy Ghost. For neither doth the pure drav
down that Spirit by his own purity, but it is graci
that worketh all. "For all," it saith, "is fo
your sake,^ whether it be Paul, or Apollos, 0
Cephas." (i Cor. iii. 22, 23.) For the thing,
which are placed in the hands of the priest it i
with God alone to give ; and however far huraa
wisdom may reach, it will appear inferior to the
grace. And this I say, not in order that we ma
order our own life carelessly, but that when som
of those set over you are careless livers, you th
ruled may not often heap up evil for yourselvC'
But why speak I of priests? Neither Angel n(
Archangel can do anything with regard to wh;
is given from God ; but the Father, the Son, at
the Holy Ghost, dispenseth all, while the prie
lends his tongue and affords his hand. F
neither would it be just that through the wickei
ness of another, those who come in faith to tl
symbols of their salvation should be harmC'
Knowing all these things, let us fear God, ai
hold His priests in honor, paying them all revc
ence ; that both for our own good deeds, ai

•* Sav. adds in brackets, " and especially by those altogether
simplest." The words found in some MSS.

« al. *' not even be harmed a little." ' Sav. *' to him."

» al. " ill-minded," or, " UDgrateful." » " is yours," N. T


Homily LXXXVIL]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


327


the attention shown to them, we may receive a
great return from God, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with


whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, dominion, and honor, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXVIL


John xx. 24, 25.


'But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was
not with them when Jesus came. The other dis-
ciples therefore said unto him. We have seen the
Lord. But he said, Except I shall see in His
hands ' — I will not believe."

[i.] As to believe carelessly and in a random
ray, comes of an over-easy temper ; so to be
leyond measure curious and meddlesome, marks

most gross understanding. On this account
'homas is held to blame. For he believed not
le Apostles when they said, " We have seen the
Ajrd" ; not so much mistrusting them, as deem-
ig the thing to be impossible, that is to say, the
jsurrection from the dead. Since he saith not,
I do not believe you," but, " Except I put my
and — I do not^ believe." But how was it,
lat when all were collected together, he alone
as absent ? Probably after the dispersion which

,d lately taken place, he had not returned even
len. But do thou, when thou seest the unbe-

f of the disciple, consider the lovingkindness

the Lord, how for the sake of a single soul
[e showed Himself with His wounds, and com-
h in order to save even the one, though he
as grosser than the rest ; on which account in-
ied he sought proof from the grossest of the

inses, and would not even trust his eyes. For
said not, " Except I see," but, " Except I

ladle," he saith, lest what he saw might some-

)W be an apparition. Yet the disciples who

Id him these things, were at the time worthy of
[edit, and so was He that promised ; yet, since
?. desired more, Christ did not deprive him even

■ this.

And why doth He not appear to him straight-

U-, instead of " after eight days " ?^ (Ver. 26.)
order that being in the mean time continually

structed by the disciples, and hearing the same
ling, he might be inflamed to more eager de-
ve, and be more ready to believe for the future.
'it whence knew he that His side had been


' " But he said unto them, Except I shall see in His hands the
lit of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
t;ust my hand into His side." N. T.

IJ " will not," N. T.

* Ver. 26. "And after eight days again His disciples were
vhin, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the door being
= I, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you." N. T.


opened? From having heard it from the dis-
ciples. How then did he believe partly, and
partly not believe ? Because this thing was very
strange and wonderful. But observe, I pray you,
the truthfulness of the disciples, how they hide
no faults, either their own or others', but record
them with great veracity.

Jesus again presenteth himself to them, and
waiteth not to be requested by Thomas, nor to
hear any such thing, but before he had spoken.
Himself prevented him, and fulfilled his desire ;
showing that even when he spake those words
to the disciples. He was present. For He used
the same words, and in a manner conveying a
sharp rebuke, and instruction for the future. For
having said,

Ver. 26. " Reach hither thy finger, and behold
My hands; and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into My side " ; He added,

" And be not faithless, but believing."

Seest thou that his doubt proceeded from
unbelief? But it was before he had received
the Spirit ; after that, it was no longer so, but,
for the future, they were perfected.

And not in this way only did Jesus rebuke
him, but also by what follows ; for when he,
being fully satisfied, breathed again, and cried
aloud,

Ver. 28. "My Lord, and my God," He saith,

Ver. 29. " Because thou hast seen Me, thou
hast believed ; blessed are they who have not
seen, and yet have believed."

For this is of faith, to receive things not seen ;
since, " Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen." (Heb. xi. i.)
And here He pronounceth blessed not the dis-
ciples only, but those also who after them should
believe. " Yet," saith some one, " the disciples
saw and believed." Yes, but they sought nothing
of the kind, but from the proof of the napkins,
they straightway received the word concerning
the Resurrection, and before they saw the body,
exhibited all faith. When therefore any one in
the present day say, " I would that I had lived
in those times, and had seen Christ working
miracles," let them reflect, that, "Blessed are
they who have not seen, and yet have believed."


328


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVII


It is worth enquiring, how an incorruptible
body showed the prints of the nails, and was
tangible by a mortal hand. But be not thou
disturbed ; what took place was a matter of
condescension. For that which was so subtle
and light as to enter in when the doors were
shut, was free from all density ' ; but this marvel
was shown, that the Resurrection might be be-
lieved, and that men might know that it was
the Crucified One Himself, and that another rose
not in His stead. On this account He arose ^
bearing the signs of the Cross, and on this ac-
count He eateth. At least the Apostles every-
where made this a sign of the Resurrection, say-
ing, " We, who did eat and drink with Him."
(Acts X. 41.) As therefore when we see Him
walking on the waves before the Crucifixion, we
do not say, that that body is of a different na-
ture, but of our own ; so after the Resurrection,
when we see Him with the prints of the nails,
we will no more say, that he is therefore ' cor-
ruptible. For He exhibited these appearances
on account of the disciple.

Ver. 30. " And many other signs truly did
Jesus."

[2.] Since this Evangelist hath mentioned
fewer than the others, he tells us that neither
have all the others mentioned them all, but as
many as were sufficient to draw the hearers to
behef. For, " If," it saith, " they should be
written every one, I suppose that even the world
itself could not contain the books." (c. xxi. 25.)
Whence it is clear, that what they have men-
tioned they wrote not for display, but only for
the sake of what was useful. For how could
they who omitted the greater part, write these
others* for display? But why went they not
through them all ? Chiefly on account of their
number ; besides, they also considered, that he
who believed not those they had mentioned,
would not give heed to a greater number ; while
he who received these, would have no need of
another in order to believe. And here too he
seems to me to be for the time speaking of the
miracles after the Resurrection. Wherefore He
saith,

" In the presence of His disciples." '

For as before the Resurrection it was neces-
sary that many should be done, in order that they
might believe that He was the Son of God, so
was it also after the Resurrection, in order that
they might admit that He had arisen. For
another reason also he has added, " In the pres-
ence of His disciples," because He conversed
with them alone after the Resurrection ; where-
fore also He said, "The world seeth Me no


* irayvTijTot. ' 2I. " raiseth Himself/' or, " is raised."
^ 01, henceforth,*' Aoiwbi',

* According to Savile's conject. and two MSS. nm av ravra for
irwc ivTav9a,

* " of His disciples, which are not written in this book," N. T.


more." (c. xiv. 19.) Then, in order that thou
mayest understand that what was done was done
only for the sake of the disciples, he added,

Ver. 31. "That believing ye might have life
in His Name."*

Speaking generally to mankind, and showing
that not on Him who is believed on, but on our
selves, he bestows a very great favor. " In Hi<
Name," that is, " through Him " ; for He is the
Life.

Chap. xxi. ver. i. "After these things, Jesus
showed Himself again to the disciples at the sei
of Tiberias."'

Seest thou that He remaineth not with then
continually, nor as before? He appeared, fo
instance, in the evening, and flew away ; thei
after eight days again once, and again flew away
then after these things by the sea, and agaii
with great terror. But what is the, " showed "
From this it is clear that He was not seen unles
He condescended, because His body was henct
forth incorruptible, and of unmixed purity.* Bi
wherefore hath the writer mentioned the place
To show that he had now taken away the greate
part of their fear, so that they now ventured fort
from their dwelling, and went about everywhen
For they were no longer shut up at home, bi
had gone into Galilee, avoiding the danger froi
the Jews. Simon, therefore, comes to fish. Fc
since neither was He with them continually, nc
was the Spirit yet given, nor they at that tin
yet entrusted with anything, having nothing
do, they went after their trade.

Ver. 2. " There were together Simon Pete
and Thomas,^ and Nathanael," '" (he that w;
called by Philip,) " and the sons of Zebedee, ar
two others.""

Having then nothing to do, they went to the
fishing,'^ and this same they did by night, becau
they were greatly afraid. This Luke also me-
tions ; '^ but this is not the same occasion, but
different one. And the other disciples follower
because they were henceforth bound to one a
other, and at the same time desired to see t'
fishing, and to bestow" their leisure well,
they then were laboring and wearied, Jesus pi
senteth Himself before them, and doth not
once reveal Himself, so that they enter into cc
verse with Him. He therefore saith to them,

Ver. 5. " Have ye" any meat'°? "

For a time He speaketh rather after a humi


* Ver. 31. "But these are written, that ye might believe I
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that,'' &c. N. T.

' " of Tiberias; and on this wise showed He Himself/' N. T

* aicjipaTov. * " Thomas, called Didymi
J» " Nathanael of Cana in Galilee."

" " two other of His disciples," N. T.

>* Ver. 3, 4. " Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fish
They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth,
entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught n
ing. But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on
shore, but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus." N. T.

*^ Luke xxiv. 37. " But they were terrified and affrighted."

^* al. ** dispose. " " Children, have ye," N.

10 or, " fish," npoiri^iytov, that which is eaten with the bread


Homily LXXXVII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


329


manner, as if about to buy somewhat of them.
But when they made signs that they had none,
He bade them cast their nets to the right ; and
on casting they obtained a haul.' But when they
recognized Him, the disciples Peter and John
again exhibited the peculiarities of their several
tempers. The one was more fervent, the other
more lofty ; the one more keen, the other more
clear-sighted. On this account John first recog-
nized Jesus, Peter first came to Him.^ For no
ordinary signs were they which had taken place.
What were they? First, that so many fish were
caught ; then, that the net did not break ; ^ then,
that before they landed, the coals had been
found, and fish laid thereon, and bread.* For He
no longer made things out of matter already sub-
sisting, as, through a certain dispensation. He did
before the Crucifixion. When therefore Peter
knew Him, he threw down all, both fish and nets,
and girded himself. Seest thou his respect and
love ? Yet they were only two hundred cubits
off; but not even so could Peter wait to go to
Him in the boat, but reached the shore by swim-
ming. What then doth Jesus ?

Ver. 12. "Come," He saith, "dine." "And
acne of them durst ask Him."'

For they no longer had the same boldness,

aor were they so confident, nor did they now

ipproach Him with speech, but with silence and

jreat fear and reverence, sat down giving heed

;o Him.

" For they knew that ' it was the Lord."

And therefore they did not ask Him, "Who

irt Thou?" But seeing that His form was

iltered, and full of much awfulness, they were

jreatly amazed, and desired to ask somewhat

:onceming it ; but fear, and their knowledge

hat He was not some other, but the Same,

Jiecked the enquiry, and they only ate what He

teated for them ' with a greater exertion of

iwer than before. For here He no more look-

th to heaven, nor performeth those human acts,

owing that those also which He did were done

y way of condescension. And to show that

"e remained not with them continually, nor in

e manner as before, It saith that.


* Ver. s, 6, and 8. *' They answered Him, No. _ And He said
to them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall
4. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it
r the multitude of fishes. And the other disciples came in a little
ip, for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred
oits, dragging the net with fishes." N. T.

* Ver. 7. " Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith
Ito Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it

the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,)
A did cast himself into the sea." N. T.

* Ver. II. *' Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full
gnat fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were
many, yet was not the net broken." N. T.

* Ver. 9, 10. *' As soon then as they were come to land, they
r a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus
ith unto them. Bring of the fish which ye have now caught."

T.

•'•ask him. Who art Thou?" N. T.

* "knowing that," N. T.

' Ver. 13. " Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth
m, aad hsh likewise." N. T.


Ver. 14. "This was the third time that Jesus
appeared to them,' after that He arose from the
dead."

And He biddeth them " to bring of the fish,"
to show that what they saw was no appearance.
But here indeed it saith not that He ate with
them, but Luke, in another place, saith that He
did; for " He was eating together with them."'
(Acts i. 4.) But the, " how," it is not ours to
say ; for these things came to pass in too strange
a manner, not as though His nature now needed
food, but from an act of condescension, in proof
of the Resurrection.

[3.] Perhaps when ye heard these things, ye
glowed, and called those happy who were then
with Him, and those who shall be with Him at
the day of the general Resurrection. Let us
then use every exertion that we may see that
admirable Face. For if when now we hear we
so burn, and desire to have been in those days
which He spent upon earth, and to have heard
His Voice, and seen His face, and to have ap-
proached, and touched, and ministered unto
Him ; consider how great a thing it is to see
Him no longer in a mortal body, nor doing
human actions, but with a body guard of Angels,
being ourselves also in a form of unmixed purity,
and beholding Him, and enjoying the rest of
that bliss which passes all language. Wherefore,
I entreat, let us use every means, so as not to
miss such glory. For nothing is difficult if we
be willing, nothing burdensome if we give heed.
" If we endure, we shall also reign with Him."
(2 Tim. ii. 12.) What then is, "If we endure "?
If we bear tribulations, if persecutions, if we walk
in the strait way. For the strait way is by its
nature laborious, but by our will it is rendered
light, from the hope of things to come. " For
our present light affliction worketh for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;
while we look not at the things which are seen,
but at those which are not seen." (2 Cor. iv. 17,
18.) Let us then transfer our eyes to heaven,
and continually imagine " those " things, and
behold them. P'or if we always spend or.r time
with them, we shall not be moved to desire the
pleasures of this world, nor find it hard to bear
its sorrows ; but we shall laugh at these and the
like, and nothing will be able to enslave or lift
us up, if only we direct our longing thither,'" and
look to that love." And why say I that we shall
not grieve at present troubles ? We shall hence-
forth not even appear to see them. Such a
thing is strong desire."^ Those, for instance, who


^ " was manifested to His disciples." N. T.

" ffui/aAt^bftfco? avroU ^f. The words are rendered as above in
the margin of the Auth. Version, and St. Chrys. seems to have so un-
derstood them. The Vulgate has, '* convescens." The literal
sense is either "eating salt with them," or, as in the text ot Auth.
Version, ** being assembled with."

^'^ al. " increase that longing."

*^ iyoiriii'. ** 6 epwf .


330


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMiLV LXXXVII.


are not at present with us, but being absent are
loved, we image every day. For mighty is the
sovereignty of love,' it alienates the soul from
all things else, and chains to the desired object.
If thus we love Christ, all things here will seem
to be a shadow, an image, a dream. We too
shall say, " Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress?" (Rom.
viii. 35.) He said not, "money, or wealth, or
beauty," (these are very mean and contempti-
ble,) but he hath put the things which seem to
be grievous, famines, persecutions, deaths. He
then spat on these even, as being nought ; but
we for the sake of money separate ourselves from
our life, and cut ourselves off from the light.
And Paul indeed prefers "neither death, nor
life, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
any other creature," to the love which is towards
Him ; but we, if we see a little portion of gold,
are fired, and trample on His laws. And if these
things are intolerable when spoken of, much
more are they so when done.^ For the terrible
thing is this, that we shudder to hear, but do not
shudder to do : we swear readily, and perjure
ourselves, and plunder, and exact usury, care
nothing for sobriety, desist from exactness in
prayer, transgress most of the commandments,
and for the sake of money make no account of
our own members.' For he that loves wealth
will work ten thousand mischiefs to his neighbor,
and to himself as well. He will easily be angry
with him, and revile hirii, and call him fool, and
swear and perjure himself, and does not* even
preserve the measures of the old law. For he
that loves gold will not love his neighbor ; yet
we, for the Kingdom's sake, are bidden to love
even our enemies. Now if by fulfilUng the old
commandments, we shall not be able to enter
the Kingdom of heaven, unless our righteousness
exceed and go beyond them, when we transgress
even these, what excuse shall we obtain? He
that loves money, not only will not love his
enemies, but will even treat his friends as ene-
mies.

[4.] But why speak I of friends? the lovers
of money have often ignored nature itself. Such
a one knows not kindred, remembers not com-
panionship, reverences not age, has no friend,
but will be ill-disposed towards all, and above
all others to himself, not only by destroying his
soul, but by racking himself with ten thousand
cares, and toils, and sorrows. For he will endure
foreign travels, hatreds, dangers, plots, anything
whatever, only that he may have in his house the
root of all evil, and may count much gold. What
then can be more grievous than this disease ? It
is void of any luxury or pleasure, for the sake of


which men often sin, it is void of honor or glory.
For the lover of money suspects that he has tens
of thousands, and really has many, who accuse,
and envy, and slander, and plot against him.
Those whom he has wronged hate him as having
been ill-used ; those who have not yet suffered,
fearing least they may suffer, and sympathizing
with those who have, manifest the same hostility ;
while the greater and more powerful, being stung
and indignant on account of the humbler sort,
and at the same time also envying him, are his
enemies and haters. And why speak I of men ?
For when one hath God also made his enemy,
what hope shall there then be for him? what
consolation? what comfort? He that loves
riches will ° never be able to use them ; he will
be their slave and keeper, not their master. For,
being ever anxious to make them more, he will
never be willing to spend them ; but he will cut
short himself, and be in poorer state than any
poor man, as nowhere stopping in his desire.
Yet riches are made not that we should keep,
but that we should use them ; but if we are going
to bury them for others, what can be more miser-
able than we, who run about desiring to get
together the possessions of all men,* that we
may shut them up within, and cut them off from
common use ? But there is another malady not '
less than this. Some men bury their money in
the earth, others in their bellies, and in pleasure
and drunkenness ; together with injustice add-
ing to themselves the punishment of wantonness.
Some minister with their substance to parasites
and flatterers, others to dice and harlots, others
to different expenses of the same kind, cutting;
out for themselves ten thousand roads that lead
to hell, but leaving the right and sanctioned road
which leads to heaven. And yet it hath not
greater gain only, but greater pleasure than thC'
things we have mentioned. For he who gives
to harlots is ridiculous and shameful, and will
have many quarrels, and brief pleasure ; or rather,'
not even brief, because, give what he will to-
the women his mistresses, they will not thank
him for it ; for, " The house of a stranger ij;
a cask with holes." (Prov. xxiii. 27, LXX.)
Besides, that sort of persons is impudent,' and
Solomon hath compared their love to the grave :
and then only do they stop, when they see theu
lover stripped of all. Or rather, such a woman
doth not stop even then, but tricks herself out
the more, and tramples on him when he is downi
and excites much laughter against him, ano
works him so much mischief, as it is not possi'
ble even to describe by words. Not such is the
pleasure of the saved ; for neither hath any one
there a rival, but all rejoice and are glad, bott
they that receive blessings, and they that lool


• al. " much more those (i.e. the opposite) when not done."
» i.e. our members in Chnst. * al. *• will not.**


* al. " From his riches? he will."

* al. " get together all."


' lit. ** forward."


Homily LXXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


331


on. No anger, no despondency, no shame, no
disgrace, besiege the soul of such a one, but
great is the gladness of his conscience, and great
his hope of things to come ; bright his glory,
and great his distinction ; and more than all is
the favor and safety which is from God, and not
one precipice, nor suspicion, but a waveless har-


bor, and calm. Considering therefore all these
things, and comparing pleasure with pleasure,
let us choose the better," that we may obtain
the good things to come, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our I^rd Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY LXXXVIII.

John xxi. 15.


"So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than
these? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou
knowest that I love Thee."

[i.] There are indeed many other things
which are able to give us boldness towards God,
and to show us bright and approved, but that
which most of all brings good will from on high,
is tender care for our neighbor. Which there-
fore Christ requireth of Peter. For when their
ating was ended, Jesus saith to Simon Peter,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than
hese? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou
uiowest that I love Thee."
" He saith unto him. Feed My sheep."*
And why, having passed by the others, doth
He speak with Peter on these matters? He
ras the chosen one of the Apostles, the mouth
)f the disciples, the leader of the band ; on this
.ccount also Paul went up upon a time to enquire
)f him rather than the others. And at the same
ime to show him that he must now be of good
heer, since the denial was done away,^ Jesus
lutteth into his hands the chief authority^ among
le brethren ; and He bringeth not forward the
enial, nor reproacheth him with what had taken
lace, but saith, " If thou lovest Me, preside over
ry brethren, and the warm love which thou didst
irer manifest, and in which thou didst rejoice,
low thou now ; and the life which thou saidst
lou wouldest lay down for Me, now give for My
eep."

When then having been asked once and again,

! called Him to witness who knoweth the secrets

the heart,* and then was asked even a third

le," he was troubled, fearing a repetition of


* My Iambs," N. T. ' lit. *' driven away."

I • wooaraaiav,

J * Ver. 16. " He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son
I Jonas, lovest thou Me? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou
V>we»t that I love Thee. He saith unto him. Feed my sheep."

I* Ver. 17. " He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of
^as, lovest thou Me? Peter was grieved because He said unto
Tl the third time, Lovest thou Me; and he said unto Him, Lord,
«tt knowest all things: Thou knowest that I love Thee. Jesus
"H nato him, Feed my sheep." N. T.


what had happened before, (for then, having
been strong in assertion, he was afterwards con-
victed,) and therefore he again betaketh him-
self to Him. For the saying,

Ver. 17. "Thou knowest all things,"
meaneth, " things present, and things to come."
Seest thou how he had become better and more
sober, being no more self-willed, or contradict-
ing? For on this account he was troubled,
"lest perchance I think that I love, and love
not, as before when I thought and affirmed
much, yet I was convicted at last." But Jesus
asketh him the third time, and the third time
giveth him the same injunction, to show at
what a price He setteth the care' of His own
sheep, and that this especially is a sign of love
towards Him. And having spoken to him con-
cerning the love towards Himself, He foretelleth
to him the martyrdom which he should undergo,
showing that He said not to Him what he said
as distrusting, but as greatly trusting him ; wish-
ing besides to point out a proof of love towards
Him, and to instruct us in what manner especially
we ought to love Him. Wherefore He saith,

Ver. 18. "When thou wast young, thou girdedst
thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest ; but
when thou art old, others shall gird thee,* and
carry thee whither thou wiliest not."

And yet this he did will, and desired ; on
which account also He hath revealed it to him.
For since Peter had continually said, " I will lay
down my life for Thee" (c. xiii. 37), and,
"Though I should die with Thee, yet will I not
deny Thee" (Matt. xxvi. 35) : He hath given
him back" his desire. What then is the,
"Whither thou wiliest not"? He speaketh of
natural feeling, and the necessity of" the flesh,
and that the soul is unwillingly torn away from
the body. So that even though the will were
firm, yet still even then nature would be found


♦> al. " the better things." ^ irpoaTaaiav.

8 " when thou art old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and
another shall gird thee," &c. N. T. and some MSS.

*■ al. " given him." ^° i.e. weakness inseparable from.


332


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVIII.


in fault. For no one lays aside the body with-
out feeling, God, as I said before, having suitably
ordained this, that violent deaths might not be
many. For if, as things are, the devil has been
able to effect this, and has led ten thousand to
precipices and pits ; had not the soul felt such
a desire for the body, the many would have
rushed to this under any common discourage-
ment. The, " whither thou wiliest not," is then
the expression of one signifying natural feeling.

But how after having said, " When thou wast
young," doth He again say, "When thou art
old " ? For this is the expression of one declar-
ing that he was not then young ; (nor was he ;
nor yet old, but a man of middle age.') Where-
fore then did He recall to his memory his former
life ? Signifying, that this is the nature of what
belongeth to Him. In things of this life the
young man is useful, the old useless ; " but in
Mine," He saith, "not so; but when old age
hath come on, then is excellence brighter, then
is manliness more illustrious, being nothing
hindered by the time of life." This He said
not to terrify, but to rouse Him ; for He knew
his love, and that he long had yearned for this
blessing. At the same time He declareth the
kind of death. For since Peter ever desired to
be in the dangers which were for His sake, "Be
of good cheer," He saith, " I will so satisfy thy
desire, that, what thou sufferedst not when
young, thou must suffer when thou art old."
Then the Evangelist, to rouse the hearer, has
added,

Ver. 19. "This spake He, signifying by what
death he should glorify God."

He said not, "Should die," but, "Should
glorify God," that thou mayest learn, that to
suffer for Christ, is glory and honor to the
sufferer.

"And when He had spoken this, He saith,^
Follow Me."

Here again He alludeth to his tender care-
fulness, and to his being very closely attached
to Himself. And if any should say, " How then
did James receive the chair at Jerusalem?" I
would make this reply, that He appointed Peter'
teacher, not of the chair, but of the world.

Ver. 20, 21. "Then Peter turning about,
seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following ;
who also leaned on His breast at supper ; and
saith,* Lord, and what shall this man do? "

[2.] Wherefore hath he reminded us of that
reclining? Not without cause or in a chance
way, but to show us what boldness Peter had
after the denial. For he who then did not dare
to question Jesus, but committed the office to
another, was even entrusted with the chief au-


* lit. " a perfect man." ' " saith unto him," N. T.
' lit. " this man."

* " at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that bctrayeth Thee?
Peter seeing him saith." N. T.


thority over the brethren, and not only doth
not commit to another what relates to himself,
but himself now puts a question to his Master
concerning another. John is silent, but Peter
speaks. He showeth also here the love which
he bare towards him ; for Peter greatly loved
John, as is clear from what followed, and their
close union is shown through the whole Gospel,
and in the Acts. When therefore Christ had
foretold great things to him, and committed the
world to him, and spake beforehand of his
martyrdom, and testified that his love was
greater than that of the others, desiring to havt
John also to share with him, he said, " Anc
what shall this man do ? " " Shall he not come
the same way with us?" And as at that othe
time not being able himself to ask, he puts Johi
forward, so now desiring to make him a return
and supposing that he would desire to ask abou
the matters pertaining to himself, but had no
courage, he himself undertook the questioning
What then saith Christ ?

Ver. 22. " If I will that he tarry till I come
what is that to thee?"^

Since he spake from strong affection, ant
wishing not to be torn away from him,' Chris;
to show that however much he might love, h'
could not go beyond His love, saith, " If I wil
that he tarry — what is that to thee?"
these words teaching us not to be impatient
nor curious beyond what seemeth good
Him. For because Peter was ever hot, am
springing forward to enquiries such as this,
cut short his warmth, and to teach him not
enquire farther. He saith this.

Ver. 23. " Then went this saying abroao
among the brethren, that that disciple shoul
not die ; yet Jesus said not ' that he shall nc
die ; but. If I will that he tarry till I come, wha
is that to thee? "

" Do not thou on any account suppose," H
saith, " that I order your matters after a sing!
rule." And this He did to withdraw ther
from' their unseasonable sympathy for eac
other ; for since they were about to receive th
charge of the world, it was necessary that tha
should no longer be closely associated togethei
for assuredly this would have been a great lo
to the world. Wherefore He saith unto hir
" Thou hast had a work entrusted to thee, loci
to it, accomplish it, labor and struggle. WhJ
if I will that he tarry here ? Look thou to an
care for thine own matters." And observe,-
pray thee, here also the absence of pride in tli
Evangelist ; for having mentioned the opinion •
the disciples, he corrects it, as though they hi
not comprehended what Jesus meant. " Jes^


»" to thee? Follow thou Me." N. T.

8 i.e. St. John.

' " said not unto him," N. T. * al. *


on account of."


Homily LXXXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON ST. JOHN.


333


said not," he tells us, " that ' he shall not die,
but, If I will that he tarry.' "

Ver. 24. " This is the disciple which testifieth
o( these things, and wrote these things, and we
Icnovv that his testimony is true."

Why is it, that then, when none of the others
do so, he alone uses these words, and that for
:he second time, witnessing to himself? for it
seems to be offensive to the hearers. What
then is the cause? He is said to have been
|:he last who came to writing, Christ ' having
tnoved and roused him to the work ; and on
jhis account he continually sets forth his love,
lUuding to the cause by which he was impelled
o write. Therefore also he continually makes
nention of it, to make his record trustworthy,
md to show, that, moved from thence,^ he came
o this work. "And I know," he saith, "that
he things are true which he saith. And if the
nany believe not, it is permitted them to believe
rom this." "From what?" From that which
5 said next.

Ver. 25. "There are also many other things

.•hi( h Jesus did, the which, if they should be

ritten every one, I suppose that even the world

self could not contain the books that should be

ritten."

" Whence it is clear that I could not have
ritten to court favor ; for I who, when the mir-
( Its were so many, have not even related so
lany as the others have, but omitting most of
icm, have brought forward the plots of the Jews,
le stonings, the hatred, the insults, the revilings,
ii(i have shown how they called Him a de-
loniac and a deceiver, certainly could not have
ted to gain favor. For it behooved one who
nirted favor to do the contrary, to reject' the
proachful, to set forth the glorious." Since
icn he wrote what he did from full assurance,
I' does not decline to produce his own testi-
luny, challenging men separately to enquire
ito and scrutinize the circumstances. For it is
j custom with us, when we think that we are
; peaking exactly true, never to refuse our testi-
liony ; and if we do this, much more would he
jho wrote by the Spirit. What then the other
postles when they preached declared, he also
■ith ; " We are witnesses of the things spoken,''
111 the Spirit which He hath given' to them
at obey Him." (Acts v. 32.) And besides, he
IS present at all, and did not desert Him even
len being crucified, and had His mother en-
isled to him ; all which things are signs of his
ve for Him, and of his knowing all things ex-
tly. And if he has said that so many miracles
'A taken place, marvel thou not, but, consider-
i( the ineffable power of the Doer, receive with


<I. " God." * al. " conceal."

i.e. by his love. * " His witnesses of these words."

" Holy Spirit which God hath given. " N. T.


faith what is spoken. For it was as easy for Him
to do whatever He would, as it is for us to speak,
or rather much easier; for it sufficed that He
should will only, and all followed.

[3.] Let us then give exact heed to the words,
and let us not cease to unfold and search them
through, for it is from continual application that
we get some advantage. So shall we be able to
cleanse our life, so to cut up the thorns ; for such
a thing is sin and worldly care, fruitless and pain-
ful. And as the thorn whatever way it is held
pricks the holder, so the things of this life, on
whatever side they be laid hold of, give pain to
him who hugs and cherishes them. Not such
are spiritual things ; they resemble a pearl, which-
ever way thou turn it, it delights the eyes. As
thus. A man hath done a deed of mercy ; he
not only is fed with hopes of the future, but also
is cheered by the good things here, being every-
where full of confidence, and doing all with much
boldness. He hath got the better of an evil de-
sire ; even before obtaining the Kingdom, he
hath already received the fruit here, being praised
and approved," before all others,' by his own
conscience. And every good work is of this
nature ; just as conscience also punishes wicked
deeds here, even before the pit. For if, after
sinning, thou considerest the future, thou becom-
est afraid and tremblest, though no man punish
thee ; if the present, thou hast many enemies,
and livest in suspicion, and canst not henceforth
even look in the face those who have wronged
thee, or rather, those who have not wronged
thee.* For we do not in the case of those evil
deeds reap so much pleasure, as we do despon-
dency, when cotiscience cries out against us, men,
without, condemn us, God is angered, the pit
travailing to receive us, our thoughts not at rest
A heavy, a heavy and a burdensome thing is sin,
harder to bear than any lead. He at least who
hath any sense of it will not be able to look up
ever so little, though he be very dull. Thus, for
instance, Ahab, though very impious, when
he felt this, walked bending downwards, crushed
and afflicted. On this account he clothed him-
self in sackcloth, and shed fountains of tears,
(i Kings xxi. 27.) If we do this, and grieve as
he did, we shall put off our faults as did Zacchaeus,
and we too shall obtain some pardon. (Luke
xix. 9.) For as in the case of tumors,' and fis-
tulous ulcers,'" if one stay not first the discharge
which runs over and inflames the wound, how
many soever remedies he applies, while the
source of the evil is not stopped, he doth all in
vain ; so too if we stay not our hand from cov-
etousness, and check not that evil afflux of
wealth, although we give alms, we do all to no


•"' lit. " admired." ' or, '* all other things."

^ i.e. in wronging thee, have not wronged thee, because thoa
dcscrvest punishment.

" al. "diseases." *° rvpiyywv.


334


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVII]


purpose. For that which was healed by it,' cov-
etousness coming after is wont to overwhelm^
and spoil, and to make harder to heal than be-
fore. Let us then cease from rapine, and so do
alms. But if we betake ourselves to precipices,
how shall we be able to recover ourselves?^
for if one party (that is, alms-doing) were to
pull at a falling man from above, while another
was forcibly dragging him from below, the only
result of such a struggle would be, that the man
would be torn asunder. That we may not suffer


* i.e. by the alms.

"• Ut> *' recover breath.**


• al. " undo.'


this, nor, while covetousness weighs us dowi
from below, alms-doing depart and leave us
let us lighten ourselves, and spread our wings,
that having been perfected by the riddance c
evil things, and the practice of good,' we ma;
obtain the goods everlasting, through the graci
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ
with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghos
be glory, dominion, and honor, now and eve
and world without end. Amen.


* lit. *' expand ourselves.**

* Sav, and Ben, '* everlasting goods.*' But MSS. omit aiayiati


%


THE HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,

ON THS

EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.

Th$ Oxford Translation Revised, with Introduction and Notes, by
REV. FREDERIC GARDINER, D.D.,

tATE PROFESSOR IN THE BERKELEY DIVINITY SCHOOL, MIOOLETOWN, CONN.


PREFACE.


This volume completes the series of St. Chrysostom's Homilies on the New Testament. Trans-
lated a quarter of a century ago by the Rev. T. Keble, Vicar of Bisley, and revised with great
labor in the use of the then existing editions by his brother, the Vicar of Hursley, it was thought
best to delay the publication until Dr. Field had completed the long-delayed publication of the
Greek Text. This appeared in 1862.

The editing of the text of St. Chrysostom's Homilies is attended with peculiar difficulties.

Written sermons,* if ever preached in those days, were the exception. Those which have been

preserved to us have been generally taken down by some hearer. St. Augustine afterwards revised

lis, when brought to him for the purpose. In the case of St. Chrysostom's Homilies on the Acts

,jf the Apostles, as well as of the present volume, there are two distinct texts still extant : that

jriginally taken down by the short-hand writer, and another, when this had been polished and

nade neat at a subsequent time. Dr. Field's great labor then in the Greek Text of the present

Mume had been to restore the older form of these Homilies. He had ample material, both in

ireek MSS., in a Catena published not many years ago by our Dr. Cramer, Principal of New

nn Hall, which exhibit the older text (the former half of a second Catena, compiled by Niketas,'

archbishop of Heraclea in Thrace in the eleventh century, and published by the same Dr. Cramer,

l)pears to use both) ; and, of yet more importance, in Latin versions.

Cassiodorus, an Italian, who lived about 150 years after St. Chrysostom, in the earlier part of
is treatise, de Institutione Divinarum Litterarum, cap. 8. (opp. t. ii. p. 543, ed. Rotom. 1679) 'i*
escribing a volume of St. Paul's Epistles, in which 13 of the Epistles had a good commentary,
oes on, " But in regard to the Epistle to the Hebrews which St. John Bishop of Constantinople
eated of in Greek in 34 homilies, we have caused Mutianus, a most eloquent man, to translate
lem into Latin, that the order of the Epistles might not be unduly broken off."

To Cassiodorus then we owe the Latin version of Mutianus which has come down to us, and
hich, translated from the older form of text, has been a great assistance in the editing. It is
ten quoted in the foot-notes. In p. 167 there is also given an extract from the 13th Homily by
II undus, an African Bishop, who lived about the same time with Mutianus, but who apparently
instated the passage into Latin for himself.

The short-hand writer, who took down these Homilies and thus preserved them to us, is not
vknown to us. It is St. Chrysostom's dearly-loved friend the Priest Constantine or Constantius.'
i)r the title is, " Homilies of St. John Chrysostom Archbishop of Constantinople on the Epistle
t the Hebrews, published after his decease, from notes by Constantine, Presbyter of Antioch."

' See an animadversion of St. Cyril Alex, on those who committed to writing other people's sermons and thus preserved what might
he been less deliberately uttered as though it had been thoroughly well weighed. De Ador. viii, t. i. 267. See also the constantly
Ourring expressions in St. Augustine, which belong to the natural extemporaneous delivery, but which would be untrue in the delivery of
Wtcn sermons. The Preface to the first volume of St. Augustine on St. John, in this Library, written by the Rev. H. Browne, contains
u resting details of St. Augustine's preaching. Fleury remarks of Atticus, Archbishop of Constantinople, in the beginning of the fifth
C' jry, just after St. Chrysostom's decease, *' His sermons were indifferent, so that no one took the trouble to take them down in writ-
i' " Fleury, Eccles. Hist. xxii. g, p. 133, Oxford translation. The extract, however, which St. Cyril has preserved of Atticus (</<? recta
fi i^d Arcadiatn Mayinantque, repeated in his Apol. adv. Episcopos Orientales, cap. 4) is eloquent and pious.
_ ' Dr. Cramer had published this from the Paris MS. Cod. Reg. 338, which contains the first half only: but the whole catena U extant

^' It Library of St. Ambrose at Milan (E. 63 part inf.).
* Montfaucon observes that the Manuscripts frequently interchange the name.


338 PREFACE.


At the beginning of St. Chrysostom's exile in 404, when he was in Nicaea, in a Letter which he
wrote to Constantius about a mission which he had set on foot at Phoenicia (Ep. 121 1. iii. pp. 721,
722, ed. Montf.), he begs him "not to cease having a care for the Churches of Phoenicia and
Arabia and the east, and to write to " St. Chrysostom " quite often, and tell him how many
Churches had been built in a year and what holy men had gone into Phoenicia." Soon after,
Constantius seems to have asked leave of St. Chrysostom to join him; for in his 13th letter to
Olympias on arriving at Cocussus or Cucusus in Cappadocia, now Goksyn, his bitter place of
exile, St. Chrysostom says (ib. p. 594), " My Lord, the most pious priest Constantius, would fain
have been here long ago, for he wrote to me begging that I would let him come." About this
time, perhaps while Constantius was on his actual journey to Cucusus, St. Chrysostom writes to
him (Ep. 225, p. 724), grieved at not having heard from him, and speaks of their great love for
each other and of Constantius' goodness to the poor, the fatherless and widows : soon after he
writes from Cucusus to Elpidius bishop of Laodicea (Ep. 114, p. 656), " the most reverend priests
Constantius and Euethius are here with us." There are extant two Letters of Constantius, one of
them to his mother, written while he was companion of St. Chrysostom there (pp. 731 and 734).
In the course of this banishment St. Chrysostom writes (Ep. 123, pp. 663, 664) about this Phoeni-
cian mission to " the priests and monks in Phoenicia, who were instructing the Gentiles there,"
encouraging them in their work, and saying that he had given orders that all their expenses " in
clothing, shoes, and support of the brethren should be bountifully supplied," and adds that they
will know about his affairs from Constantius' letter. In a letter to Gerontius (Ep. 54, p. 623)
written during this exile about the mission in Phoenicia, St. Chrysostom says that he had intrusted
Constantius to give Gerontius all he needed whether " for building or for the needs of the
brethren."

To Constantius' piety we owe the preservation of these Homilies. One very special value of
them lies in the pious fervent exhortation at the end of each, on Penitence, Almsgiving, or what-
ever St. Chrysostom had at the time chiefly in mind, breathing forth words from a heart, filled
with the love of God and that longed for his flock to partake it.

HOM. I on sin and Almsgiving

2 on high thoughts and on poverty and wealth

3 on God's gifts to each

4 on heathen practices at funerals

5 on temptation

6 on Heaven

7 on old age

8 on study of Scriptures

9 on Penitence and confession of our sins

10 on relieving distress

1 1 on Almsgiving and giving to beggars
13 on free-will and Penitence

13 on not postponing Baptism and on a right life

14 on Thought of God and earnest prayer

15 on sin-enslavement and on untimely laughter

16 on dwelling in Heaven

17 on worthily receiving Holy Communion

18 on the Might of Poverty

19 on the great Gain of loving one's neighbor

20 on slavery to possessions and on Thankfulness

21 on gossip

22 on seeking God, on His protection and enduring Temptation

23 on the loss of God

24 on the acquirement of Virtue


m


PREFACE. 330

25 on not caring for things of the world nor partaking with the covetous

26 on loyalty to God

27 on the might of Prayer and on minding us that we are sinners

28 value of Affliction and on simplicity of life and adornment of the soul

29 on the Peril of Luxury

30 on helping each other in way of salvation

31 on Penitence and keeping in mind our sins

32 on the Might of mercifulness to others

33 on the value of affliction, trial, poverty, and on Thankfulness

34 on using with intensity of mind and purpose, the Grace of the Spirit.

After the publication of Dr. Field's text (^Bibliotheca Patrum Eccksiae Catholicae Qui ante
Irientis et Occidentis schisma floruerunf, torn vii. Oxonii 1862) the translation was again very
arefuUy revised by that text by the Rev. Dr. Barrow, Principal of St. Edmund Hall : he also
rrote heads for the present Preface. The headings were given (as far as could be done) in the
/IS. and many of them have been retained ; others, fitting in less well with the printed page,
eemed to need a little modification. For an occasional note enclosed in brackets, the son of
he one remaining Editor of the Library is responsible.
1 P. E. PUSEY.

Oxford, May, 1877.

[It has seemed better in this edition to conform the translation of the Scripture texts to some one standard.
Chrysostom used the current text of his day, which, on the whole, was more like the Textus Receptus, the basis
the A. v., th.-.n the more critical text followed by the R. V. It has therefore seemed best to take the A. V. as

standard (except where St. Chrysostom has followed a different text), but note has been made of any variations
the R. V. materially affecting the sense. There remain a number of loose quotations and combinations of dif-
ent texts, and in these the English translation is retained.

Effort has been made to simplify the language and remove involved constructions in the translation of the
)milies. The English translation was originally made from the Benedictine, and afterwards revised from Field's
>re accurate text, and the differences between these have sometimes been overlooked. Besides this, it has often
:n possible to give St. Chrysostom's meaning more accurately, — sometimes even reversing the sense. There are,
ivever, many very felicitous translations in the English edition which have been retained. It is a revision, and

a new translation.

All the notes in the English edition have been scrupulously retained, additions being enclosed in square brackets,

I the initials of the reviser. An introduction on the authorship of this Epistle has been inserted. — F. G.]


[Published after his decease. — F. G., jr.]


INTRODUCTION.

By THE AMERICAN REVISER.


In the following Homilies St. Chrysostom assumes throughout St. Paul's authorship of the
pistle, and in his opening Homily deals with considerable ingenuity with several of the most
jvious objections to the Pauline authorship.

The Epistle, however, is anonymous, and is not attributed to St. Paul by the most ancient his-
rical testimony which has come down to us, nor is his authorship generally recognized by
lodern criticism. It is interesting, therefore, to enquire whether St. Chrysostom, in adopting the
[evailing view of his time, did so on sufficient grounds.

I The history of the matter is very curious. At the close of the second century TertuUian
eaks positively and unhesitatingly of the Epistle to the Hebrews as written by Barnabas, the
rly and long-continued companion of St. Paul.* But there happened to be current in the
cient Church another epistle ascribed to Barnabas, and then commonly received as his, though
nerally considered spurious. The two epistles were so entirely unlike that no one could well
:eive them both as from the same author. The result was different in different parts of the
lurch. In the West, although the Epistle to the Hebrews had been used very largely by
ement of Rome, it came to be discredited altogether, and did not secure general recognition
til the fourth century ; it was then gradually acknowledged and attributed, at first doubtfully,
t afterwards by common consent, to St. Paul. In the East, on the other hand, the Epistle
ilf was firmly accepted from the first, but with no certain tradition and much questioning in
;ard to its author. The suggestion of its Pauline authorship seems to have been made by
ntaenus, the teacher of Clement of Alexandria, and a contemporary of TertuUian. We have
I opinion, however, only at third hand, in a quotation preserved by Eusebius ^ from a lost work
I Clement, and it is impossible to tell on what grounds he rested his opinion, or whether it was
I'nere personal speculation, like the reason he gives for the omission of the name of St. Paul in
C'lnection with the Epistle.

His disciple Clement adopted the suggestion not without hesitation. No one familiar with
G^ek, which was still the current language of the East, and especially of Alexandria, could fail
tc lie struck by the extreme difference of style between this Epistle and those of St. Paul.
Cment, therefore, conjectured that it might have been originally written by St. Paul in Hebrew
ar translated into Greek by St. Luke. This again is second-hand opinion preserved to us by
)ius.' Nevertheless, in other works, which are still extant, he frequently cites the Epistle
Paul's.

riiill. De Pud. c. 20, Ed. Mignc, 1021. Exstat enint et Barnabae titulus ad ffebraeos, adeo satis auciorttatis viro [viri'\, ui
I'aulus juxta se constiiuerit in abstinentiae tenore : . . . [i Cor. ix. 6]. . . , Et utique receptior afiud EccUsias Epistola
Jiutabae illo apocrypko Pastore tnoechorutn, Monens itaque disdpulos, otnissis omnibus initHs, ad per/ectionetn magis tendertf
. . [After quoting Heb. vi. 4-8, he goes on] Hoc qui ab Apostolis didicit et cum Apostolis docuit, etc.

' iscbius' Ecci. Hist. vi. 14 (Cruse's translation, p. 213). " But now, as the blessed presbyter used to say, ' since the Lord who
Apostle of the Almighty, was sent to the Hebrews, Paul by reason of his inferiority, as if sent to the Gentiles, did not subscribe
.m apostle of the Hebrews; both out of reverence for the Lord, and because he wrote of his abundance to the Hebrews, as a
ini apostle of the Gentiles.'"

./. The Epistle to the Hebrews he asserts was written by Paul to the Hebrews in the Hebrew tongue, but that it was

V translated by Luke and published among the Greeks. Therefore one finds the same character of style and of phraseology in

tic as in the Acts. " But it is probable that the title, Paul the Apostle, was not prefixed to it. For as he wrote to the Hebrews,

A imbibed prejudices against him and suspected him, he wisely guards against diverting them from the perusal by giving his


342 INTRODUCTION.


Clement was succeeded in his catechetical office at Alexandria by Origen, a profound thinker
and scholar. He was strongly impressed with the difference between the Greek of this and of
the Pauline Epistles, and speaks of the matter in different parts of his voluminous works, some-
times suggesting the Clementine hypothesis, sometimes speaking of the variety of opinions and
traditions on the subject, sometimes speaking of St. Luke or of Clement of Rome as the probable
author, but summing up his perplexity (in language, quoted fully by Eusebius), by saying that
who really was the author, God only knows.'

Thus far the question of authorship was evidently an open one on which every one was free
to hold his own opinion, or uncertainty of opinion. TertuUian speaks of the authorship of
Barnabas simply as a fact, without an allusion to any doubt on the matter. But as the time went
on, the attention of the masters of thought in the Church became more and more engrossed with
doctrinal questions, while those of exegesis and criticism more and more lost their interest, espe-
cially in the East. In the West there is no trace of any reference of the authorship of the Epistl(
to St. Paul until the middle of the fourth century ; but after this the opinion spread rapidly, ant
under the influence of Augustine, in the year 393 somewhat hesitatingly, but in 419 positively
the provincial council of Carthage reckoned it among the Pauline Epistles. Augustine himself
however, sometimes expressed himself doubtfully, and although it had now become customary t(
quote the Epistle as St. Paul's, yet scholars like Jerome, when distinctly treating of the question
express the old doubts and uncertainties of Origen. The assumption of the Pauline authorshij
was a convenience in maintaining the authority of the Epistle, and there being almost no one t<
call it in question, had come to be generally adopted in St. Chrysostom's time, and remainef
almost unquestioned until the revival of learning at the period of the Reformation. Since then
while still remaining a popular impression, it has come to be rejected by the great majority 0
careful students.

In this variety of opinion from the earliest times, and in the absence of any consisten
external evidence, we are plainly left free to form our own conclusions from internal evi
dence. Among the great number of authors suggested by different writers, the only name
entitled to especial consideration are those of St. Paul (Chrysostom, Augustine, and latt
writers generally until modem times, but at present the only scholar of weight is Hofmann), S
Luke (besides the views of ancients given above, Calvin, Ebrard, DoUinger, and to a certai
extent Delitzsch), Clement of Rome (Erasmus, Reithmaier, Bisping), Silas (Mynster, Bohrai
Godet), ApoUos (Luther, Semler, De Wette, Tholuck, Bunsen, Kurtz, Farrar, De Pressens:
Bleek, Hilgenfeld, Lfinemann, Alford), and Barnabas (UUmann, Wieseler, Ritschl, Grau, Thierscl
Weiss, Renan, Keil) . Of the three first we have genuine writings with which to make a compar
son; of the three last — assuming the spuriousness of the so-called Epistles of Barnabas — nothir
remains.

The supposition of the authorship of St. Paul, although so long carelessly held, seems almo
forbidden by an expression in the Epistle itself. St. Paul was always most strenuous in assertii
that he had received his apostleship and his knowledge of the truth " not of man, neither 1
man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father" (Gal. i. i), while the author of this Epis!
ranks himself among those who had received through the medium of others that Gospel " whi^
at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that hea
Him " (ii. 3). All attempts to weaken the force of this evidence by considering the passage
merely an instance of the rhetorical figure koinosis, in which the writer identifies himself with 1
readers, and thus attributes to himself what properly belongs only to them, have been unsucce
fill. Delitzsch considers that if the Epistle were the joint work of St. Paul and St. Luke,
which the former only supplied the general course of thought, leaving its expression entirely


• Eusebius' Eccl. Hist. vi. 25. Extended quotations from the various writers above referred to, and from nuuiy others, may be fo
in almost any of the innumerable treatises on the subject, and are given with especial fullness and clearness in Alford's Prolegomena.


I


INTRODUCTION. 343


he latter, even this expression, so singularly like Luke i. i, 2, might have been used ; but this
;an only be by a practical surrender of the Pauline authorship. St. Paul everywhere lays such
imphasis on the fact that his presentation of Christian truth was in no way whatever derived
rom man, but was from express divine instruction given to himself personally, that this passage
nust form a presumption against the Pauline authorship so strong as to be set aside only by
;lear and positive evidence. It has already appeared that there is no such external evidence j
he internal will be examined below.

The authorship of Clement of Rome may also be set aside on two grounds: (i) That he
Juotes largely from this Epistle with the whole air of one citing from a higher authority to con-
Irm his own teachings; and (2) that his own manner and style, as well as intellectual power, is
|o unlike as to make the supposition of a common authorship scarcely conceivable.

The early suggestion that the Epistle may have been written in Hebrew by St. Paul, more or
ss fully, and translated by St. Luke or St. Clement, or some other of his companions more or less
araphrastically, can find no favor with the modern scholar. If such a supposition is meant to
iave the work essentially a translation, it encounters all the difficulties already mentioned against
le Pauline authorship, and besides is opposed to abundant evidence that the work was origi-
ally written in Greek. " It abounds in compound words which are essentially Greek, which
ave no analogues in Aramaic or in Hebrew," ' and it contains paronomasia, entering into the
lought, which could only be possible in Greek. If, on the other hand, it is meant to express
lerely some connection of St. Paul with the thought and line of argument of the Epistle, it
sally gives up the Pauline authorship, and even this thread of connection may be found in the
iquel difficult to retain.

In favor of the authorship of St. Paul so far as the ideas and essential argument of the Epistle
■a concerned, Origen urges the beauty of the thoughts, and there must be some force in this
•gument, or the Epistle could hardly have been so long and so widely attributed to him. Per-
ips it may be summed up in the words of an eminent and now departed divine," " If the
pistle were not written by St. Paul, then we have the remarkable phenomenon that there were
'O men among the Christians of that age who were capable of writing it." The theory has
so a certain pritnd facie probability, and offers a convenient way of reconciling the conflict of
e external evidence. But of course it cannot be accepted merely on these grounds.

At the outset, on a general view of the Epistle, every one must be struck with the marked

IFerence in its construction from any of St. Paul's Epistles. The omission of his name at the

ginning has been more or less satisfactorily accounted for from ancient times, but the reasons

: this do not apply to the absence of any sort of salutation, " any heading or introductory

inksgiving," by which St. Paul always takes pains to conciliate his readers, and of which there

s especial need if he were writing to Hebrews disposed to prejudice against him. On the

ntrary, after the manner of St. Mark in his Gospel, the writer strikes directly into his subject,

iiout any sort of preface. Another striking feature of difference is, that St. Paul always keeps

ise to his argument until it is completed, and then adds practical exhortations founded upon it,

lie in our Epistle each short division of the argument is separated from that which follows by

appropriate practical application. This indicates quite a different habit of mind, and it is

cificult to fancy such a severely logical reasoner as St. Paul thus pausing in the flow of his

a;ument. The style of the Epistle is so markedly different from that of St. Paul that attention

hi been drawn to this point from the time of Origen down. The " rounded oratorical periods "

0 the Hebrews are very unlike the " unstudied, broken, abrupt phraseology " of St. Paul. This

dference might, in part at least, be accounted for as the work of the translator ; only in that

c e, the translator could have been neither St. Luke, whose style is clear and smooth enough,

not at all oratorical, nor Clement, whose style is very unlike.


1


» Godet in The Expositor, April, 1888, p. 262. • Bp. George Burgess.


344 INTRODUCTION.


When we come to details, there are two passages which have been thought to favor a Paul-
ine authorship. There is a quotation in Heb. x. 30, which, it is alleged, agrees precisely with th<
same quotation in Rom. xii. 19, but differs from either the Hebrew or the Greek of Deut. xxxii.
35. The A. V. makes a slight variation in language between Romans and Hebrews, but th(
Textus Receptus of the original is the same : " Vengeance is mine ; I will recompense, saith th(
Lord." Now the LXX reads, " In the day of vengeance I will recompense " ; the Hebrew
" mine [are] vengeance and recompense." If, however, we examine any critical text, we shall fine
that the clause " saith the Lord," is rejected as a gloss in this Epistle, while undisputed in Romans
thus constituting a difference between them. It is still true, however, that they both differ in th(
same way from the Hebrew and the LXX. This might be a difficulty were it not that the quota
tion as it is in this Epistle is found exactly in the Targum, and from that had probably passei
into familiar use. Everywhere else the author of Hebrews quotes very closely from the LXX, an^
from that in what is known as its Alexandrine form, while St. Paul uses the Vatican text, quote
far more loosely, and often follows the Hebrew rather than the Greek.

The other passage really gives no clear indication at all, and as far as it goes, is rather a
variance with Pauline authorship. In xii. 23 the writer says, " Know ye that our brother Timo
thy is set at liberty ; with whom, (if he come shortly,) I will see you." It is of course possibl
that Timothy may have been imprisoned, at Rome or elsewhere, when St. Paul was with him
but as far as we know the history of the two, it seems unlikely. The passage might quite as we
have been written by almost any of the companions of St. Paul who were also associated wit
Timothy. 1

When now, enquiry is made as to the indications to be found in the choice of words an^ I
construction of sentences, there is certainly room for some difference of opinion. Delitzsch ha 1
endeavored throughout his commentary on this Epistle to show that there is such a strikin
similarity between it and the writings of St. Luke as to favor decidedly the view that it wa
written by him; Lunemann, on the other hand, in the introduction to his commentary, hj
collected the instances of Delitzsch and remarks upon them, " So soon as we separate therefro!
that which is not exclusively peculiar to Luke and the Epistle to the Hebrews ; so soon as w
also put out of the account that which Luke has only taken up out of the sources employed b
him, and cease to lay any weight upon isolated expressions and turns of discourse which wei
the common property either of the Greek language in general, or of the later Greek in partici
lar, and are only accidentally present in Luke and the Epistle to the Hebrews, — there is nothir.
whatever left of an actual affinity, such as must of necessity admit of being traced out betwee
the works of the same author." The fact seems to be that there is between these two write
as compared with the other New Testament writers a certain similarity, not so much of particuli
words and constructions, as of the general cast, both of the phraseology and the structure of tJi
sentences ; but that this similarity arises, not from the identity of the writers, but from the iiU
that both wrote in somewhat better Greek than is found in the rest of the New Testaraer
The grammars of the New Testament Greek continually refer to the fact, that certain classic
constructions are found only, or at least more frequently, in these writers than elsewhere. B
this does not prove more than that the author of this Epistle, as might easily have been the ca
with several of the companions of St. Paul, like St. Luke, was more accustomed to classical Gre«
usage than most of the earliest Christian writers.

An examination of the vocabulary of this Epistle in comparison with that of St. Paul, i
Luke, and the other New Testament writers will throw some light upon the question. In anoth
place ' I have made such an examination with some care, and will here give a summary >
results. It is to be borne in mind that this Epistle is much shorter than the collective writi
of St. Paul, or St. Luke, or of the other New Testament writers taken together. By a ca

' ymtrnal of the Soc. cf Biil. Literature and Exegesie for June, 1887, pp. 1-27.


INTRODUCTION. 345


stimate of the actual length of these four groups it is found that, taking the longest as the

;andard, in order to determine the relative use of any word in them, it is necessary to multiply

le number of its occurrences in St. Luke by 1.57, in St. Paul by 1.86, in Hebrews by 1 1.56. The

isults may in many instances prove fallacious. Any writer may use a word several times, even

1 a short passage, which he would not have used again had his writing been greatly extended ;

r he may not use a particular word once in twenty pages, when he will employ it several times

I the twenty-first. Such facts must be borne in mind, but the above process seems to be the

nly means of making a comparative statement in figures ; and when it is applied to a large

Umber of words, and especially to whole groups of words which correspond to certain classes

■ ideas, the general result must have a decided bearing upon the question of authorship.

It has often been noticed that the number of words peculiar to any New Testament writer is

index of the number freely at his command. Peculiar words, it is true, are often required by

iculiarity of subject, and may sometimes be what is called accidental. Still, when the number

them in any writer is unusually large, the fact has its value, and such words do abound in the

tings of St. Luke and in the Epistle to the Hebrews above all others.' No great importance

haps should be attached to this point ; yet as it is often brought forward, the exact facts

ould be ascertained. Excluding words occurring only in quotations from the LXX (which can

ive no bearing upon the characteristics of the writer), and also excluding words which depend

doubtful readings, the number of words found in the New Testament only in the Gospel of St.

ike is 249, in the Acts 414, in both taken together 724; the similar number in the much

orter Epistle to the Hebrews is 147, while even the Apocalypse, with all its peculiar subjects

d imagery, has but 116, and none of the other books (except Matthew 1 14) reach as high as 100.

lis suggests that the writer of this Epistle was like St. Luke in having at his command a pecu-

rly rich vocabulary. • But if the facts be looked at in another way, and the comparative length

the various books taken into consideration, a different result is reached. St. Luke's Gospel has

e peculiar word to every 9.76 lines ; Acts, one to every 5.77 ; Hebrews, one to 4.45 ; but i

[nothy has one to every three lines ; 2 Timothy, one to 3.22 ; Titus, one to 2.97 ; James, one

3.5 ; and so on with several of the shorter epistles. The result of such statistics appears to

pend much upon how they are manipulated. Nevertheless, in no book of nearly equal, or of

ater length, is the proportion so large as in this Epistle, except in the Acts. If the writings

various authors be taken collectively, —

St. Luke has 724 peculiar words = i to every 6.66 lines.
St. Paul has 777 peculiar words = i to every 5.25 lines.
Hebrews has 147 peculiar words = i to every 4.45 lines.
St. John has 244 peculiar words = i to every 13.46 lines.
All others taken together have 378 peculiar words = i to every 1 1.38 lines.

On the whole, then, the first impression of every reader is confirmed : St. Paul, St. Luke, and
tV author of Hebrews are alike distinguished from the other New Testament writers by the com-
pative richness of their vocabulary ; yet, in view of the peculiar subjects treated in this Epistle,
tK fact has less significance than it might be entitled to under other circumstances.

Another question may be asked of the same kind. May not some indication of authorship

bifnund in the number and character of the words common only to the Hebrews with St. Paul,

St. Luke, and with the other writers respectively? There are 34 words common to St.

and Hebrews, and found nowhere else ; to St. Paul and Hebrews, 46 ; to all others and

ews, 28. Or, proportioning these numbers to the length of the several books, common to

and Hebrews, 53.5 ; to St. Paul and Hebrews, 85.56 ; to other writers and Hebrews, 28 ; or

nyly twice as many common to Hebrews with St. Luke, and more than three times as many

' See Thayer's Grimm's N. T. Lexicon^ Appendix iv. pp. 698-710, for lists of words peculiar to each New Testament writer.


346 INTRODUCTION.


common to Hebrews with St. Paul, as there are common to Hebrews with other writers. Th
examination tends like the other, but much more strongly, to connect this Epistle both with S
Luke and St. Paul, but especially with the latter. It falls in with the vacillating opinion c
Origen, already given, and with his report of the current traditions of his time.

But much more important than the mere numerical statement, is the character of some (
these words, used in common by these writers and by no others. Most of them, indeed, ha\
nothing characteristic, and many are used but once by each of the writers, and that apparent!
without any special design. There are several, however, worthy of more consideration. Th
noun Karairava-ii and the verb Karairavm, which might be expected to be common enough, ai
use.d only in Luke and Hebrews, the noun once in Luke, eight times in Hebrews ; the vet
1 1 times in Luke, three times in Hebrews ; or together, 1 2 times and 1 1 times. The noi
fifToxoi is used once in Luke, five times in Hebrews, and nowhere else, while the verb /iiTf)
is used five times by St. Paul, three times in Hebrews, and by no other writer. AiaTtdt/uu occu
three times in Luke, twice in Hebrews, and nowhere else. Suvavrdw is used four times in Lul
twice in Hebrews, and not elsewhere. The word for star in Greek has either form, auTf.
or offTTJp, and both are common in the LXX ; but the former is used exclusively by St. Lu
(three times) and also in Hebrews, where, however, it occurs but once ; but aa-Trjp is us
exclusively by all the other New Testament writers, by St. Paul three times, by others
times. On the other hand, ivSuKwiu occurs twice in Hebrews, nine times in St. Paul, and in
other writer. The verb liapioTtm (occurring three times) is peculiar to Hebrews, as is also t
adverb evapco-rtois, while the adjective lidpta-Toi occurs once in Hebrews, and seven times
St. Paul, being found nowhere else in the New Testament. The striking adverb €(j>a.ira$, r
found in any other New Testament writer, occurs three times in Hebrews and twice in St. Pa
The verb XuTovyiu> with the nouns Xctrouyia and XttToupyds and the adjective XtirovpytKos, thou
common enough in the LXX, and apparently sufficiently often called for, are used in the N
Testament only by St. Luke, St. Paul, and in Hebrews. The verb occurs once in each of thet
XiiTovpyCa is used once by St. Luke, three times by St. Paul, twice in Hebrews ; XetToupyds th;
times by St. Paul, twice in Hebrews ; while the adjective occurs only once in the last ; i.e. tak:-
the whole group together, it is employed twice by St. Luke, seven times by St. Paul, and
times in Hebrews, and never elsewhere. The much more important word /leo-tVi;? is used 0
in St. Paul and Hebrews, three times in each. The same is true of op-oXoyui, a word which mi,
have been expected more frequently. There seems to be nothing peculiar about dv«8t'o-/i.os wh:
yet happens to be found only in St. Paul (three times) and in Hebrews (twice). The wO'
n-aiScia and n-aiStvriJs also occur only in these writers, the former four times, the latter once in
Paul ; the former twice, the latter once in Hebrews ; or together, five times and three times,
are surprised to find such a word as Tr\r]po<l>opta only in these writers, in each of them tw«
The remarkable word iiTrdo-Tao-t?, afterwards in another sense of so much importance theologies
is found only in these writers, in St. Paul three times, in Hebrews twice.

The results of this comparison have a positive value, unless they can be, at least in some gi
degree, paralleled by words common to Hebrews and the other New Testament writers. ]
not find this to be the case. There seem to be but two words common only to Hebrews anci
any of them occurring more than once in each. One of these is the purely accidental m
t/88o/io«, used twice in Hebrews, and seven times elsewhere (five times in Revelation) ; and
other is the more important word /Jairno-^ds (always in the plural = purifying ablutions) used t"
each in Mark and Hebrews. Whatever value, therefore, there may be in this examinatio
common words, it is much increased by the almost entire absence of any such relation betv
this Epistle and the other writings of the New Testament. It certainly points, as far as it f '
to some sort of relation between the three writers, St. Luke, St. Paul, and the author of Hebr
and especially between the two last.


INTRODUCTION. 347

We now turn to common words of wider range which yet have something in their usage
ending to show the style of the writer. The verb Ipxo/Mi. with its compounds iw'-, iir'-, i(-, t'ur-,
ar-, trap-, and Trpocr-, is naturally more common in narrative. Making allowance for this, we are
urprised at its relative frequency in Hebrews and infrequency in the Pauline Epistles, while the
rord is in such common use as to make this difference significant. The proportionate numbers
re : Hebrews, 519 ; St Luke, 656 ; St. Paul, 169 ; all others, 708. For the particular compound
a-epxafjuu, the same numbers are: Hebrews, 196; St. Luke, 133; St. Paul, 7; all others, 91.
/hile it is relatively much the most frequent in Hebrews, it is yet common in St. Luke, but
Imost entirely avoided by St. Paul.

Aaixfidvui with its compounds im-, vapa-, and vtto-, have a similar variable usage. They are
11 relatively much more frequent in Hebrews than elsewhere, less common in St. Luke, and still
!ss so in St. Paul ; taking the simple verb and its compounds separately, St. Luke alone uses
lat with VTTO (four times actually, or relatively, six times), and almost entirely avoids that with
apa, and St. Paul, like the other writers, that with im ; while Hebrews uses them all (except
to) with peculiar frequency. The proportionate numbers are : —

Hebrews. St. Luke. St. Paul. All Others.

\ap.pdva) 196 80 61 157

<T'- 34 19 4 4

Trapa- I39 I 20 25

inro- ...... — 6 — —


Total . . .369 106 85 186

The verbs employed for request or prayer are numerous, and their employment by the differ-
it writers varies .much. The following list of their relative frequency shows the principal
cts: —

Hebrews. St. Luke. St. Pauu All Others.

atTe'ci) II 330 7 46

O-TT- 3

«^ — 2 — —

<V- — 3 — —

■^°-p- 35 <5 7 —

TTpOfT- I -^ 2

Scd/Utl 8 9 I

(iriOvniio II 23 II 5

ipoyrao) — 31 7 37

tv)(opai — 3 ^ *

Total ... 57 410 47 93

While St. Matthew habitually designates heavenly things by the plural (gen. or dat.) of
oiavos, and is somewhat followed by the other writers, the author of Hebrews and St. Paul
eipioy these forms very little, and are almost alone in availing themselves of the compound adjec-
t e tVoupovtos for the same purpose. St. Luke uses this word only once ; Hebrews, six times ;
S Paul, twelve times ; all others, twice. On the other hand, the simple oupawos is not used at all
iiHebrews and St. Paul, but occurs twice in St. Luke, and four times elsewhere.
I The words XoXtti' and Xtyeti/ are both common enough, and the distinction between them is
vill recognized. The point to be noticed is the frequency of their use relatively to each other.
I^brews uses them in the proportion of i : 2 ; St. Paul the same ; St. Luke, 1:3^; all others,
1 7 nearly. St. Luke here varies considerably from Hebarews and St. Paul, but far less than the
c»ers.


348 INTRODUCTION.


The Hebraistic wpoa-mirov, so frequent in the LXX, is found but once in Hebrews, and th
in an allusion to the LXX ; but curiously occurs 2 7 times in St. Luke, as many in St. Paul, and
all others 22. So also prjfua. is a common enough word; but in its Hebraistic sense, correspor
ing to dabar, a thing, the subject-matter of speech or command, its use is confined to St. Lul
and it does not occur either in Hebrews or elsewhere. Both vird.px»> and vro<TTpi^u) are favor
words with St. Luke. The former occurs in his writings 34 times, is not found at all in Hebrev
is used by St. Paul 1 1 times, and only four times elsewhere ; the latter is used by St. Luke
times, and elsewhere only once each in Hebrews, St. Paul, and St. Mark. Kartpyo^o/ioi if
Pauline word (21 times), never used in Hebrews, and but three times elsewhere (Jas. 2, Pet. 1
On the other hand, the use of the comparatives Kpua-criov and jrXeiW, with the superlative irXdcri
is far more common in Hebrews. The comparative numbers are : for KptiWwv, Hebrews, 150 ;
Luke, o ; St. Paul, 7 (he also used the adverb Kptlwov once) ; all others, 2. For irX«
wKtioTiys, Heb. 46 ; St. Luke, 42 ; St. Paul, 19 ; all others, 17.

I do not recall any other words of this kind, the usage of which affects our enquiry. Such in
ences as may be drawn from this examination are somewhat contradictory. They certainly
not point to the author of this Epistle as either St. Paul or St. Luke, as they might be expec
to do if such were the fact. There are some striking similarities of diction ; but the differen
are, at least, quite as important.

It is time now to turn to those adverbs, particles and prepositions, which bring out the gn
matical form in which a writer is accustomed to clothe his ideas. But before speaking of th.
mention must be made of one grammatical form peculiarly characteristic of the nicety
subtlety of thought of the classic Greek writers — the optative mood. This subject has b
investigated by Dr. Harman with great care. He finds that this mode is used in the whole f
Testament 66 times, 32 of them in the Pauline Epistles, 28 in the writings of St. Luke, onc(
Hebrews, and five times in all other writers. "In nearly all the cases in which the opta
occurs in the New Testament it is used to express a wish or prayer, except in the writing
Luke." " In the Epistle to the Hebrews we find one instance of the optative, KaTapria-ai, 'j
God maie you perfect ' (xiii. 21). This is presumptive proof that an Alexandrian did not v
this Epistle, as it is not likely that the use of this mode in but one instance would have satis
his fine Greek taste." '

The usage of the particles, adverbs and prepositions, require so much detail that only a si
mary can here be given with a reference to the paper on the " Language of the Epistles to
Hebrews," already mentioned.

The particles ixtv and Si would naturally be more common in narrative ; but as betv"
Hebrews, St. Paul, and the other Epistles, they are relatively most frequent in Hebrews,
same is true of the conjunction t«, which is more common in St. Luke and St. Paul than in ci
New Testament writers. The adversative dAAd is common enough everywhere, not even
shortest epistle being without more than one instance of its use. St. Luke and Hebrews em
it very much more seldom ; but again, St. Luke uses it far less than Hebrews. The three wrj
St. Luke, St. Paul, and the author of Hebrews, are distinguished from the other writers by
(comparatively) sparing use of av and idv, but of the three, St. Luke employs it most, an( 5t,
Paul least. Hebrews alone uses iavTrep, but never idv p-rj, which is employed in St. Luke th
moderate freedom, by St. Paul twice as often, and still more frequently by the other writers. In
the case of Si6, St. Paul uses it relatively only half as often as Hebrews, but three times as M
as St. Luke, and the last more than twice as often as the other writers. In the use of &< s
much less common word, there is a less difference, but still a marked one and in the m
order.

< "TheOptative Mode in Hellenistic Greek," by Prof. H. M. Harman, D.D., LL.D. youmal 0/ Soc. 0/ Biil. Lit. and Es\
Dec. 18S6, p. 10.


INTRODUCTION. 349


The pronouns of the first and second person are used, as might be expected, most abundantly
ly St. Paul ; but Hebrews is singularly shy of them. This fact has been noticed and an explana-
ion offered on the ground that the work has more the character of a treatise than of a personal
pistle ; but this explains too much, since these personal pronouns, though relatively infrequent,
,re still very common in our epistle. The author was not disposed to bring forward the person-
lity of either himself or his hearers. St. Paul, on the contrary, used these pronouns more than
wice as often as our author, and indeed far more frequently than any other New Testament
writer.

The case of the third person of the pronoun is peculiar, since its frequent redundant use is
|.ne of the marked characteristics of the New Testament diction ; yet St. Paul uses it less than
alf as often as Hebrews. The same is true of the demonstrative eVcti/o? ; but in the use of the
eflective lavros, St. Paul is largely in excess. The difference in the use of these pronouns
etween Hebrews and St. Luke is not very great ; but, in regard to the two first particularly, the
ifference from the other writers is marked, and St. Paul's usage of all of them is very different.
>n the other hand, in the use of ovtkk, Hebrews is strongly separated from St. Luke and less so
om St. Paul.

The words <L\Ai;Xo)v, oAXos, eTtpo<!, tis (interrog.), and tis (indef.) have marked peculiarities
I their frequency of employment by the different writers, but it is enough to instance here oXAov,
nployed oftener by St. Paul than by St. Luke and Hebrews put together, and yet by the other
riters collectively twice as often as by him ; and crtpos used with exactly the same frequency
V St. Luke and St. Paul, less than one quarter as often by other writers, but far oftener in
ebrews than in any of them. So also with licao-To?, toioCtos, and rocroiVros : they are all used
ith exactly the same frequency in Hebrews ; but while the first is used by St. Paul much oftener,
e last is used only one-fourteenth as often. The usage of St. Luke is markedly different from
at of either.

Further and more detailed examination of words of this class would be out of place here.
itfice it to say that such an examination shows a marked individuality in the usage of the several
riters ; and it is to be remembered that Hebrews, Acts, and the latter Epistles of St. Paul must
ive been written with no great interval of time between them.

The same things are true in whatever way we test the forms of expression of these writers.

, we take the particle d with its various combinations el Ka{, el /xt^, tiye, €i 8c /xi^, el /xiq re, el nep,

■ TTuJs, el T£, a. Tis, we shall find that only the first two of these combinations occur in Hebrews

ill, and those only once each, while all of them are found in the PauUne Epistles, and all but

.i|ree of them in the writings of St. Luke. The whole group together is used more than twice

i often by St. Paul as by any other writer.

Adverbs of space are very sparingly used by St. Paul, with an approach to equality between

Jehrews and St. Luke, but twice as often by other writers. In the various particles and adverbs

( negation, there do not seem to be, on the whole, very noticeable peculiarities, although ixjjSek

.1 fi.r)&t occur but once each in Hebrews, while the former is everywhere else common, and the

Iter also in St. Paul and other writers, though less frequent in St. Luke. But the word x^pis is

f quent enough in Hebrews to be considered characteristic, is used far less by St. Paul, only once

1 St. Luke, and comparatively seldom by other writers. UdXtv is quite rare in St. Luke, equally

c union in Hebrews and St. Paul, and a little less so in the other writers. The use of 17 is very

r c in Hebrews whether as a disjunctive conjunction, or as a term of comparison. In the latter

■ it occurs but once, and in the former only four times, two of which are in quotations from

LXX, and a third in a more than doubtful reading. In al! the other New Testament writers

ii s very common, but most of all in St. Paul. In the use of /loXXov, however, though St. Paul

exceeds, Hebrews most nearly approaches his usage. The causal cVti is five times as

, lent in Hebrews as in St. Paul, and yet four times more frequent in his writings than in the


350 INTRODUCTION.


others, and is still less common in St. Luke than in them. The word irZi is used but once i
Hebrews (interrogatively), while it is common enough everywhere else. Both 'fa and on ai
used very often by St. Paul and the other writers, and much more sparingly in Hebrews ; but S
Luke uses ?va much less than half as often as Hebrews, while he employs on much more than ha
as of^en again. The un-Attic particle xadu?, the adverbs ourcos, wuci, wa-trip, and the conjunctio
mrr€, are all appropriate to trains of reasoning, but their usage in the different writers, particular!
in the three we are especially considering, is very various. The same may be said of the prepos
tions, among which crw is never used in Hebrews (except in composition), while it is employe
much oftener by St. Luke than by St. Paul or any other writer.

It may be thought that all this examination — still tedious, though much condensed — is nc
worth the trouble. It goes to show, what has always been noticed by every reader, that the sty!
of this Epistle is unlike that of St. Paul ; but if it show, as it seems to do quite as clearly, th:
it is unlike that of St. Luke as well, something has been gained. It makes it at least improbab
that St. Luke wrote the Epistle to give expression to the ideas of St. Paul.

It remains to examine some words of another class. There are many words and groups
words so peculiarly appropriated to certain ideas or shades of thought, that the use or non-use
them becomes a fair index of the habitual tone of thought of the writer. If he use them fr
quently, the phase of truth which they represent must have been prominent in his mind ; or if :
seldom employ them, then that aspect of truth was not the predominant one from his point
view. Such words or groups of words may be of different degrees of importance ; but even the
of inferior significance help to complete the picture of the writer's mental habits, and it is ther
fore well to examine all that are at all characteristic. As the force of the evidence from the
words can only be brought out by a more careful examination of them, I venture to copy son
pages of the paper referred to above.

The group dyairdw, dyaTi/, and ayair-qroi is noteworthy. They are very common in the Paul!
writings, but are rare both in St. Luke and in Hebrews. In fact only one of them, dyairjjr
occurs at all in the Acts, and none of them are ever used by St. Luke except in recording t
words of others. So also of the Hebrews. Of the five instances of their use, two are in quo
tions from the LXX. They are common enough in other writers, but are especial favorites
St. John. Of the 154 instances in "other writers," 109 are in St. John, so that the words ir
be called Pauline and Johannean. Their rarity in St. Luke and Hebrews may be partly explair
by the fact that iydirrj is an exclusively biblical word, and that dyaTrow also is used in a higl
sense in the sacred than in profane writings. Still they were common words in the Christ
community, and they mark a distinction in thought between St. Luke and Hebrews on the (
side, and St. Paul and the rest of the New Testament on the other. The actual number'
instances of their use is : Hebrews, 5 times ; St. Luke, 15 ; St. Paul, 135 ; all others (John, 109), i;
but if we exclude from the enumeration all quotations from the LXX, and all record of the wo
of others, the numbers become : Hebrews, 3 ; St. Luke, o ; St. Paul, 132 ; all others (John, 43),
The comparison is too obvious to call for proportionate numbers. As an appendix to this gn
it may be mentioned that ifuXiw never occurs in Hebrews, is used only twice by St. Luke, tv
by St. Paul, and 21 times elsewhere, 15 of which are in St. John.

A word especially appropriate to Hebrews, and one which might have been expected th
very often, dyiaa-ixm, occurs but once, while it is used eight times by St. Paul, and is not foum
the rest of the New Testament. On the other hand, alfM, which we might have expected
quently in St. Paul as well as in Hebrews, is very common in the latter and not at all so in
former. Proportionate numbers are ; Hebrews, 231 times ; St. Luke, 31 ; St. Paul, 24 ; all others, • I
Here, from the nature of the writings, we may not be surprised at the commonness of the w
in Hebrews ; but its comparative rarity in St. Paul is remarkable. His subjects led to it, and
it come to his mind as readily as it did to that of the author of Hebrews, it must ha^Y^ occu
in his Writings much oftener.


INTRODUCTION. 351

The group of words, aX^Otux, aXTjOiji, dXr;^ivos, oA.i;6o>s, and dXijOcvto, which we are accustomed

consider peculiarly Johannean, is also very frequent in St. Paul, but comparatively rare in St.
like and Hebrews. The actual numbers are : Hebrews, 4 (cUj/Scvos three times, dX^^eta once) j
. Luke, 12 ; St. Paul, 55 ; all others, 114 (of which St. John, 95).

Of the group aa-Oivtia, audtvlia, atrdivrjua, and ao-flevijS, only two occur in Hebrews — axrOcvtia
our times) and dtrSfvi/s (once). The actual occurrences of the whole together are : Hebrews, 5
ues ; St. Luke, 15 ; St. Paul, 43; all others, 21 ; or proportionately, Hebrews, 58 ; St. Luke, 23 ;
. Paul, 90 ; all others, 2 1 . This is evidently an especially Pauline class of words.

The words of opposite signification, pifiauK, /8e/3aio<i>, ySe/Saiwo-is, — very infrequent in the
XX, — do not occur at all in St. Luke, and are relatively far more frequent in Hebrews than
lywhere else. The proportionate numbers are : Hebrews, 92 times; St. Luke, o; St. Paul, 15 ;
iewhere, 3. Evidently St. Paul preferred to dwell upon weakness, the author of Hebrews upon
•ength.

There is a similar contrast between the verb cX-n-i^o) and the noun eXiri's on the one hand, and

verb CTTayyeXXo/iai and the noun tTrayyeXia on the other. KXr^povoixiia, KXr/povofua, and Kkripovo-

s are most common in Hebrews. The proportionate numbers are : —

Hebrews. St. Luke. St. Paul. All Others.

iXiri^o) and i\ni<s 69 20 100 10

(TrayyeWofxal and tTrayycXta . . . 2o8 1 6 57 9

KXripovofino, KX-qpovofXM, K\r)pov6p.oi .104 II 33 8

Together .... 381 47 190 27

is plain that while the author of Hebrews dwelt much more upon the brightness of the future
,n any other writer, he preferred to speak of it in the light oi promise and of inheritance, while
•ested in St. Paul's mind more as a hope. This is the more noteworthy because the ideas
sonship and of adoption are very common in St. Paul. He alone uses the word vlodicrla five
es.

The words rifxipa and (rrjp.epov are curiously infrequent in a writer of the present urgency of
Paul, and are relatively most common in St. Luke and Hebrews, but most so in the last. In
portion the numbers are : Hebrews, 278 ; St. Luke, 207 ; St. Paul, 100; all others, 153. That

[ebrews uses them nearly three times as often as St. Paul.
[The names for God and for our Lord are used by the various writers with much difiference,

with an evident preference in each of them for his own accustomed word. The proportion-
Inumbers (which can take no note of periphrases) are as follows : —

Hebrews. St. Luke. St. Paul. All Others.

Oeos 774 463 1016 419

Kvpw 185 335 524 213

'I'?<^ovs 150 255 405 519

XpUTTOi 150 69 562 102

In all cases St. Paul uses these words most freely (about twice as often as anybody else),
Ipt that in the case of 'Ii^o-ovs he is exceeded by " other writers " as a result of the large
unt of narrative contained in them, ©tds is used in Hebrews next in frequency to St. Paul,
vith a long interval between them, and very much more often than elsewhere. Kvpios is
least frequently in Hebrews, while 'Iiycrovs and Xpiaro's are employed there, one with
tly the same frequency as the other, though St. Luke, St. Paul, and the other writers employ
very unequally, one preferring one and another the other. The use of these words is so
a matter of habit, habit alike of writing and of mode of thinking, that these go far to
entiate the writers.


352 INTRODUCTION.


KiqpvyfM, K-fipvi, and Kr]pva-<ro> are none of them ever used in Hebrews. For the others pr
portionate numbers are : St. Luke, 27 times ; St. Paul, 35 ; all others, 20.

The group Kavxaofiai, Kav)(riiia, and Kavxr/m^ is almost exclusively Pauline, occurring in his wr
ings 58 times, while it is nearly absent from Hebrews, only Kavxrjiui being used, and that b
once. These words do not occur in the other New Testament writers except three times
James. So also koyi^ofuu and naKpoBv/xia are especially Pauline. They each occur only once
Hebrews. The first is found twice, the second not at all in St. Luke ; but Xoyi^ofua occurs ;
times in St. Paul, four times in other writers, while paKpoOviiia is used by St. Paul ten times, ai
only three times elsewhere.

MavSdvo) is used 16 times by St. Paul, only once each by Hebrews and St. Luke, and sevi
times elsewhere. najoaKoXeo) and TropaKXiyo-ts are much more frequent in St. Paul's writings th;
elsewhere, but in this case he is more nearly approached by Hebrews than by others — yet with
great difference. Proportionate numbers are : Hebrews, 81 ; St. Luke, 54 ; St. Paul, 137 ; all othe
22. The word vpoo-ivxn occurs in Hebrews but once, and wpocrtvxofuu. not at all. This is a noi
worthy omission in our epistle, although it is also true that they are not used by St. John, exce
TrpoartvxiJ three times in Revelation. The two words are found in St. Luke and St. Paul each 33 tim^
and in the other writers 43 times. The words crdpi and trap/«Kos are favorites of St. Paul. Th
occur seven times in Hebrews, six times in St. Luke, 102 times in St. Paul, and 46 times (of whi
one-half are in St. John) elsewhere. Proportionately Hebrews uses them about two-thirds as oft
as St. Paul, and nearly twice as often as all other writers together. The group <^poviu>, <f>p6vT]^
and <l>p6vT]cni is characteristic. None of them are found at all in Hebrews, and they occur \
twice in St. Luke, and twice in the other writers (Matthew, i,Mark, i, in parallel passages) , both
the record of the words of others ; but St. Paul uses them 31 times. (He uses ^povT^pa, howev
only in Romans — four times.) A word used in a figurative sense especially characteristic of
John (31 times), <^a»s, never occurs in Hebrews. It is used 16 times by St. Luke, 12 times
St. Paul, and ten times by other writers. It is more or less used by every New Testament wri I
except the author of Hebrews, and St. Jude in his very short epistle. Xaipui is also used by ev
other writer (St. Luke, 19 times; St. Paul, 27 times), except Hebrews and St. Jude. St. P
greatly delights in the word x<»P's> ^i^d in the idea conveyed by it ; he never wrote an epis
without it, and uses it loi times. In Hebrews it is found eight times, in St. Luke 24, and
all others 22, not occurring in the first two Gospels.

The foregoing list is somewhat long of words characteristic of phases of thought which
especially favorite with St. Paul, and either wholly unused or much less frequently employed
Hebrews. A corresponding list may be made of other words especially common in Hebre
but less used by St. Luke and St. Paul. Before going to this, however, a few words are tO'
considered which in their frequency of usage are characteristic of all three, or of two of tb
writers as distinguished from others, although with some differences between them.

Most prominent in this latter class is v6p.<yi, which we are accustomed to think especially P'
ine. It is indeed used much oftener by St. Paul than by any other writer, yet it also occur; '
Hebrews with a frequency distinguishing that Epistle from any other writing. The proportioi
numbers are : Hebrews, 162 ; St. Luke, 44 ; St. Paul, 227 ; all others, 33. Nevertheless, the ass
lation here is more apparent than real ; for St. Paul employs it chiefly of a method of salvat
while it refers in Hebrews mostly to a definite collection of statutes. In the same way irtVi
usually regarded as a characteristically Pauline word. It is relatively much more commoi j
Hebrews ; for the proportionate numbers are : Hebrews, 369 ; St. Luke, 42 ; St. Paul, 262 ; all ot?
43. But here also there is a shade of distinction in the force of the word as used by the
writers ; St. Paul's TritrTis is reliance upon Christ as the means of salvation in opposition to ■
law and the works of the law, while in the Hebrews it is only a general reliance on God's g '■
and promises. Of course, it is not denied that St. Paul sometimes uses a word, so common '
such varied shades of meaning, in a more general way as in i Cor. xiii. 2, 13 ; xvi. 13 ; 2 Co •


INTRODUCTION. 353


etc. ; but the distinction in the shade of meaning between his habitual employment of the

ord, and that common in the Epistle to the Hebrews is easily recognized. In this connection

a-Tivo} must be mentioned, though belonging in the former category. The proportionate in-

ances of its use are : Hebrews, 23 ; St. Luke, 76 ; St. Paul, 100 ; all others (of which St. John, 99),

13. It is therefore a comparatively rare word in Hebrews. The adjective Trio-Tos, which ought

;rhaps hardly to be considered in this connection, is used proportionately, in Hebrews, 58 times ;

;. Luke, 6 ; St. Paul, 61 ; all others, 23. Ilet^oj somewhat associates the three writers together,

though most frequent in Hebrews, occurring proportionately, in Hebrews, 58 times ; St. Luke, 33 ;

:. Paul, 43 ; all others, 6. SwttSc'w and o-uwiSt/o-is are used proportionately : Hebrews, 58 ; St. Luke,

(all in Acts) ; St. Paul, 37 (but crw£t8eo> only once) ; all others, 4. The word <Tu>Trjp, though

led by St. Luke four times, St. Paul 12, and by others eight times, never occurs in Hebrews ; but

is is not remarkable, as it is not found in the much larger books of Matthew, Mark, and Revela-

i)n ; moreover, it should be taken in connection with cruiTrjpia and crwTijpiov, which also do not occur

1 the first two Gospels, but are found in Hebrews 7 times, St. Luke 13, St. Paul 19, and all others

times. This would give them a relatively greater frequency in Hebrews ; but they are also

mmon words in St. Luke and St. Paul. The word >j/vxv,,whi\e a little more common relatively

Hebrews, is yet frequent enough in St. Luke and other writers, though not a favorite with St.

,ul. Proportionate numbers are : Hebrews, 69 ; St. Luke, 57 ; St. Paul, 29 ; all others, 54.

This leads to the third class of words — those which, embodying certain sets of ideas, are

aracteristic of Hebrews in distinction from other writers, especially St. Luke and St. Paul. One

these is the idea of witness, expressed by iiAprvp, fidprvs, paprvpia, paprvpiov, paprvpiia, and

iTvpopai. This group of words is especially common in Hebrews, and much less frequent in

Luke and St. Paul. It is also very common in St. John. The proportionate numbers are :

brews, 1 2 7 ; St. Luke, 45 ; St. Paul, 50 ; all others (of which St. John, 80), 96. The word rdin is

naturally called for in the argument of Hebrews that there is nothing remarkable in its occur-

g there seven times, while in all the rest of the New Testament it is found but three times (St.

il twice, St. Luke once). The group Tt'Atios, TtAcioTi;?, TcXttow, TtAtio)?, rtKciuxn';, and TeXcKuT)/?,

nore significant. The words do not occur with great frequency, but they mark a distinct Chris-

1 thought, and are relatively far more common in Hebrews than anywhere else. The propor-

late numbers are : Hebrews, 162 ; St. Luke, 8 ; St. Paul, 19 ; all others, 20 (one-half of which are

John) . The perfection and finality of Christian truth as set forth in this epistle comes out

;he frequency of the use of these words as clearly as in its general scope ; it is difficult to

pose that the Epistle to the Galatians, e.g., which does not contain any of these words, could

e been written by the same author.

But by far the most important word in this connection is Upcvs, with its various derivatives,
evs, Itpartux, uparev/wt, and dpx' V"*°'' ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ of these are of little importance, as
ev/ia occurs only twice, in St. Peter, and apxitpariKo^ only once, in Acts ; also uparcui occurs
once each in St. Luke and Hebrews, and nowhere else. Altogether, Upeik and its compounds
derivatives occur 159 times, but are never once used by St. Paul.' The actual numbers are,
: Hebrews, 14 times ; St. Luke, 9 ; St. Paul, o ; all others, 9 ; for dpx'V'w, Hebrews, 1 7 ; St.
je, 37 ; St. Paul, o ; the other Gospels, 68, but never elsewhere. This is a remarkable fact. In view
t. Paul's arguments in the epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians, and in view of the fre-
,cy and emphasis with which he insists in all his Epistles, upon the sacrificial character of
;'s death, it seems to show that his mind was so absorbed in dwelling upon the value and
■X of the sacrifice that he was not in the habit of thinking or speaking of Christ as also Him-
e Sacrificer. Redemption came to his thought through the medium of the Victim by whom
1 obtained, but not through that of the Priest who offered the Victim. This is the more

i word itpovpyovyra {air. \€y.) in the highly figurative passage, Rom. xv. i6, is no exception, being derive^ not from if^evf , fcut


354 INTRODUCTION.


striking from the fact that he often speaks of Christ as giving Himself, offering Himself, and the
like ; but always for the purpose of bringing out the voluntariness and the love of the act, and
never with any allusion to its priestly character. The line of reasoning in the Epistle to the
Hebrews was thus quite foreign to the habitual thought of St. Paul. Such similarity of language
to his acknowledged writings as exists must be accounted for in some other way.

On looking back over these various words, with their difference of usage, it is plain that they
are not perfectly of accord in their indications. This was to be expected. I have endeavored,
in this part of the examination, to select only words characteristic of thought, and to note every
word of this kind in regard to which there is any considerable difference of usage ; yet so many
words are used by every writer accidentally, as it were, and not because they are characteristic,
that much allowance is to be made. Still, the investigation seems to me to afford a sufficient
basis for some probable conclusions. The Epistle contains both style-words and thought-words
characteristic alike of St. Luke and St. Paul, sometimes of one, sometimes of the other, some-
times of both ; and these must be taken into account in any theory of the authorship. But the)
are not more than might be expected in any writer belonging among the companions of a leadet
of such magnetism and power as St. Paul. I see nothing in them to prove, hardly even tc
suggest, actual authorship. On the other hand, there are many words and groups of word:
expressing ideas very prominendy in the mind of the author of this Epistle, which must hav(
appeared also in the writings of St. Paul had the thoughts of this Epistle been derived from him
but which are not found there. Of course, no man expresses all his ideas in any one epistle, no.
the same ideas in every one he writes ; but the difference here is more radical. As one mine j
now is affected by one, and another by another of the various aspects of Christian truth, so th<!
differences here go to show that the mind of the author of Epistle to the Hebrews was no
affected in the same way as St. Paul ; for Hebrews is scarcely more unlike the Epistles in whicl
St. Paul addressed believing Jews than the speeches recorded in Acts xiii., xxii., and xxviii.,
which he spoke to his still unbelieving countrymen. This leaves us free to accept the author's owi
statement, that instead of being, like St. Paul, one who had received his apostleship " not of man
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father " (Gal. i. i), he was of that number whi
had received through the medium of others that Gospel " which at the first began to be spoke
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him " (Heb. ii. 3).

It thus appears that neither are the thoughts of this Epistle Pauline, nor is its language thr '
of St. Luke. It may be well to say a few words in conclusion as to the person to whom sui
facts as we have point as the probable author. ;

It is plain from what has been said, as well as from the common consent of students, that th -
author must be looked for among those companions of St. Paul who, through prolonged intc
course, were likely to have their modes of expression somewhat affected by his language. Tl
number of these is considerable, and after so many ages of uncertainty, beginning with tl
earliest discussion of the subject, it is not likely that the right one can ever be pointed out wi!
certainty. Many modern critics have selected Apollos as the most probable author, chief ,
because of the facts recorded of him in Acts xviii. 24-28, that he " was born at Alexandri |
an eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures," and that after receiving further instruction fro j
Aquila and Priscilla, " he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scri
tures that Jesus was Christ." He was certainly personally known to St. Paul (i Cor. xvi. 12
although of the length of time they may have been together we have no information. His beii
an Alexandrian is thought to explain what some are pleased to consider an Alexandrian tone
thought in the Epistle, and also the fact that its quotations are from the LXX, and accord rath
with its Alexandrian than its Vatican recension. The force of the last point is not obvious.
the meagreness of our knowledge of the original LXX, it appears probable that the so-called .
andrian recension was the one generally current in the Levant, and therefore that this indicatiO|
whatever it may be worth, simply points to an Oriental author. And so also whatever there ml


INTRODUCTION. ^55


e of an Alexandrian caste of thought in the Epistle only indicates some one familiar with Jewish-

lexandrian literature, and this would include almost every educated Jew living in the lyCvant.'

t all events, neither of these considerations seemed to have occurred to any of those early Alex-

idrian scholars, Pantaenus, Clement, or Origen, who all speak of the authorship, the last at some

ngth and with discrimination. The theory of ApoUos' authorship has, however, this great

ivantage : that no line of his remains to compare with our Epistle. It has also these disadvan-

Lges : that it never occurred to any ancient author, but was first suggested by Luther ; that there

no evidence of any prolonged personal intercourse between him and St. Paul ; and that there

nothing to connect him with any especial interest in, or familiarity with, the Jewish ritual and

:mple beyond the simple fact that he was a Jew, as was also almost every other writer who has

^er been suggested. The non-use of the optative is also strongly against the authorship of the

lexandrian ApoUos. Moreover, it is clear from such passages as vii. 12; x. 32-36; xiii. 7,

7-19, 23-25, that this Epistle was addressed to some particular community, a fact now gener-

ly recognized, and that the author was personally and favorably known to his readers. There

a difference of opinion in regard to the locality of that community ; but if, as seems altogether

•obable, it was Palestinian, we have no reason to suppose that ApoUos was ever known to them ;

id although this evidence is only negative, it suggests looking for some other names positively

accord with it.

Of the other names suggested in ancient and modem times St. Luke and St. Clement of
me seem to be sufficiently excluded by a comparison of the Epistle with their acknowledged
tings ; the former also by the probability that he was a Gentile, the latter by the very use he
■kes of the Epistle, apparently as quoting words of another.^

Silas has also been suggested as a possible author. Of him we know even less than of ApoUos.
was a prophet in the early Church at Jerusalem (Acts xv. 32), and was the companion of St.
lul on his second missionary journey and subsequently in his labors at Corinth, and was also
ociated with the work of St. Peter ( i Pet. v. 1 2 ) . In aU this there is nothing to mark him
as the one likely to have written this Epistle beyond several others of the companions of St.
1. The only point which really gives plausibility to the suggestion of his authorship is the
that he was much associated with Timothy (i Thess. i. i ; 2 Thess. i. i ; 2 Cor. i. 19), and
may explain the reference to Timothy in Hebrews xiii. 23. On that ground the suggestion of
name might be adopted if there were not much more to be said in favor of another, and also
ere were not the same very serious objection as in the case of ApoUos — that he was never so
h as named in all antiquity.
There is a person, however, to whose authorship one of the very earliest witnesses, TertuUian,
•eady noted, positively and unhesitatingly testifies, — Barnabas.' He has the same advan-
with ApoUos in having transmitted to us no writing with which to institute a comparison


But that the style indicates that the Epistle was not actually written by an Alexandrian may be gathered from the non*use of the
s mood. See the reference to Dr. Harman on p. 348.

' the question be asked how Clement of Rome should have been so familiar with this Epistle, the sufficient answer is, that if this

ntbe the same with the Clement mentioned in Phil. iv. 3, as is altogether probable and as is generally asserted in the fathers, they

oth companions of St. Paul, though whether they were with him at the same time is not known, and so one of them was likely to

land value the work of the other. Moreover, nearly all the varying traditions about Barnabas concur in speaking of his preaching

e, where he would have become personally known to Clement, and whence he may have written this Epistle. If he planted

hurch at Milan, as is asserted in the title and proper preface for St. Barnabas Day, in the Ambrosian liturgy, he must have passed

I Rome on his way.
tertullian De Pudtcitia, c. 20, Tom. II., fol. 1021, ed. Migne. It is well known that the Pauline authorship of the Epistle was
J by many of the ancients. Eusebius {Eccl. Hist. vi. 20I mentions that in the list of Caius, Presbyter at Rome (cir. 200), only
In epistles of Paul are enumerated, and this is omitted. It is also omitted in the Muratonian fragment, if that be not the same. The
[• Claromontanns C6th cent.) was copied from a MS. not containing Hebrews, but gives at the end of Philemon a stichometrical
B of all the books of the Old and New Testaments, and then gives our Epistle. In the catalogue, however, before Revelations
, and immediately after Jude, is mentioned the " Epistle of Barnabas," having 850 lines. It has been conjectured that by this
> meant the Epistle to the Hebrews; for i Corinthians is put down at 1060 lines, and this would give, in proportion, very nearly the
^h for our Epistle, making Hebrews 820 instead of 850 lines, whereas the spurious " Epistle of Barnabas" is nearly one-half
(See Salmon, Introd. to the N. 7"., note at end of xxi., 2d cd., pp. 453, 454.) This conclusion is controverted by Llinemann,
i to Heh.. sect, i., p. 23. ed. T. & T. Clark.


356 INTRODUCTION.


(the spuriousness of the epistle attributed to him being admitted,)^ and in having been a Helle-
nistic Jew, likely to have written somewhat better Greek than St. Paul. His birthplace also was in
the Levant, in Cyprus, where he could have had the full benefit of Alexandrian literature. Being
at Jerusalem he became one of the very early converts to Christianity, long before St. Paul, and
he was a man of property and benevolence ; for although a Cypriote, he had land in Jerusalem
and sold it to relieve the necessities of the early Christian community (Acts iv. 36, 37). He
must have been known from the first very generally in the Hebrew-Christian community, and he
must have been endeared to them, not merely by this act of benevolence, but by that kindly sym-
pathy which led to his surname, " Son of consolation." A very few writers, indeed, have identi-
fied him with " Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus," of Acts i. 23, and this is
countenanced by the Codex Bezse and the yEthiopic reading Papvajiav ; and in this case he must
have been an original disciple, and would be excluded by the language of Heb. ii. 3. But then
seems to be no ground for the identification. In .'\cts iv. 36 the language implies that Barnaba;
is there spoken of for the first time, the names themselves are different, and Barsabas was knowi
by the surname of Justus, which does not appear to have been ever given to Barnabas. He i:
next heard of as bringing Saul, of whom all were afraid, to the apostles, and telling the story 0
his conversion (Acts ix. 26, 27), showing at once the position he occupied and his own mora
courage. When tidings of the conversion of many Gentiles at Antioch came to the Church a
Jerusalem, they sent forth Barnabas to take charge of the matter, and by his labors " much peo
pie was added to the Lord." The work growing too great for him, he sought out Saul at Tarsii
and brought him to his assistance (Acts xi. 25, 26). Then after a year, the Church at Antiocl
sent Barnabas and Saul to carry their alms to the Church at Jerusalem. Having returned t(
Antioch, they were divinely selected to go forth upon a wider missionary work, in the course 1
of which they visited " Lystra and Derbe," when probably the young Timothy received hi ?
first knowledge of Christianity. On St. Paul's second visit to these cities he is spoken of a *
already " a disciple." Barnabas must, therefore, have known him from the very beginning of hi
Christian life, and it is, therefore, entirely natural that he should speak of him in the w
recorded in Heb. xiii. 23. After Barnabas and Paul returned from this, when disputes arc
between the Jews and Gentiles, they were sent to Jerusalem together, and having obtained
favorable hearing before the Council again returned to Antioch. Here are years of closest com
panionship between Barnabas and St. Paul, during all the earlier part of which Barnabas appeal
as the leader, Paul as the assistant. They had often stood together in the synagogue to tell t
their fellow-countrymen the story of the cross, and probably had often discussed with one anothf
the best way of presenting truth to the Jewish mind, and they had shared together the charge i
the numerous Jewish converts. Barnabas must have been a man of dignity, for when the people
Lystra took them for gods, they selected Barnabas as Jupiter (Acts xiv. 11, 12). The companioi
ship was broken up at the entrance upon another missionary journey, by a difference of opinio
about taking Mark with them. In this case Barnabas, although doubtless influenced by his ki
ship, appears to have been the better judge of character, since at a later date St. Paul writes fiw
Rome to Timothy, " Take Mark and bring him with thee ; for he is profitable to me in the rainii

1 The following memorandum of the authorities for and against the genuineness of the Epistle of Barnahas, and for its date, haibc
kindly furnished by the Rev. E. C. Richardson, Librarian of the Hartford Theological Seminary: —

Genuineness, etc. For: Origen, Clement of A., Eusebius, Hieron., Apost. const., Voss, Hammond, Pearson, Bull, Cave, Dn P
Grynaeus, Wake, Lardner, Fleury, Le Nourry, Russel, Galland, Less, Rosenmiiller, Muenscher, Staudlin, Danz, Bertholdt, HeWl
Schmidt, Henke, Bleek, Rbrdam, Gieseler, Nabe, Credner, Bretschneider, Guericke, Francke, Gfrbrer, Mohler, Baumgartcn-Crusius,
Wette (?), Rysewyk, Schncckenburger, Sprinzl, Alzog, Nirschl, Sharpe. Against: Rivet, Usher, Menard, Dailli, Papebroch, Calr:
Cotclerius, Le Moyne, Tenzel, Natalis Alex., Ittig, Spanheim, Tillemont, Basnage, Oudin, Ceillier, StoUc, Pertsch, Baumgarten, Wal
Mosheim, Semler, Schroekh, Rossler, Starke, Lumper, Michaelis, Gaals, Lange, Hanlein. Winter, Neander, Ullmann, Mynster, H
Baur, Winer, Hasc, Ebrard, Semisch, Kayser, Reithmayr, Hefele, MacKenzie, Lipsius, Weizacker, Donaldson, Roberts and D., Rigs
bach, Westcott, Braunsberger, Cunningham, Funk, Alford. Interpolated: Schenkel, Heydeckc,

Date; Reign of Vespasian, Menardus, Ewald, Weizacker, Milligan; 71-73, Galland: 70-100, Tischendorf (at first): reign of Doraiti
Wieseler, Hilgcnfeld, Riggenbach. Donaldson, Reuss, Ewald, Dressej, and Ritschl also put it in the first century. Papebroch 1
nounces for some time later than 97, Hcfcic for 107-120, Volkmar, Tischendorf (later), Baur, and others, for 119: Tentzel for the re
of Trajan; and Hug, tjllmann, Liicke, Neander, Winer, Zeller, and Kostlin for some time early in the ad century, while Heydei
distinguishes into a genuioc £., 70-71, and aa interpolator, 119-iai.


INTRODUCTION. 357


ry " (2 Tim. iv. 11); but however this may be, Barnabas showed in the matter independence

ind determination. He is called by the name of " Apostle " (Acts xiv. 14), and altogether held

uch a position in the Christian community as would make his writing such an Epistle a proper

■ct. In all that is related of him there is but one faulty act, and even this points him out as

specially interested in the Hebrews. When St. Peter behaved so ill at Antioch and received the

harp reproof of St. Paul, in his account of the matter St. Paul says, " the other Jews dissembled

kewise with him " ; and adds as evidence of the strength and danger of the defection, " inso-

luch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation" (Gal. ii. 13, 14). Barnabas

hen was not only a Jew by birth, but had strong sympathies with his race.

More than this : he was a Levite. The particular line of argument adopted in the main part

f the Epistle to the Hebrews is one which would have occurred to few, and scarcely to any

'ho was not familiar with the temple ritual. There is no evidence that this was the case with

.polios ; but with Barnabas the temple service was a matter of professional duty, as well as the

rompting of his devout heart. Indeed, an objection to the authorship of Barnabas has been

ased on this very point ; — it is said that the author does not show that nicely accurate precis-

in in his statements which might be expected from one personally familiar with the temple.

he points referred to admit of easy explanation on other grounds ; but were they better taken,

jnsidering that the service of the Levites was altogether subordinate to that of the priests, and

id not lead them into the va'os itself, the objection seems hypercritical. But one of the actual

aties of the Levites, and a very prominent one, was that of chanting in the Levitical choirs in

le courts of the temple. This would have led to a special familiarity with the Psalms. Now it

a curious fact that about one-half of all the quotations from the Old Testament in the Episde

the Hebrews are taken from the Psalms, and that the author cites that book, relatively, nearly

ur times as often as St. Paul, and eight times as often as St. Luke or the other writers. This

ct is at once explained by the supposition that the author of the Epistle was a Levite.' It is not

ilikely that when that " great company of the priests were obedient to the faith " (Acts vi. 7),

imabas, as one of their attending Levites, was influenced by their example and with them

;cepted the faith of Christ.

The only important objection urged against the authorship of Barnabas is, that since the time

TertuUian until recently, there has never been any considerable weight of opinion in its favor.

It this is accounted for by the almost universal acceptance in the meantime of the spurious

iistle of Barnabas as his genuine work. The two certainly could not have been written by the

me person. The fact, however, that the spurious Epistle was attributed to him may be an indi-

tion of a belief that he had left to the Church some legacy of written teaching. Since that

iDistle has been found not to be his, and is probably of a somewhat later date, there ^mains

I thing to hinder the belief that the devout Levite of Cyprus, the early convert to Christianity

\iile still in strong sympathy with the Christian Jews, the man of benevolence and wealth, and

tjrefore probably of education, by birth the appointed servant of the temple, the man of inde-

jndence and dignity, and yet of such tender sympathy as to be surnamed " Son of consola-

tn," the long and intimate companion of St. Paul, and for years in the position of his superior,

- there is nothing to hinder the acceptance of the early ecclesiastical statement that he was also

t ; author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Frederic Gardiner.

The large proportion of quotations from the Psalms in this Epistle is noticed in the article upon it in Smith's Bible Dictionary (where
tl proportion is stated as i6 out of 32) ; but my attention was first called to the bearing of this upon the question of authorsnip by the
q' k observation of Rev. Hermann Lilienthal. It is not easy to give a precise numerical statement of the proportion because of the large
B'lber of historical allusions which can hardly be reckoned as quotations, and also because the New Testament writers often clothe their
tljghts in the familiar words of the Old Testament, apparently without any conscious quotation. This matter, however, which cannot
b<ibulated, is quite in accord with the rest, and the whole Epistle is saturated with the language and the historical allusions of the Psalms.
Ting only what may fairly be considered as designed quotations, the relative numbers taken from the Psalms are; Hebrews, 900; St.
Lc, 25; St. Paul, 39; all others, 25. The Apocalypse is omitted from the calculation. In the comparatively few quotations in St. Luke
le than one-third (17 out of 55) are from the Psalms, and every one of these in recording the words of others: less than one.fifth ia
Si^ul (16 out of 89) ; and in the others 22 out of 116. In Hebrews almost exactly one-half.


CONTENTS.


HOMILIES ON EPISTLE TO HEBREWS.

PAca

RGUMENT 363

[OMILY I. — Heb. i. I, 2. God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times past unto the
fathers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son : whom He hath appointed
heir of all things, by whom also He made the worlds 366

!0MILY II. — Heb. i. 3. Who being the brightness of His Glory and the express Image of His person, and
upholding all things by the word of His power, when He had by Himself purged our sins 370

OMILY III. — Heb. i. 6-8. And again when He bringeth in the First-Begotten into the world, He saith,
And let all the angels of God worship Him. And of the angels He saith. Who maketh His angels spirits,
and His ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son He saith. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. . . 375

OMILY IV. — Heb. ii. 5-7. For unto the Angels hath He not put in subjection the world to come, whereof
we speak. But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the
son of man that Thou visitest him ? Thou madest him a little lower than the Angels 382

OMILY V. — Heb. ii. 16, 1 7. For verily He took not on Him the nature of Angels, but He took on Him the
seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behooved Him to be made like unto His brethren 388

OMILY VI. — Heb. iii. 7-1 1. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith. To-day if ye will hear His voice, harden
not your hearts, as in the provocation in the day of temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers
tempted Me, proved Me, and saw My works forty years. AVherefore I was grieved with that generation,
and said. They do alway err in their heart, and they have not known My ways. So I sware in My wrath.
They shall not enter into My rest 393

DMlLY VII. — Heb. iv. H-13. Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any man fall after the
same example of unbelief. For the word of God is quick [i.e. living] and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not mani-
fest in His sight, for all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to do. . . 398
)MILY VIII. — Heb. v. 1—3. For every high priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins : who can have compassion on the
ignorant and on them that are out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity; and by

reason hereof he ought, as for the people so also for himself to offer for sins 403

iMILY IX. — Heb. vi. 1-3. Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God; of
the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands : and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judg-
ment. And this will we do, if God permit 408

MILY X. — Heb. vi. 7, 8. For the Earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth
forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God. But that which beareth

thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned 413

iMILY XL — Heb. vi. 13-16. For when God made promise to Abraham, because He could swear by no
greater. He sware by Himself, saying. Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.
And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater,

and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife 418

lOLY XII. — Heb. vii. 1-3. For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who met
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him : to whom also Abraham gave a tenth
part of all; first being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which
it. King of Peace, without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor
end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest continually '. 423


3^


CONTENTS.


FAGI

Homily XIII. — Heb. vii. 1 1-14. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood (for under it the
people received the law) ; what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of
Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For the priesthood being changed, there is
made of necessity a change also of the law. For He of whom these things are spoken, pertaineth to
another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out
of Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood 427

Homily XIV. — Heb. viii. i, 2. Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum. We have such
an High Priest; who is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens: a minister of
the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man 433

Homily XV. — Heb. ix. 1-5. Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a
worldly Sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the Candlestick, and the
Table, and the Shewbread; which is called the Sanctuary. And after the second veil, the tabernacle
which is called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the Ark of the Covenant overlaid
round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and
the tables of the covenant; and over it the Cherubims of glory, shadowing the Mercy-seat, of which we
cannot now speak particularly 438

Homily XVI. — Heb. ix. 15-18. And for this cause He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means
of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For where a testament is, there must also of
necessity be the death of the testator. For a testament is of force after men are dead, otherwise it is of no
strength at all whilst the testator liveth. Whereupon neither was the first testament dedicated without
blood 44J'

Homily XVII. — Heb. ix. 24-26. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are |
the figures of the true, but into Heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Nor yet that
He should offer Himself often, as the High Priest entereth into the Holy place every year with blood
of others, for then must He often have suffered since the foundation of the world. But now, once, in the
end of the world, hath He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself 446

Homily XVIII. — Heb. x. 8-13. Above when He said. Sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offerings, and [offer-
ing] for sin, Thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure [therein], which are offered by the Law, then said
He, Lo ! I come to do Thy will, O God. He taketh away the first, that He may establish the second. By
the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all. And every
priest standeth daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away
sins. But this [man] after He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of
God, from henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His footstool 45

Homily XIX. — Heb. x. 19-23. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood
of Jesus, by a new and living way which He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say. His
flesh, and having an High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assur-
ance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water,
let us hold fast the profession of our hope without wavering 45'

Homily XX. — Heb. x. 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indigna-
tion which shall devour the adversaries 45

Homily XXI. — Heb. x. 32-34. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were illuminated,
ye endured a great fight of afflictions; partly, whilst ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and
afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of them that were so used. For ye had compassion
on those who were in bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye
have in heaven a better and an enduring substance 4^

Homily XXII. — Heb. xi. 3, 4. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of
God; so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear. By faith Abel offered unto
God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testify-
ing of his gifts; and by it he being dead yet speaketh 4'

Homily XXIII. — Heb. xi. 7. By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house ; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir
of the righteousness which is by Faith 4'

Homily XXIV. — Heb. xi. 13-16. These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For
they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they had been mindful of
that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned. But now they


CONTENfTS. 361


rACB

desire a better country, that is, an heavenly ; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for
He hath prepared for them a city 473

[OMILY XXV. — Heb. xi. 17-19. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac and he that had
received the promises offered up his only-begotten son, of whom it was said. That in Isaac shall thy seed
be called : accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead ; from whence also he received
him in a figure 477

tOMlLV XXVI. — Heb. xi. 20-22. By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By
faith, Jacob when he was a dying blessed both the sons of Joseph, and worshiped leaning upon the top
of his staff. By faith, Joseph when he died made mention of the departing of the children of Israel, and
gave commandment concerning his bones 481

lOMiLY XXVII. — Heb. xi. 28-31. Through faith, he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, lest he
that destroyed the first-born should touch them. By faith, they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry
land; which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after
they were compassed about seven days. By faith, the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed
not, when she had received the spies with peace. 487

!OMILY XXVIII. — Heb. xi. 37, 38. They wandered about in sheep-skins, in goat-skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented (of whom the world was not worthy) ; they wandered in deserts, and in mountains,
and in dens, and caves of the earth 49I

OMlLY XXIX. — Heb. xii. 4-6. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. And ye have for-
gotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children. My son, despise not thou the chastening
of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him. For whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth : and

scourgeth every son whom He receiveth 499

OMILY XXX. — Heb. xii. 1 1-13. No chastisement for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous, never-
theless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.
Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees: and make straight paths for your

feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed 503

3MILV XXXI. — Heb. xii. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness without which no man shall see the

Lord 506

)MILY XXXII. — Heb. xii. 18-24. For ys are not come unto a fire that might be touched and that burned,
nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words, which
voice they that heard entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more. (For they could
not endure that which was commanded. And if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned.
And, so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.) But ye are come unto
Mount Zion, and unto the city of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable com-
pany of Angels, to the general assembly and Church of the first-born which are written in Heaven; and
to God the Judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect: and to Jesus the Mediator of the

New Covenant: and to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better things than that of Abel 510

MH-Y XXXIII. — Heb. xii. 28, 29. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
have grace {or gratitude], whereby we serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God

is a consuming fire 514

MILY XXXIV. — Heb. xiii. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves. For they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for
this is unprofitable for you 518


HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,


ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,


ON THE


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS,

Published after his Falling Asleep, from Notes by Constantine, Presbyter of Antioch.


ARGUMENT,

AND SUMMARY OF THE EPISTLE.

[i.] The blessed Paul, writing to the Romans,
ys, " Inasmuch then as I am the Apostle of
e Gentiles, I magnify mine office : if by any
:ans I may provoke to emulation them that
s my flesh " : ' and again, in another place,
For He that wrought effectually in Peter to
; apostleship of the circumcision, the same
s mighty in me toward the Gentiles." ^ If
jrefore he were the Apostle of the Gentiles,
)r also in the Acts, God said to him, " Depart ;
■ I will send thee far hence unto the Gen-
!S," •'') what had he to do with the Hebrews ?
d why did he also write an Epistle to them ?
And especially as besides, they were ill-dis-
-ed towards him, and this is to be seen from
my places. For hear what James says to
n, " Thou seest, brother, how many thousands
Jews tlicre are which believe . . . and these
have been informed of thee that thou teachest
n to forsake the law." * And oftentimes he
m many disputings concerning this.
Why therefore, one might ask, as he was so
I'rncd in the law (for he was instructed in the
i at the feet of Gamaliel,^ and had great zeal
I' the matter, and was especially able to con-


: Rom. xi. i-j, i,
» Gal. ii. 8.
* Acts xxii, 21,


* Acts xxi. 20, 21,
■ Acts xxii. 3.


found them in this respect) —why did not God
send him to the Jews? Because on this very
account they were more vehement in their enmity
against him. " For they will not endure thee," «
God says unto him ; " But depart far hence to
the Gentiles, for they will not receive thy testi-
mony concerning me."' Whereupon he says,
" Yea, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and
beat in every synagogue them that believed on
thee ; and when the blood of thy martyr Stephen
was shed, I also was standing by and consenting
unto his death, and kept the raiment of them
that slew him."*

And this he says ' is a sign and proof of their
not believing him. For thus it is : when a man
goes away from any people,'" if he be one of the
least and of those who are nothing worth, he does
not much vex those from whom he went ; but
if he be among the distinguished and earnest
partisans and those who care for these things,
he exceedingly grieves and vexes them beyond
measure, in that " he especially overthrows their
system with the multitude.

And besides this, there was something else."
What now might this be ? That they who were
about Peter were also with Christ, and saw signs


« " wherefore God foreseeing this, that they would not receive
Him," Ben. K. Sav.

' Acts xxii. 21, i3. 0 •' they show," K. Ben.

8 Acts xxn. 19. 20. HI ;0,,ou?.

" " Departing from them, going to others," K. Ben. Sav.
" Add: " Which should make them incredulous," Bened. K Sav.


364


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


and wonders; but he [Paul] having had the
benefit of none of these, but being with Jews,
suddenly deserted and became one of them.
This especially promoted our cause. For while
they indeed, seemed to testify even from grati-
tude, and one might have said that they bore
witness to those things in love for their Master ;
he, on the other hand, who testifies to the resur-
rection, this man was rather one who heard a
voice only. For this cause thou seest them
waging war passionately with him, and doing all
things for this purpose, that they might slay
him, and raising seditions.'

The unbelievers, then, were hostile to him for
this reason ; but why were the believers ? Be-
cause in preaching to the Gentiles he was con-
strained to preach Christianity purely ; and if
haply even in Judaea he were found [doing so],
he cared not. For Peter and they that were
with him, because they preached in Jerusalem,
when there was great fierceness, of necessity
enjoined the observance of the law; but this
man was quite at liberty. The [converts] too
from the Gentiles were more than the Jews be-
cause they were without.^ And this ' enfeebled
the law, and they had no such great reverence
for it, although * he preached all things purely.
Doubtless in this matter they think to shame
him by numbers, saying, " Thou seest, brother,
how many ten thousands of Jews there are which '
are come together.'" On this account they
hated him and turned away from him, because
" They are informed of thee, he says, that thou
teachest men to forsake the law." '

[2.] Why, then, not being a teacher of the
Jews, does he send an Epistle to them? And
where were those to whom he sent it ? It seems
to me in Jerusalem and Palestine. How then
does he send them an Epistle? Just as he
baptized, though he was not commanded to
baptize. For, he says, " I was not sent to bap-
tize " : ' not, however, that he was forbidden, but
he does it as a subordinate matter. And how
could he fail to write to those, for whom he was
willing even to become accursed ? ' Accordingly
he said,'" " Know ye that our brother Timothy is
set at liberty ; with whom, if he come shortly, I
will see you." "

For as yet he was not arrested. Two years
then he passed bound, in Rome ; then he was
set free ; then, having gone into Spain, he saw


' " For this purpose, and raising seditions that they might slay
him," Bencd. A. K.

' " The chosen people being /ewer than all people, encircled
on all sides hy the heathen " ; see Mic. v. 7, 8,

3 " By this he enfeebled," Ben.

• " Because," Ben. Sav. K. Q. R. ' Acts xxi. 31.
" Acts xxi. 20. * 1 Cor. i. 17.

• " which believe," Ben. Sav. K. Q. * Rom. ix. 3.

*** St. Chrys. introduces this as an instance of St. Paul's interest
in the Hebrews: that he not only wrote to them, but also intended
to visit them; and on that digresses to the events of his history and
the relative date of his Epistles. " Hcb. xiii. 33.


Jews '^ also in like manner ; and then he returned
to Rome, where also he was slain by Nero. The
Epistle to Timothy then was later '' than this
Epistle. For there he says, " For I am now
ready to be offered " " ; there also he says, " In
my first answer no man stood with me." " In
many places they [the Hebrew Christians] had
to contend " with persecution, as also he says,
writing to the Thessalonians, " Ye became fol-
lowers of the churches of Judaaa " : '^ and writing
to these very persons he says, " Ye took joyfully
the spoiling of your goods." '* Dost thou see
them contending ? And if men had thus treated
the Apostles, not only in Judaea, but also wherever
they were among the Gentiles, what would the)
not have done to the believers ? On this account,
thou seest, he was very careful for them. Foi
when he says, " I go unto Jerusalem to ministei
unto the saints " ; '" and again, when he exhort'
the Corinthians to beneficence, and says that thf
Macedonians had already made their contribu
tion,^ and says, " If it be meet that I go also," ^
— he means this. And when he says, " Only tha-
we should remember the poor ; the same whicl
I also was forward to do," ^ — he declares this
And when he says, " They gave to me am '
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship ; that wf
should go unto the heathen, and they unto tht
circumcision,"^ — he declares this. ';

But this was ^* not for the sake of the poor wh(
were there, but that by this we might be partaker I
in the beneficence. For not as the preachinii
did we apportion the care for the poor to eaci
other (we indeed to the Gentiles, but they t ,
the circumcision). And everywhere thou sees
him using great care for them : as was reason
able.

Among the other nations indeed, when ther
were both Jews and Greeks, such was not th
case ; but then, while they still seemed to hav
authority and independence and to order man
things by their own laws, the government nc
being yet established nor brought perfectly undc
the Romans, they naturally exercised gre;
tyranny. For if in other cities, as in Corintl
they beat the Ruler of the synagogue before th
Deputy's judgment seat, and Gallio "cared fi
none of these things,"^ but it was not so i


" [The text might perhaps leave it uncertain whether St. Chn
meant to state that St. Paul saw Jews in Spain, or that, after vi»
ing Spain, he went into Juda:a. Ben. Sav. K. Q. are cxpre:
" Spain : then he went into Judaea, where also he saw the Jews
<I? Tas STTaftaf ^KBtv ' tlra ei« '\Qviaiav i^r] ore (cai 'lotSaif
eI5«.— F. G.]

*3 nptffSvTipa. The word is elsewhere used in this sense by
Chrys. See Mr. Field's notes. St. Chrys. often points out thai i
Ep. ii. to Timothy is the last of all St. Paul's Epistles.

" 2 Tim. iv. 6. ^" Rom. xv. 25.

*" 2 Tim. iv. 16. ^ a Cor. viij. 1-3.

w ^ff\i)(Tav, see ^BXriffiv, Heb. x. 32. ^^ i Cor. xvi. 4.

" I Thess. ii. 14. " « Gal. ii. 10.

" Heb. X. 34. M Gal. n. 9.

** "But these things he does not say merely (or," &c., P'
Sav. K. Q.

'^ Acts xviii. 17.


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


365


fudjea.' Thou seest indeed, that while in other

;ities they bring them to the magistrates, and

leed help from them and from the Gentiles,

lere they took no thought of this, but assemble

I Sanhedrim themselves and slay whom they

)lease. Thus in fact they put Stephen to death,

hus they beat the Apostles, not taking them

before rulers. Thus also they were about to put

Paul to death, had not the chief captain thrown

limself^ [upon them]. For this took place

vhile the priests, while the temple, while the

itual, the sacrifices were yet standing. Look

ndeed at Paul himself being tried before the

iigh Priest, and saying, " I wist not that he was

he High Priest," '' and this in the presence of

he Ruler.* P"or they had then great power.

"oiisider then what things they were likely to

liter who dwelt in Jerusalem and Judsea.

[3.] He then who prays to become accursed

)r those who were not yet believers, and who

) ministers to the faithful, as to journey himself,

need be, and who everywhere took great care

f them ; — let us not wonder if he encourage

id comfort them by letters also, and if he set

lem upright when tottering and fallen. For in

word, they were worn down '' and despairing

1 account of their manifold afflictions. And

is he shows near the end, saying, " Wherefore

t up the hands that hang down, and the feeble

lees " ;^ and again, " Yet a little while, he that

;all come will come, and will not tarry" ;^ and

: ain, " If ye be without chastisement, . . . then

:e ye bastards and not sons."'

For since they were Jews and learned from

te fathers that they must expect both their

fi)(i and their evil immediately and must live

a (jrdingly, but then [when the Gospel came]

t" opposite was [taught] — their good things

ling in hope and after death, their evils in

hnd, though they had patiently endured much,

i *as likely that many would be fainthearted ; —

hreon he discourses.

But we will unfold these things at a fit oppor-

tuity. At present : he of necessity wrote to

tlise for whom he cared so greatly. For while

tl reason why he was not sent to them is plain,

y he was not forbidden to write. And that

tl y were becoming fainthearted he shows when

h says, " Lift up the hands which hang down,

• 'he feeble knees, and make straight paths" ;°

again, " God is not unrighteous to forget

work and love." '° For the soul overtaken


tiori


. in Judzea, they beat and scourged, not through the indifTer-

ilie Judge, but by their own authority.

Is xxi. 31-33. 3 Acts xxiii. 5.

before Lysias.

luving lost their freshness and vigor like salted fish." See

istanccs of its use in this sense in Mr. Field's note on .St.

'^n 1 Cor. Horn, xxviti. (p. 255, A). [See p. 390, O. T.]
Hcb. xii. 12. • Heb. xii. 8.

Heb. X. 37. •* Heb. xii. 12, 13.

Hcb. vi. 10 [St. Chrys. here follows the better reading, omit-
■oii KOTroif. — F. G.].


by many trials, was turned aside even from the
faith." Therefore he exhorts them to " Give
heed to the things which they have heard, and
that there should not be an evil heart of unbe-
lief." " On this account also, in this Epistle,
especially, he argues at length concerning faith,
and after much [reasoning] shows at the end
that to them [of old] also He promised good
things in hand, and yet gave nothing.

And besides these things, he establishes two
points that they might not think themselves for-
saken : the one, that they should bear nobly
whatever befalls them ; the other, that they should
look assuredly for their recompense. For truly
He will not overlook those with Abel and the
line of unrewarded righteous following him.

And he draws comfort in three ways : first,
from the things which Christ suffered : as He
Himself says, " The servant is not greater than
his Lord." '^ Next, from the good things laid
up for the believers. Thirdly, from the evils ; and
this point he enforces not only from the things
to come (which would be less persuasive), but
also from the past and from what had befallen
their fathers. Christ also does the same, at one
time saying, " The servant is not greater than his
Lord " ; " and again, " There are many mansions
with the Father " ; "^ and He denounces innu-
merable woes on the unbelievers.

But he speaks much of both the New and the
Old Covenant ; for this was useful to him for
the proof of the Resurrection. Lest they should
disbelieve that [Christ] rose on account of the
things which He suffered, he confirms it from
the Prophets, and shows that not the Jewish, but
ours are the sacred [institutions]. For the
temple yet stood and the sacrificial rites ; there-
fore he says, " Let us go forth therefore without,
bearing His reproach." '° But this also was made
an argument against him : " If these things are
a shadow, if these things are an image, how
is it that they have not passed away or given
place when the truth was manifested, but these
things still flourish?" This also he quietly inti-
mates shall happen, and that at a time close at
hand.

Moreover, he makes it plain that they had
been a long time in the faith and in afflictions,
saying, " When for the time ye ought to be
teachers," " and, " Lest there be in any of you
an evil heart of unbelief," '* and ye became
" Followers of them who through patience in-
herit the promises." "


" Heb. ii. I.
** Heb. iii. la.
** John xiii. 16.
** John xiii. 16.
" John xiv. 3.


** Heb. xiii. 13.
" Heb. V. 12.
1* Heb. iii. 13.
M Heb. vi. la.


366


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily


HOMILY 1.


Hebrews i. i, 2.


" God who at sundry times and in divers manners spake
in time past unto the fathers by the Prophets, hath
at the end of the days ' spoken unto us by His Son :
whom He hath appointed heir of all things, by whom
also He made the worlds."

[i.] Truly, "where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound." (Rom. v. 20.) This
at least the blessed Paul intimates here also, in
the very beginning of his Epistle to the Hebrews.
For since as it was likely that afflicted, worn out
by evils, and judging of things thereby, they would
think themselves worse off than all other men,
— he shows that herein they had rather been
made partakers of greater, even very exceeding,
grace ; arousing the hearer at the very opening
of his discourse. Wherefore he says, " God who
at sundry times and in divers manners spake in
times past unto the fathers by the Prophets, hath
at the end of the days spoken unto us by His
Son."

Why did he [Paul] not oppose " himself" to
" the prophets " ? Certainly, he was much greater
than they, inasmuch as a greater trust was com-
mitted to him. Yet he doth not so. Why?
First, to avoid speaking great things concern-
ing himself. Secondly, because his hearers
were not yet perfect. And thirdly, because he
rather wished to exalt them, and to show that
their superiority was great. As if he had said,
What so great matter is it that He sent prophets
to our fathers? For to us [He has sent] His
own only-begotten Son Himself.

And well did he begin thus, " At sundry times
and in divers manners," for he points out that
not even the prophets themselves saw God ;
nevertheless, the Son saw Him. For the ex-
pressions, " at sundry times and in divers man-
ners " are the same as " in different ways."
" For I "(saith He) "have multiplied visi**-;, and
used simiUtudes by the ministry of tht ih-
ets." (Hos. xii. 10.) Wherefore the v -^1-
lency consists not in this alone, that to x.t^tn
indeed prophets were sent, but to us the Son ;
but that none of them saw God, but the Only-
begotten Son saw Him. He doth not indeed
at once assert this, but by what he says after-
wards he establishes it, when he speaks concern-
ing His human nature ; " For to which of the


' <<r\aTov Ttiiv ijfjLepMV. euxirmv T. r). (in these last days) Sav.
Ben. here and throughout the Homily. The former is considered
to be the true reading of the Sacred Text. It is throughout the
reading of St. Chrys. as is clear from his argument. [It is the read-
ing of all the uncials; the cursives and the versions are divided.
Tfie R- V. follows the correct text. — F. C]


Angels said He, Thou art My Son," (ver. 5)
and, " Sit thou on My right hand "? (Ver. 13.)

And look on his great wisdom. First ht
shows the superiority from the prophets. Ther
having established this as acknowledged, he de
Clares that to them indeed He spake by th
prophets, but to us by the Only- begotten. The
[He spake] to them by Angels, and this agai
he establishes, with good reason (for angels als
held converse with the Jews) : yet even herei
we have the superiority, inasmuch as the Mai
ter [spake] to us, but to them servants, an
prophets, fellow-servants.

[2.] Well also said he, " at the end of th
days," for by this he both stirs them up an
encourages them desponding of the future. Fc
as he says also in another place, " The Lord
at hand, be careful for nothing " (Phil. iv. 5, 6"
and again, " For now is our salvation nean
than when we believed" (Rom. xiii. 11): s
also here. What then is it which he sayi
That whoever is spent in the conflict, when
hears of the end thereof, recovers his breal
a little, knowing that it is the end indeed of h
labors, but the beginning of his rest.

" Hath in the end of the days spoken unto
in [His] Son." Behold again he uses the sa-
ing, " in [His] Son," ^ for " through the Son,'
against those who assert that this phrase is propi
to the Spirit.'' Dost thou see that the [wore
"in" is "through"?'

And the expression, " In times past," an
this, " In the end of the days," shadows for
some other meaning : — that when a long tin
had intervened, when we were on the edge 1
punishment, when the Gifts had failed, whi
there was no expectation of deliverance, wh(
we were expecting to have less than all — the
we have had more.

And see how considerately he hath spoki
it. For he said not, " Christ spake " (albeit
was He who did speak), but inasmuch as thf
souls were weak, and they were not yet able
hear the things concerning Christ, he says, " G(
hath spoken by Him." What meanest thov


* fv uitjij » fiia Toi) utou.

* That is, the Macedonians or Pneumatomachi, who about
year 373 found great fault with St. Basil for using indifferently
two forms of doxology, sometimes /leTa toC YioO aiiv rw HfcvfL
Toi "Aviw, sometimes 6ia toO YioO iv Ttp Tlvevixart. Tui 'Ayi'w, Tl I
said that the latter, by which they meant to imply inferiority in
Third Person especially, was the only proper form. This gave
casion to St. Basil's writing his Tract De Spiritu Sancto, in wh
he refutes them at large, proving among other things that iv i
Scripture often equivalent to avv. c. 25. t. iii. 40. That iv is
for {li is also said by St. Chrys. Hom. on i Cor. 1. 4 (p. 11, 0.
and elsewhere. » [t6, iv, icd ivn. — F. G.


OMILY I.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


367


d God speak through the Son? Yes. What
en? Is it thus thou showest the superiority?
r here thou hast but pointed out that both the
ew and the Old [Covenants] are of One and
e same : and that this superiority is not great,
herefore he henceforth follows on upon this
b;ument, saying, " He spake unto us by [His]
n."

(Note, how Paul makes common cause, and

ts himself on a level with the disciples, say-

y, He spake " to us " : and yet He did not

eak to him, but to the Apostles, and through

;m to the many. But he lifts them [the He-

ews] up, and declares that He spake also to

5m. And as yet he doth not at all reflect on

i Jews. For almost all to whom the prophets

ike, were a kind of evil and polluted persons.

t as yet the discourse is not of these : but

herto of the gifts derived from God.)

" Whom He appointed," saith he, " heir of

." What is " whom He appointed heir of

"? He speaks here of the flesh [the human

;ure]. As He also says in the second Psalm,

isk of Me, and I will give Thee the heathen

Thine inheritance." (Ps. ii. 8.) For no

ger is " Jacob the portion of the I,ord " nor

srael His inheritance " (Deut. xxxii. 9), but all

n : that is to say. He hath made Him Lord

ill ; which Peter also said in the Acts, " God

h made Him both Lord and Christ." (Acts

36.) But he has used the name " Heir,"

Jaring two things : His proper sonship ' and

i indefeasible sovereignty. " Heir of all,"

t is, of all the world.

'3.] Then again he brings back his discourse

ts former point. " By whom also He made

worlds [the ages]."^ Where are those who

, There was [a time] when He was not ?

i'hen, using degrees of ascent, he uttered that

ch is far greater than all this, saying,

Fer. 3, 4. " Who, (being the brightness of

H glory, and the express image of His person,

■ pholding all things by the word of His

,) when He had by Himself purged our

It down on the right hand of the Majesty

;ii ; being made ' so much better than the

T as He hath by inheritance obtained a

excellent name than they."

' ! the wisdom of the Apostle ! or rather,

he wisdom of Paul, but the grace of the

Is the thing to wonder at. For surely he

1 not these things of his own mind, nor

It way did he find his wisdom. (For

e could it be ? From the knife, and the

or the workshop?) But it was from the

ng of God. For his own understanding

Jt give birth to these thoughts, which was


to yvT^<Tiov Tri^ uioTijTO?.

rows aiuvac, " the ages," " duration beyond time.*
R. V. " having become." — F. G.]


then so mean and slender as in nowise to sur-
pass the baser sort ; (for how could it, seeing it
spent itself wholly on bargains and skins ?) but
the grace of the Spirit shows forth its strength
by whomsoever it will.

For just as one, wishing to lead up a little
child to some lofty place, reaching up even to
the top of Heaven, does this gently and by
degrees, leading him upwards by the steps from
below, — then when he has set him on high,
and bidden him to gaze downwards, and sees
him turning giddy and confused, and dizzy,
taking hold of him, he leads him down to the
lower stand, allowing him to take breath ; then
when he hath recovered it, leads him up again,
and again brings him down; — just so did the
blessed Paul likewise, both with the Hebrews
and everywhere, having learnt it from his Mas-
ter. For even He also did so ; sometimes He
led His hearers up on high, and sometimes He
brought them down, not allowing them to remain
very long.

See him, then, even here — by how many
steps he led them up, and placed them near the
very summit of religion, and then or ever they
grow giddy, and are seized with dizziness, how
he leads them again lower down, and allowing
them to take breath, says, " He spake unto us
by [His] Son," " whom He appointed Heir of
all things." * For the name of Son is so far com-
mon. For where a true ' [Son] it is understood
of. He is above all : but however that may be,
for the present he proves that He is from above.

And see how he says it : " Whom He ap-
pointed," saith he, "heir of all things." The
phrase, " He appointed Heir," is humble. Then
he placed them on the higher step, adding, " by
whom also He made the worlds." Then on a
higher still, and after which there is no other,
"who being the brightness of His glory, and
the express image of His person." Truly he
has led them to unapproachable light, to the
very brightness itself. And before they are
blinded see how he gently leads them down
again, saying, " and upholding all things by the
word of His power, when He had by Himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty." He does not simply say, " He
sat down," but " after the purifying. He sat
down," for he hath touched on the Incarnation,
and his utterance is again lowly.

Then again having said a little by the way
(for he says, " on the right hand of the Majesty
on high "), [he turns] again to what is lowly ;
" being made so much better than the angels.


* That is for the moment St, Paul does not argue the dignity of
Christ from the title *' Son " — from His being the truf Son of God,
and therefore God, but condescending to the weakness of his hear-
ers, at first uses the word in a general sense, and establishes His
Divinity by other considerations.


368


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily


as He hath by inheritance obtained a more ex-
cellent name than they." Henceforward then
he treats here of that which is according to the
flesh, since the phrase " being made better "
doth not express His essence according to the
Spirit,' (for that was not " made " but " begot-
ten,") but according to the flesh : for this was
" made." Nevertheless the discourse here is
not about being called into^ existence. But
just as John says, " He that cometh after me, is
preferred before me" (John i. 15, 30), that is,
higher in honor and esteem ; so also here, " being
made so much better than the angels" — that is,
higher in esteem and better and more glorious,
" by how much He hath obtained by inheritance
a more excellent name than they." Seest thou
that he is speaking of that which is according
to the flesh? For this Name,' God the Word
ever had ; He did not afterwards " obtain it by
inheritance " ; nor did He afterwards become
" better than the Angels, when He had purged
our sins"; but He was always "better," and
better without all comparison.* For this is
spoken of Him according to the flesh.

So truly it is our way also, when we talk of
man, to speak things both high and low. Thus,
when we say, " Man is nothing," " Man is earth,"
" Man is ashes," we call the whole by the worse
part. But when w6 say, " Man is an immortal
animal," and " Man is rational, and of kin to
those on high," we call again the whole by the
better part. So also, in the case of Christ, some-
times Paul discourseth from the less and some-
times from the better ; wishing both to establish
the economy, and also to teach about the incor-
ruptible nature.

[4.] Since then " He hath purged our sins,"
let us continue pure ; and let us receive no stain,
but preserve the beauty which He hath implanted
in us, and His comeliness undefiled and pure,
" not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing."
(Eph. v. 27.) Even little sins are "a spot and
a wrinkle," such a thing, I mean, as Reproach,
Insult, Falsehood.

Nay, rather not even are these small, but on
the contrary very great : yea so great as to de-
prive a man even of the kingdom of Heaven.
How, and in what manner ? " He that calleth his
brother fool, is in danger " (He saith) " of hell-


^ Kara irvtvfia is the reading adopted by Mr. Field, following
herein an ancient Catena [compiled by Nikctas Archbishop of
Heraclea in Thrace who flourished in the nth century] which has
preserved it: Kara tou itarepa. is found in all other MSS. and Edi-
tions, and was probably the reading in Mutianus' text, who trans-
lates " essentia paternse." Of the use of itvfv)j.ai for the Divine
Nature of the Son, see many instances brought together in the note
to the Oxford Translation of St. Athanasius against the Arians, p.
196 d. [See also in Tertullian, O. T. note H, pp. 322 sqq.]

' ov<7ib>(7<(.>f , " communication of Being." Cf. in i Cor. Horn. v.
{ 4, p. 56, Oxf. Tr.

^ That is the Name Son. The passage is thus rightly pointed
by Mr. Field in accordance with the addition of the explanatory
word "Son** in [Niketas*] Catena (Supp.). According to the
pointing of the other editions, the translation would be, " For this
Name, God the Word, He ever had." * davyKptrwr .


fire." (Matt. v. 22.) But if it be so with hit
who calls a man " fool," which seems to be th
slightest of all things, and rather mere chil
dren's talk; what sentence of punishment wi
not he incur, who calleth him malignant am
crafty and envious, and casteth at him ten thou
sand other reproaches ? What more fearful thai
this?

Now suffer, I beseech you, the word [of ex
hortation].* For if he that "doeth" [aught] t
" one of the least, doeth it to Him " (Matt. xx\
40), and he that "doeth it not to one of th
least doeth it not to Him " (Matt. xxv. 45 ) , how
it not the same also in the matter of good or ev
speaking? He that reviles his brother, revili
God : and he that honors his brother, hone
God. Let us train therefore our tongue 1
speak good words. For " refrain," it is sail
" thy tongue from evil." (Ps. xxxiv. 13.) F(
God gave it not that we should speak evil, th
we should revile, that we should calumniate 01
another ; but to sing hymns to God withal,
speak those things which " give grace to tl
hearers" (Eph. iv. 29), things for edificatio
things for profit. j

Hast thou spoken evil of a man ? What is tl
gain, entangling thyself in mischief together wil
him ? For thou hast obtained the reputation <
a slanderer. For there is not any, no not ar
evil, which stops at him that suffers it, but
includes the doer also. As for instance
envious person seems indeed to plot again
another, but himself first reaps the fruit of 1;
sin, wasting and wearing himself away, and beii
hated of all men. The cheat deprives anoth
of his money; yea and himself too of mar
good will : and causes himself to be evil spoki
of by all men. Now reputation is much bett
than money, for the one it is not easy to wa*
out, whereas it is easy to gain possession of t
other. Or rather, the absence of the one doth i
hurt to him that wanteth it ; but the absence
the other makes you reproached and ridicule
and an object of enmity and warfare to all.

The passionate man again first punishes ai
tears himself in pieces, and then him with who
he is angry.

Just so the evil speaker disgraces first hiti
self and then him who is evil-spoken of: or,'
may be, even this hath proved beyond his poww
and while he departs with the credit of a ft
and detestable kind of person, he causes t
other to be loved the more. For when a m
hearing a bad name given him, doth not
quite the giver in the same kind, but praises a
admires, he doth not praise the other, but hi
self. For I before observed that, as calumn
against our neighbors first touch those who (


' Comp. Heb. xiii. 32. It seems as if the hearers were show
themselves surpriseti at the severity of what he was saying.


MILY I.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


369


; the mischief, so also good works done
'ards our neighbors, gladden first those who
them. The parent either of good, or evil,
;ly reaps the fruit of it first himself. And
: as water, whether it be brackish or sweet,
I the vessels of those who resort to it, but
sens not the fountain which sends it forth ; so
ely also, both wickedness and virtue, from
itever person they proceed, prove either his
or his ruin.

5o far as to the things of this world ; but what

ech may recount the things of that world,

ler the goods or the evils? There is none.

• as to the blessings, they surpass all thought,

speech only ; for their opposites are ex-

ssed indeed in terms famihar to us. For

it is said, is there, and darkness, and bonds,

a worm that never dieth. But this repre-

:s not only the things which are spoken of,

others more intolerable. And to convince

consider at once this first : if it be fire,

is it also darkness ? Seest thou how that fire

ore intolerable than this? For it hath no

|t. If it be fire, how is it forever burning?

it thou how something more intolerable than

happens? For it is not quenched. Yea,

efore it is called unquenchable. Let us then

ider how great a misery it must be, to be

er burning, and to be in darkness, and to

unnumbered groanings, and to gnash the

and not even to be heard. For if here

one of those ingeniously brought up, should

e cast into prison, speaks of the mere ill

|r, and the being laid in darkness, and the

bound with murderers, as more intolerable

any death : think what it is when we are

ing with the murderers of the whole world,

er seeing nor being seen, but in so vast a

tude thinking that we are alone. For the

ess and gloom doth not allow our distin-

ing those who are near to us, but each will

as if he were thus suffering alone. More-

if darkness of itself afflicteth and terrifieth

ouls, how then will it be when together

the darkness there are likewise so great

and burnings?

erefore I entreat you to be ever revolving
things with yourselves, and to submit to
lain of the words, that we may not undergo
lunishment of the things. For assuredly,
se things shall be, and those whose doings
'eserved those chambers of torture no man
•escue, not father, nor mother, nor brother.


" For a brother redeemeth not," He saith ;
"shall a man redeem?" (Ps. xlix. 7, LXX.),
though he have much confidence, though he
have great power with God. For it is He Him-
self who rewards every one according to his
works, and upon these depends our salvation or
punishment.

Let us make then to ourselves " friends of the
mammon of unrighteousness " (Luke xvi. 9),
that is : Let us give alms ; let us exhaust our
possessions upon them, that so we may exhaust
that fire : that we may quench it, that we may
have boldness there. For there also it is not
they who receive us, but our own work : for that
it is not simply their being our friends which
can save us, learn from what is added. For why
did He not say, " Make to yourselves friends,
that they may receive you into their everlasting
habitations," but added also the manner? For
saying, " of the mammon of unrighteousness,"
He points out that we must make friends of
them by means of our possessions, showing that
mere friendship will not protect us, unless we
have good works, unless we spend righteously
the wealth unrighteously gathered.

Moreover, this our discourse, of Almsgiving I
mean, fits not only the rich, but also the needy.
Yea even if there be any person who support-
eth himself by begging, even for him is this
word. For there is no one, so poverty-stricken,
however exceeding poor he may be, as not
to be able to provide " two mites." (Luke
xxi. 2.) It is therefore possible that a person
giving a small sum from small means, should
surpass those who have large possessions and
give more ; as that widow did. For not by
the measure of what is given, but by the means
and willingness of the givers is the extent of the
alms-deed estimated. In all cases the will is
needed, in all, a right disposition ; in all, love
towards God. If with this we do all things,
though having little we give little, God will not
turn away His face, but will receive it as great
and admirable : for He regards the will, not the
gifts : and if He see that to be great. He assign-
eth His decrees and judges accordingly, and
maketh them partakers of His everlasting ben-
efits.

Which may God grant us all to obtain, by the
grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever,
and world without end. Amen.


370


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I


HOMILY II.


Hebrews i.


" Who being the brightness of His Glory and the express
Image of His person, and upholding all things by
the word of His power, when He had by Himself
purged our sins."

[i.] Everywhere indeed a reverential mind
is requisite, but especially when we say or hear
anything of God : Since neither can tongue
speak nor thought ' hear anything suitable to
our God. And why speak I of tongue or
thought?' For not even the understanding^
which far excels these, will be able to compre-
hend anything accurately, when we desire to
utter aught concerning God. For if " the peace
of God surpasseth all understanding" (Phil. iv.
7), and "the things which are prepared for
them that love Him have not entered into the
heart of man" (i Cor. ii. 9) ; much more He
Himself, the God of peace, the Creator of all
things, doth by a wide measure exceed our rea-
soning. We ought therefore to receive all things
with faith and reverence, and when our dis-
course ^ fails through weakness, and is not able
to set forth accurately the things which are
spoken, then especially to glorify God, for that
we have such a God, surpassing both our thought
and our conception.* For many of our concep-
tions ' about God, we are unable to express, as
also many things we express, but have not
strength to conceive of them. As for instance :
— That God is everywhere, we know ; but how,
we no longer understand." That there is a cer-
tain incorporeal power the cause of all our good
things, we know : but how it is, or what it is, we
know not. Lx) ! we speak, and do not under-
stand. I said, That He is everywhere, but I do
not understand it. I said. That He is without
beginning, but I do not understand it. I said,
That He begat from Himself, and again I know
not how I shall understand it. And some things
there are which we may not even speak — as for
instance, thought conceives ' but cannot utter.

And to show thee that even Paul is weak and
doth not put out his illustrations with exactness ;
and to make thee tremble and refrain from
searching too far, hear what he says, having
called Him Son and named Him Creator, "Who
being the brightness of His Glory, and the ex-
press image of His person."

This we must receive with reverence and clear


1 iiii^ta ov^t Sav. ben. in both places, " «f fooO^cf .

' b vovt. " voovpiti',

* X6yo«. ' votl ij itivota.

♦ TTif '-yvoiaiff rhv AtJyoc, Sav. Ben.


of all incongruities. "The brightness of H
glory," saith he. But observe in what referem
he understands this, and so do thou receive ii
— that He is of Him : " without passion : th
He is neither greater, nor less ; since there a
some, who derive certain strange things from t
illustration. For, say they, " the brightnes
is not substantial," but hath its being in anoth
Now do not thou, O man, so receive it, neitl
be thou sick of the disease of Marcellus '" a
Photinus." For he hath a remedy for thee clt
at hand, that thou fall not into that imaginati(
nor doth he leave thee to be hurried down ii
that fatal malady. And what saith he? "A
the express image of His person " [or " subsi
ence"'^]: that is, just as He [the Father]
personally subsisting, being in need of nothirij
so also the Son. For he saith this here, show
the undeviating similitude '* and the peculiar i
age of the Prototype, that He [the Son] is
subsistence by Himself.

For he who said above, that " by Him
made all things " here assigns to Him absol
authority. For what doth he add ? " And :
holding all things by the word of His power
that we might hence infer not merely His be
the express image of His Person, but also J
governing all things with absolute authority.

See then, how he applies to the Son t
which is proper to the Father. For on this
count he did not say simply, " and upholding
things," nor did he say, "by His power,")
" by the word of His power." For much as ;
now we saw iiim gradually ascend and descei
so also now, as by steps, he goes up on hi
then again descends, and saith, " by whom i
He made the worlds."

Behold how here also he goes on two j*.
by the one leading us away from Sabellius,
the other from Arius, yea and on anotl'
that He [Christ] should not be accounted


' OTl «f avTo
' ivviTOaTaTOv.


0, " that He [Christ] is of Him [the Father]."

Marcelius Bishop of Ancyra lapsed towards Sa!>ellia
holdinK, as it seems, virtually at least, that our Lord is not a F
eternally distinct from the Father, but, a Manifestation of the F:
lasting from the Incarnation to the Judgment. His view,
anathematized in i Cone. Constantinop. Canon i.

" Photinus Bishop of Sirmium, who had been Deacon imder
cellus, and carried his theory out, maintaining our Lord to
had no distinct existence before His Birth of Mary. Socr. £■
29. His doctrine too was condemned at Constantinople, ubi m

12 uTrofTTarrco)?. St. Chrys. understands the word to mean
neither "substance" nor " Person," but, if we may use si
word, " substantiality," or *' substantive existence," whi(
speaking (/<? Divinis we call " Personality.'* See below, page
note 5. _ . - V

^3 Sav. Ben. add n-pbs un-oo'TaiT't*'. ** airapaAAO


OMILY II.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


371


ys


•iginated,' which he does also throughout, nor
t alien from God. For if, even after so much,
icre are some who assert that He is alien, and
sign to Him another father, and say that He is
variance with Him ; — had [Paul] not de-
ared these things, what would they not have
tered ?

How then does he this ? When he is com-
Ued to heal, then is he compelled also to utter
vvly things : as for instance, " He appointed
im " (saith he) " heir of all things," and " by
im He made the worlds." (Supra, vet. 2.)
It that He might not be in another way dis-
mored, he brings Him up again to absolute
thorityand declares Him to be of equal honor
th the Father, yea, so equal, that many thought
im to be the Father.
And observe thou his great wisdom. First he

down the former point and makes it sure
curately. And when this is shown, that He is

Son of God, and not aUen from Him, he
ereafter speaks out safely all the high sayings,
many as he will. Since any high speech con-
rning Hira, led many into the notion just
entioned, he first sets down what is humiliating
d then safely mounts up as high as he pleases.
id having said, " whom He appointed heir of

things," and that " by Him He made the
)rlds," he then adds, "and upholding all things
the word of His power." For He that by a
)rd only governs all things, could not be in
ed of any one, for the producing all things.
[2.] And to prove this, mark how again going
rward, and laying aside the " by whom," he
iigns to Him absolute power. For after he
d effected what he wished by the use of it,
;nceforward leaving it, what saith he ? " Thou
rd in the beginning hast laid the foundation
the earth, and the heavens are the works of
line hands." (Infra, ver. 10.) Nowhere is
;re the saying " by whom," or that " by Him
; made the worlds." What then? Were they
t made by Him ? Yes, but not, as thou say-
: or imaginest, "as by an instrument " : nor as
lUgh He would not have made them unless

Father had reached out a hand to Him.
as He "judgeth no man" (John v. 22),

is said to judge by the Son, in that He be-

Him a judge ; so also, to create by Him, in
t He begat Him a Creator. And if the Father

the original cause of Him, in that He is
ther, much more of the things which have
sn made by Him. When therefore he would
m that He is of Him, he speaks of necessity
'ly things. But when he would utter high


iam^XOv. On this third heresy respecting the Holy Trinity,

St* Greg. Naz. Orat, ii. 37; xx. 6; in both which places it is. as

!, mentioned as the third form of error with Sabellianism and

inn. See also Bp. Hull, Drf. Fid. N. iv. i. 8. The mention

I is not found in the Common text, in which the whole passage


things, Marcellus takes a handle, and Sabellius ;
avoiding however the excess of both, he holds
a middle [way]. For neither does he dwell on
the humiliation, lest Paul of Samosata should
obtain a standing place, nor yet does he for
ever abide in the high sayings ; but shows on
the contrary His abundant nearness, lest Sabel-
lius rush in upon him. He names Him "Son,"
and immediately Paul of Samosata comes on
him, saying that He is a son, as the many are.
But he gives him a fatal wound, calling Him
" Heir." But yet, with Arius, he is shameless.
For the saying, " He appointed Him heir," they
both hold : the former one saying, it comes of
weakness ; the other still presses objections, en-
deavoring to support himself by the clause
which follows. For by saying, " by whom also
He made the worlds," he strikes backwards the
impudent Samosatene : while Arius still seems
to be strong. Nevertheless see how he smites
him likewise, saying again, " who being the
brightness of His glory." But behold ! Sabel-
lius again springs on us, with Marcellus, and
Photinus : but on all these also he inflicts one
blow, saying, " and the express image of His
person and upholding all things by the word of
His power." Here again he wounds Marcion
too ; ^ not very severely, but however he doth
wound him. For through the whole of this
Epistle he is fighting against them.

But the very thing which he said, " the bright-
ness of the glory," hear also Christ Himself say-
ing, " I am the Light of the world." (John
viii. 12.) Therefore he [the Apostle] uses the
word " brightness," showing that this was said in
the sense of " Light of Light." Nor is it this
alone which he shows, but also that He hath
enlightened our souls ; and He hath Himself
manifested the Father, and by " the brightness "
he has indicated the nearness of the Being [of
the Father and the Son^]. Observe the subtlety
of his expressions. He hath taken one essence
and subsistence to indicate two subsistences.
Which he also doth in regard to the knowledge
of the Spirit * ; for as he saith that the knowl-
edge of the Father is one with that of the Spirit,
as being indeed one, and in nought varying from
itself (t Cor. ii. 10-12) : so also here he hath
taken hold of one certain [thing] whereby to
express the subsistence of the Two."

And he adds that He is " the express Image."


2 Because Marcion, holding the Creation to be evil, denied the
Son's preserving Power.

' (cat 5ta ToO a.no.Vfitrti.rt.TOl Tjj? ovcriac ^r\v fyywTTjTa (£f(f<i'.
Sav. and Ben. read 5ia 5< toO a. to itroi' ia-rm-av* t^? ovaia?, Kat Tiji*
ffQo? Tov varificL iyyv-rrira.. " By &c. he indicated the equality of
His Substance and His nearness to the Father."

* Cf.yhrsttan.

" «i? TTji' Tttif 5vb vTTOffTatrn'. Sav. and Ben. read i. r. r. 8.
viro(rTa(Tf<tty 5tjAa)(Tii'. " whereby to show the two Subsistencies."
Mr. Field says that the old translation of Mutianus in some degree
confirms this latter reading, which is easier. The word uiroo-ra '■i'
in the singular is used in the sense of " Personality," as abov^
370, note 12.


372


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily •


For the " express Image " is something other' than
its Prototype : yet not Another in all respects,
but as to having real subsistence. Since here
also the term, " express image," indicates there
is no variation from that whereof it is the
" express image " : its similarity in all respects.
When therefore he calls Him both Form,^ and ex-
press Image, what can they say? "Yea," saith
he, " man is also called an Image of God." "
What then ! is he so [an image of Him] as the
Son is? No (saith he) but because the term,
image, doth not show resemblance. And yet,
in that man is called an Image, it showeth re-
semblance, as in man. For what God is in
Heaven, that mail is on earth, I mean as to
dominion. And as he hath power over all
things on earth, so also hath God power over
all things which are in heaven and which are on
earth. But otherwise, man is not called " Express
image," he is not called Form : which phrase
declares the substance, or rather both substance
and similarity in substance. Therefore just as
"the form of a slave" (Phil. ii. 6, 7) expresses
no other thing than a man without variation*
[from human nature], so also "the form of
God" expresses no other thing than God.

"Who being" (saith he) "the brightness of
His glory." See what Paul is doing. Having
said, " Who being the brightness of His glory,"
he added again, " He sat down on the right hand
of the Majesty" : what names he hath used,
nowhere finding a name for the Substance. For
neither "the Majesty," nor "the Glory" setteth
forth the Name, which he wishes to say, but is
not able to find a name. For this is what I
said at the beginning, that oftentimes we think
something, and are not able to express [it] :
since not even the word God is a name of sub-
stance, nor is it at all possible to find a name of
that Substance.

And what marvel, if it be so in respect of God,
since not even in respect of an Angel, could one
find a name expressive of his substance ? Per-
haps too, neither in respect of the soul. For
this name [soul] doth not seem to me to be
significative of the substance thereof, but of
breathing. For one may see that the same
[thing] is called both Soul and Heart and
Mind : for, saith he, " Create in me a clean
heart, O God" (Ps. li. 10), and one may often
see that it [the soul] is called spirit.

" And upholding all things by the word of His
power." Tell me, "God said" (it is written),
" Let there be light" (Gen. i. 3) : "the Father,
saith one,* commanded, and the Son obeyed " ?
But behold here He also [the Son] acts by word.


1 aXAoc Tiff. , * Phil, ii. 6, see below.

' cifcdfof tiKatv, Ben.: t'tKwv (only), Sav.

* airapaAAaKTof.

' This is an heretical objection, as is expressed by the reading in
the editions of Sav. and Ben.


For (saith he), "And upholding all things "-
that is, governing ; He holds together wh;
would fall to pieces ; For, to hold the worl
together, is no less than to make it, but eve
greater (if one must say a strange thing) . Fc
the one is to bring forward something out i
things which are not : but the other, whe
things which have been made are about to fa
back into non-existence, to hold and fasten thei
together, utterly at variance as they are with eac
other : this is indeed great and wonder^l, and
certain proof of exceeding power. i

Then showing the easiness, he said, "uphol
ing " : (he did not say, governing," from t
figure of those who simply with their finger nio
anything, and cause it to go round.) Here
shows both the mass of the creation to be gre.
and that this greatness is nothing to Him. Th
again he shows the freedom from the labor, sj
ing, " By the word of His power." Well said 1
" By the word." For since, with us, a word
accounted to be a bare thing, he shows that
is not bare with God. But, how " He upholde
by the word," he hath not further added : '
neither is it possible to know. Then he add
concerning His majesty : for thus John also dii
having said that "He is God" (John i.
he brought in the handiwork of the Creatic
For the same thing which the one indirectly ^
pressed, saying, " In the beginning was
Word," and "All things were made by Hin
(John i. 3), this did the other also openly (
clare by " the Word," and by saying " by wh(
alsQ He made the worlds." For thus he she
Him to be both a Creator, and before all
What then? when the prophet saith, concern
the Father, "Thou art from everlasting and
everlasting " (Ps. xc. 2), and concerning the S
that He is before all ages, and the maker of
things — what can they say ? Nay rather, wl
the very thing which was spoken of the Fath
— "He which was before the worlds," — t
one may see spoken of the Son also ? And t
which one saith, " He was life " (John i.
pointing out the preservation of the creati
that Himself is the Life of all things, — so
saith this other, " and upholding all things
the word of His power " : not as the Greeks v
defraud Him, as much as in them lies, both
Creation itself, and of Providence, shutting;
His power, to reach only as far as to the Md

" By Himself" (saith he) " having purged
sins." Having spoken concerning those mar
ous and great matters, which are most ab
us, he proceeds to speak also afterwards c
cerning His care for men. For indeed the for
expression, "and upholding all things," also
universal ; nevertheless this is far greater, ft


tOMILY II.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


373


Iso is universal : for, for His part, " all " men

elieved.' As John also, having said, " He was

fe," and so pointed out His providence, saith

gain, and " He was light."

"By Himself," saith he, "having purged our

ns. He sat down on the right hand of the

[ajesty on high." He here setteth down two

ry great proofs of His care : first the " purify-

g us from our sins," then the doing it " by

imself " And in many places, thou seest him

aking very much of this, — not only of our

conciliation with God, but also of this being

:complished through the Son. For the gift

ling truly great, was made even greater by the

'ct that it was through the Son.

For^ in saying, " He sat on the right hand,"

1(1, " having by Himself purged our sins," —

ough he had put us in mind of the Cross, he

■ lie kly added the mention of the resurrection

•id ascension. And see his unspeakable wis-

)m : he said not, " He was commanded to sit

Dwn," but " He sat down." Then again, lest

ton shouldest think that He standeth, he sub-

yn>. " For to which of the angels said He at

;v lime. Sit thou on My right hand."

•• lie sat" (saith he) "on the right hand of

t ■ Majesty on high." What is this "on high "?

J ith he enclose God in place? Away with such

rhonght! but just as, when he saith, " on the

I lit hand," he did not describe Him as having

(lire, but showed His equal dignity with the

1 tlicr ; so, in saying " on high," he did not en-

cise Him there, but expressed the being higher

tin all things, and having ascended up above

a things. That is. He attained even unto the

\ 'V throne of the Father : as therefore the

I tliLT is on high, so also is He. For the " sit-
t l; together " implies nothing else than equal
unity. But if they say, that He said, " Sit
^ou," we may ask them. What then? did He
~ k to Him standing? Moreover, he said not

i le commanded, noi that He enjoined, but

II "He said " : for no other reason, than that
t lu mightest not think Him without origin and

hout cause. For that this is why he said it,

Mevident from the place of His sitting. For

he intended to signify inferiority, he would

have said, " on the right hand," but on the

k hand.

ver. 4. " Being made," saith he, " so much

r than the angels, as He hath by inheritance

lied a more excellent name than they."

■'being made," here, is instead of "being

■5">vii forth," as one may say. Then also from

wjat does he reason confidently? From the

I*jme. Seest thou that the name Son is wont

tcieclare true relationship ? And indeed if He


^■. so far as Christ's work for men was concerned, it was uni-
He put it in the power of all to believe. — F. G.]
ap, om. S.


were not a true Son (and " true " is nothing else
than "of Him"), how does he reason confi-
dently from this ? For if He be Son only by
grace. He not only is not " more excellent than
the angels," but is even less than they. How?
Because righteous men too were called sons ;
and the name son, if it be not a genuine son,
doth not avail to show the " excellency." When
too he would point out that there is a certain
difference between creatures and their maker,
hear what he saith :

Ver. 5. " For to which of the Angels said He
at any time. Thou art My Son, this day have I
begotten Thee. And again, I will be to Him a
Father, and He shall be to Me a Son"? For
these things indeed are spoken with reference
also to the flesh : " I will be to Him a Father,
and He shall be to Me a Son" — while this,'
"Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten
Thee," expresses nothing else than "from [the
time] that God is." For as He is said to be,*
from the time present (for this befits Him more
than any other) , so also the [word] " To-day "
seems to me to be spoken here with reference
to the flesh. For when He hath taken hold of
it, thenceforth he speaks out all boldly. For
indeed the flesh partakes of the high things, just
as the Godhead of the lowly. For He who dis-
dained not to become man, and did not decline
the reaUty, how should He have declined the
expressions?

Seeing then that we know these things, let us
be ashamed of nothing, nor have any high
thoughts. For if He Himself being God and
Lord and Son of God, did not decline to take
the form of a slave, much more ought we to do
all things, though they be lowly. For tell me, O
man, whence hast thou high thoughts ? from
things of this life ? but these or ever they ap-
pear, run by. Or, from things spiritual? nay,
this is itself one spiritual excellency, — to have
no high thoughts.

Wherefore then dost thou cherish high
thoughts? because thou goest on aright? hear
Christ saying, " When ye have done all things,
say, we are unprofitable servants, for we have
done that which was our duty to do." (Luke
xvii. 10.)

Or because of thy wealth hast thou high
thoughts ? Dost thou not see those before thee,
how they departed naked and desolate ? did we
not come naked into life, and naked also shall
depart ? who hath high thoughts on having what
is another's? for they who will use it to their
own enjoyment alone, are deprived of it how-


' Sav. and Ben. omit the words <rT^fitpov . . . ire, and for c( ofi
effTiv 6 Oeo9. iitantp yap have if avrov itrriv • wrirtp 6e, so that the
passage runs; "but this, ' Thou art My Son,' expresses nothing
else than that He is of Him. And just as," &c. . . The corrector
seems to have misapprehended the meaning of ii oi in this place.


374


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily II,


ever unwillingly, often before death, and at death
certainly. But (saith one) while we live we use
them as we will. First of all, one doth not
lightly see any man using what he hath as he
will. Next, if a man do even use things as
he will, neither is this a great matter : for the
present time is short compared with the ages
without end. Art thou high-minded, O man,
because thou art rich? on what account? for
what cause ? for this befalleth also robbers, and
thieves, and man-slayers, and effeminate, and
whoremongers, and all sorts of wicked men.
Wherefore then art thou high-minded? Since
if thou hast made meet use of it, thou must not
be high-minded, lest thou profane the com-
mandment : but if unmeet, by this indeed [it
has come to pass that] thou art become a slave
of money, and goods, and art overcome by
them. For tell me, if any man sick of a fever
should drink much water, which for a short
space indeed quencheth his thirst, but afterwards
kindleth the flame, ought he to be high-minded ?
And what, if any man have many cares without
cause, ought he therefore to be high-minded?
tell me, wherefore? because thou hast many
masters? because thou hast ten thousand cares?
because many will flatter thee ? [Surely not.]
For thou art even their slave. And to prove
that to thee, hear plainly. The other affections
which are within us, are in some cases useful.
For instance. Anger is often useful. For (saith
he) " unjust wrath shall not be innocent "
(Ecclus. i. 22) : wherefore it is possible for one
to be justly in wrath. And again, " He that is
angry with his brother without cause,' shall be
in danger of hell." (Matt. v. 22.) Again for
instance, emulation, desire, [are useful] : the
one when it hath reference to the procreation of
children, the other when he directs his emulation
to excellent things. As Paul also saith, " It is
good to be zealously affected always in a good
thing" (Gal. iv. 18) and, "Covet earnestly the
best gifts." (i Cor. xii. 31.) Both therefore
are useful : but an insolent spirit is in no case
good, but is always unprofitable and hurtful.

However, if a man must be proud, [let it
be] for poverty, not for wealth. Wherefore?
Because he who can live upon a little, is far
greater and better than he who cannot. For
tell me, supposing certain persons called to the
Imperial City, if some of them should need
neither beasts, nor slaves, nor umbrellas, nor
lodging- places, nor sandals, nor vessels, but it
should suffice them to have bread, and to take
water from the wells, — while others of them
should say, " unless ye give us conveyances, and
a soft bed, we cannot come ; unless also we have
many followers, unless we may be allowed con-


* [St. Chrys. here follows a text having the gloss eUr] now re-
jected by nearly all critical editors. — F. G.J


tinually to rest ourselves, we cannot come, noi
unless we have the use of beasts, unless too we
may travel but a small portion of the day — and
we have need of many other things also " : whom
should we admire ? those or these ? plainly, these
who require nothing. So also here : some need
many things for the journey through this life;
others, nothing. So that it would be more fitting
to be proud, for poverty if it were fitting at all.

" But the poor man," they say, " is contempti-
ble." Not he, but those who despise him. For
why do not I despise those who know not how tc
admire what they ought ? Why, if a person be i
painter, he will laugh to scorn all who jeer a
him, so long as they are uninstructed ; nor dotl
he regard the things which they say, but is con
tent with his own testimony. And shall we de
pend on the opinion of the many? Therefore
we are worthy of contempt when men despisi
us for our poverty, and we do not despise then
nor call them miserable.

And I say not how many sins are produce
by wealth, and how many good things by pov
erty. But rather, neither wealth nor poverty i
excellent in itself, but through those who use it
The Christian shines out in poverty rather tha
in riches. How? He will be less arrogant
more sober-minded, graver, more equitabk
more considerate : but he that is in wealth, hat!
many impediments to these things. Let us se
then what the rich man does, or rather, he wh I
useth his wealth amiss. Such an one practicet t,
rapine, fraud, violence. Men's unseemly loves j
unholy unions, witchcrafts, poisonings, all theij
other horrors, — wilt thou not find them prcj
duced by wealth? Seest thou, that in povert
rather than in wealth the pursuit of virtue is L
laborious? For do not, I beseech thee, thn
that because rich men do not suffer punishmti
here, neither do they sin. Since if it were e;!
for a rich man to suffer punishment, thou won
est surely have found the prisons filled with thei
But among its other evils, wealth hath this al;
that he who possesseth it, transgressing in evil w;
impunity, will never be stayed from doing -
but will receive wounds without remedies, ar j
no man will put a bridle on him. j

And if a man choose, he will find that pover
affords us more resources even for pleasur
How? Because it is freed from cares, hatre
fighting, contention, strife, from evils out '
number.

Therefore let us not follow after wealth, 0
be forever envying those who possess much. B
let those of us who have wealth, use it arigh
and those who have not, let us not grieve i
this, but give thanks for all things unto God, I
cause He enableth us to receive with little lal
the same reward with the rich, or even (if
will) a greater : and from small means we sh


;OMILY lll.j


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


375


ive great gains. For so he that brought the
iro talents, was admired and honored equally
ith him who brought the five. Now why?
ecause he was entrusted with [but] two talents,
t he accomplished all that in him lay, and
ought in what was entrusted to him, doubled,
'hy then are we eager to have much entrusted

us, when we may by a little reap the same
aits, or even greater ? when the labor indeed is
ss, but the reward much more? For more

ily will a poor man part with his own, than a
;h man who hath many and great possessions.
Tiat, know ye not, that the more things a man
,th, the more he setteth his love upon ? There-


fore, lest this befall us, let us not seek after wealth,
nor let us be impatient of poverty, nor make
haste to be rich : and let those of us who have
[riches] so use them as Paul commanded.
(" They that have," saith he, " as though they
had not, and they that use this world as not
abusing it" — i Cor. vii. 29, 31) : that we may
obtain the good things promised. And may it
be granted to us all to obtain them, by the grace
and love of our I^rd Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, power, honor, now, and for ever, and world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY III,

Hebrews i. 6-8.


^d again when He bringeth in the First-Begotten into
the world, He saith, And let all the angels of God
worship Him. And of the Angels He saith, Who
maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame
of fire. But unto the Son He saith. Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever."

[i.] Our Lord Jesus Christ calls His coming
the flesh an exodus [or going out] : as
en He saith, "The sower went out to sow."
latt. xiii. 3.) And again, " I went out from
Father, and am come." (John xvi. 28.)
id in many places one may see this. But
,ul calls it an [eisodus or] coming in, saying,
^d when again He bringeth in the First-
gotten into the world," meaning by this Bring-
in, His taking on Him flesh.
Now why has he so used the expression?
iC things signified [thereby] are manifest, and
what respect it is [thus] said. For Christ
lieed calls it a Going cut, justly ; for we were
from God. For as in royal palaces, prison-
and those who have offended the king, stand
:hout, and he who desires to reconcile them,
not bring them in, but himself going out
courses with them, until having made them
let for the king's presence, he may bring them
so also Christ hath done. Having gone out
■Tus, that is, having taken flesh, and having dis-
cjrsed to us of the King's matters, so He
^(ht us in, having purged the sins, and made
iciliation. Therefore he calls it a Going

- a Paul names it a Coming in, from the
n taphor of those who come to an inheritance
al receive any portion or possession. For the
s;ing, " and when again He bringeth in the
Pst-Begotten into the world," means this.


" when he putteth the world into His hand." For
when He was made known, then also He obtained
possession of the whole thereof. He saith not
these things concerning God The Word, but
concerning that which is according to the flesh.
For if according to John, " He was in the world,
and the world was made by Him " (John i.
10) : how is He " brought in," otherwise than in
the' flesh ?

" And," saith he, " Let all the angels of God
worship Him." Whereas he is about to say
something great and lofty, he prepares it before-
hand, and makes it acceptable, in that he rep-
resents the Father as " bringing in " the Son.
He had said above, that " He spake to us not
by prophets but by His Son " ; that the Son is
superior to angels ; yea and he establishes this
from the name [Son]. And here, in what fol-
lows, from another fact also. What then may
this be? From worship. And he shows how
much greater He is, as much as a Master is than
a slave ; just as any one introducing another
into a house straightway commands those having
the care thereof to do him reverence ; [so] say-
ing in regard to the Flesh, "And let all the
Angels of God worship Him."

Is it then Angels only? No; for hear what
follows : " And of His Angels He saith. Which
maketh His Angels spirits, and His ministers a
flame of fire : but unto the Son, Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever." Behold, the greatest
difference ! that they are created, but He un-
created. While of His angels He saith, who
" maketh " ; wherefore of the Son did He not
say " Who maketh " ? Although he might have
expressed the difference as follows : " Of His
Angels He saith. Who maketh His Angels spirits.


376


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMII-Y III,


but of the Son, ' The Lord created Me ' : ' God
hath made Him Lord and Christ.'" (Prov.
viii. 2 2 ; Acts ii. 36.) But neither was the one
spoken concerning the Son, nor the other con-
cerning God The Word, but concerning the flesh.
For when he desired to express the true differ-
ence, he no longer included angels only, but the
whole ministering power above. Seest thou how
he distinguishes, and with how great clearness,
between creatures and Creator, ministers and
Lord, the Heir and true Son, and slaves ?

[2.] "But unto the Son he saith. Thy throne,
O God, is for ever and ever." Behold a symbol
of Kingly Office. " A scepter of righteousness
is the scepter of Thy kingdom." Behold again
another symbol of Royalty.

Then again with respect to the flesh (ver. 9)
"Thou hast loved righteousness and hated in-
iquity, therefore God, even Thy God, hath
anointed Thee."

What is, "Thy God"? Why, after that he
hath uttered a great word, he again qualifieth it.
Here he hits both Jews, and the followers of
Paul of Samosata, and the Arians, and Marcellus,
and Sabellius, and Marcion. How ? The Jews,
by his indicating two Persons, both God and
Man ; ^ the other Jews,^ I mean the followers of
Paul of Samosata, by thus discoursing concerning
His eternal existence, and uncreated essence :
for by way of distinction, against the word, " He
made," he put, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever
and ever." Against the Arians there is both this
same again, and also that He is not a slave ; but
if a creature, He is a slave. And against Mar-
cellus and the others, that these are two Persons,
distinguished in reference to their subsistence.-''
And against the Marcionites, that the Godhead
is not anointed, but the Manhood.

Next he saith, " Above Thy fellows." But who
are these His " fellows " other than men ? that
is Christ received "not the Spirit by measure."
(John iii. 34.) Seest thou how with the doc-
trine concerning His uncreated nature he always
joins also that of the "Economy"? what can
be clearer than this ? Didst thou see how what
is created and what is begotten are not the same ?
For otherwise he would not have made the dis-
tinction, nor in contrast to the word, " He made "
[&c.], have added, "But unto the Son He said,
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever." Nor
would he have called the name, "Son, a more


' Svh np6<runra SeiKvvi, Kal Qtbv KaX avSpunov, That is ioik
two distinct Persons in the Godhead, and also the Divine and
human natures of the Christ. The corrector would seem to have
understood it "two Persons, both God and man"; the common
texts read Svo rbf auTOf fieiKcv?, k. 6. k, a. " showing the same
[Person] to be two, both God and man." [The first ical may well
DC translated iotA. It seems to have been omitted by the corrector
simply as superfluous, not as altering the sense. — F. G.]

^ Sav. and Ben. omit 'lovBaiov^. The teaching of Paul of
Samosata was regarded ns closely connected with Judaism, and he
and his followers were called Jews,

* Kara Tijv vnoaTaaiv, see above, pp. 370, 371, notes.


excellent Name," if it is a sign of the same thing.
For what is the excellence ? For if that which is
created, and that which is begotten be the same,
and they [the Angels] were made, what is there
[in Him] "more excellent"? Lo ! again 6 ©cos,
" God," with the Article.*

[3.] And again he saith (ver. 10-12) : "Thou
Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation
of the earth, and the heavens are the works of
Thine hands. They shall perish, but Thou re-
mainest, and they shall all wax old as a gar-
ment, and as a vesture shall Thou fold them up,
and they shall be changed : but Thou art the
same and Thy years shall not fail."

Lest hearing the words, " and when He bring-
eth in the First-Begotten into the world " ; thou
shouldest think it as it were a Gift afterwards
super-added to Him ; above, he both corrected
this beforehand, and again further corrects, say-
ing, "in the beginning" : not now, but from the
first. See again he strikes both Paul of Samosata
and also Arius a mortal blow, applying to the
Son the things which relate to the Father. .And
withal he has also intimated another thing by the
way, greater even than this. For surely he hath
incidentally pointed out also the transfiguration
of the world, saying, "they shall wax old as a
garment, and as a vesture Thou shall fold them
up, and they shall be changed." Which also
he saith in the Epistle to the Romans, that he
shall transfigure the world. (See Rom. viii. 21.)
And showing the facility thereof, he adds, as
if a man should fold up a garment so shall He
both fold up and change it. But if He with so
much ease works the transfiguration and the
creation to what is better and more perfect,
needed He another for the inferior creation?
How far doth your shamelessness go ? At the
same time too this is a very great consolation,
to know that things will not be as they are, but
they all shall receive change, and all shall li
altered, but He Himself remaineth ever existin;;
and living without end: "and Thy years," he
saith, "shall not fail."

[4.] Ver. 13. "But to which of the Angel
said He at any time. Sit thou on My right hani
until I make thine enemies thy footstool?
Behold, again he encourages them, inasmuch a
their enemies were to be worsted, and their ene-
mies are the same also with Christ's.

This again belongs to Sovereignty, to Eqm\
Dignity, to Honor and not weakness, that the
Father should be angry for the things done to
the Son. This belongs to His great Love and
honor towards the Son, as of a father towards a
son. For He that is angry in His behalf how is
He a stranger to Him ? Which also he saith in

* The Ben. editor observes that it had been said that 6 5fos wilk
the article is used in Scripture only of the Father, and that St. Chrys.
here as in other places argues that it is used of the Son.


)MILY III.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


^n


e second Psalm, " He that dwelleth in heaven
all laugh them to scorn, and the Lord shall
ve them in derision. Then shall He speak
to them in His wrath, and vex them in His
re displeasure." (Ps. ii. 4, 5.) And again He
imself saith, "Those that would not that I
ould reign over them, bring hither before
e, and slay them." (Luke xix. 27.) For that
ey are His own words, hear also what He
ith in another place, " How often would I
ve gathered thy children together, and ye
mid not ! Behold, your house is left deso-
e." (Luke xiii. 34, 35.) And again, "The
igdom shall be taken from you, and shall be
'en to a nation bringing forth the fruits
;reof." (Matt. xxi. 43.) And again, " He that
leth upon that stone shall be broken, but on
orasoever It shall fall. It will grind him to
wder." (Matt. xxi. 44.) And besides, He who

0 be their Judge in that world, much more did
Himself repay them in this. So that the

rds " Till I make thine enemies thy foot-

01 " are expressive of honor only towards the

/er. 14. "Are they not all ministering spirits,
forth to minister for them who shall be
of salvation?" What marvel (saith he)
hey minister to the Son, when they minister
n to our salvation? See how he lifts up
ir minds, and shows the great honor which
i has for us, since He has assigned to Angels
) are above us this ministration on our behalf,
f one should say, for this purpose (saith he)
employs them ; this is the office of Angels,
ninister to God for our salvation. So that it
n angelical work, to do all for the salvation
he brethren : or rather it is the work of
|ist Himself, for He indeed saves as Lord,
they as servants. And we, though servants,
at Angels' fellow-servants. Why gaze ye so
lastly on the Angels (saith he) ? They are
ints of the Son of God, and are sent many
for our sakes, and minister to our salva-
And so they are partners in service with

lonsider ye how ha ascribes no great differ-
to the kinds of creatures. And yet the
le between angels and men is great ; never-
fss he brings them down near to us, all but
kg, For us they labor, for our sake they run
pd fro : on us, as one might say, they wait.
is their ministry, for our sake to be sent
way.
kd of these examples both the Old [Testa-
l] is full, and the New. For when Angels
glad tidings to the shepherds, or to Mary,
Joseph ; when they sit at the sepulcher,
they are sent to say to the disciples,
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
heaven?" (Acts i. 11), when they release


Peter out of the prison, when they discourse
with Philip, consider how great the honor is;
when God sends His Angels for ministers as to
friends, when to Cornelius [an Angel] appears,
when [an Angel] brings forth all the apostles
from the prison, and says, " Go, stand and speak
in the temple to the people the words of this
life " (Acts v. 20) ; and to Paul himself also an
Angel appears. Dost thou see that they minister
to us on God's behalf] and that they minister to
us in the greatest matters ? wherefore Paul saith,
" All things are yours, whether life or death, or
the world, or things present, or things to come."
(i Cor. iii. 22.)

Well then the Son also was sent, but not as a
servant, nor as a minister, but as a Son, and Only-
Begotten, and desiring the same things with the
Father. Rather indeed. He was not " sent " :
for He did not pass from place to place, but
took on Him flesh : whereas these change their
places, and leaving those in which they were
before, so come to others in which they were
not.

And by this again he incidentally encourages
them, saying, What fear ye ? Angels are minister-
ing to us.

[5.] And having spoken concerning the S(W,
both what related to the Economy, and what
related to the Creation, and to His sovereignty,
and having shown His co-equal dignity, and
that as absolute Master He ruleth not men only
but also the powers above, he next exhorts them,
having made out his argument, that we ought to
give heed to the things which have been heard,
(c. ii. I.) "Wherefore we ought to give more
earnest heed " (saith he) " to the things which
we have heard." Why " more earnest " ? Here
he meant " more earnest " than to the Law : but
he suppressed the actual expression of it, and
yet makes it plain in the course of reasoning,
not in the way of counsel, nor of exhortation.
For so it was better.

Ver. 2, 3. " For if the word spoken by Angels"
(saith he) " was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward ; how shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken to us by the Lord, and was confirmed
unto us by them that heard Him ? "

Why ought we to " give more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard " ? were not those
former things of God, as well as these ? Either
then he meaneth " more earnest " than [to] the
Law, or " very earnest " ; not making compari-
son, God forbid. For since, on account of the
long space of time, they had a great opinion of
the Old Covenant, but these things had been
despised as yet new, he proves (more than his
argument required) that we ought rather to give
heed to these. How? By saying in effect, Both


378


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV II


these and those are of God, but not in a like
manner. And this he shows us afterwards : but
for the present he treats it somewhat superfi-
cially, but afterwards more clearly, saying ; " For
if that first covenant had been faultless" (c.
viii. 7), and many other such things : " for that
which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish
away." (c. viii. 13.) But as yet he ventures
not to say any such thing in the beginning of
his discourse, nor until he shall have first occu-
pied and possessed his hearer by his fuller [argu-
ments].

Why then ought we " to give more earnest
heed"? "Lest at any time," saith he, "we
should let them slip " — that is, lest at any time we
should perish, lest we should fall away. And here
he shows the grievousness of this falUng away, in
that it is a difficult thing for that which hath
fallen away to return again, inasmuch as it hath
happened through wilful negligence. And he
took this form of speech from the Proverbs.
For, saith he, " my son [take heed] lest thou fall
away" (Prov. iii. 21, LXX.), showing both the
easiness of the fall, and the grievousness of the
ruin. That is, our disobedience is not without
danger. And while by his mode of reasoning
he shows that the chastisement is greater, yet
again he leaves it in the form of a question, and
not in the conclusion. For indeed this is to
make one's discourse inoffensive, when one does
not in every case of one's self infer the judg-
ment, but leaves it in the power of the hearer
himself to give sentence : and this would render
them more open to conviction. And both the
prophet Nathan doth the same in the Old
[Testament], and in Matthew Christ, saying,
" What will He do to the husbandmen " (Matt.
xxi. 40) of that vineyard? so compelling them
to give sentence themselves : for this is the
greatest victory.

Next, when he had said, " For if the word
which was spoken by Angels was steadfast" —
he did not add, much more that by Christ : but
letting this pass, he said what is less, " How
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation ? "
And see how he makes the comparison. " For
if the word which was spoken by Angels," saith
he. There, " by Angels," here, " by the Lord "
— and there " a word," but here, " salvation."

Then lest any man should say, Thy sayings, O
Paul, are they Christ's? he proves their trust-
worthiness both from his having heard these
things of Him, and from their being now spoken
by God ; since not merely a voice is wafted, as
in the case of Moses, but signs are done, and
facts bear witness.

[6.] But what is this, " For if the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast"? For in the
Epistle to the Galatians also he saith to this
effect, " Being ordained by angels in the hand of


a Mediator." (Gal. iii. 19.) And again, "\
received a law by the disposition of Angels, ar
have not kept it." (Acts vii. 53.) And ever
where he saith it was given by angels. Son
indeed say that Moses is signified ; but withoi
reason. For here he says Angels in the plura
and the Angels too which he here speaks of, a:
those in Heaven. What then is it? Either 1
means the Decalogue only (for there Mosi
spake, and God answered him — Ex. xix. 19
— or that angels were present, God disposir
them in order, — or that he speaks thus
regard of all things said and done in the 0!
Covenant, as if Angels had part in them. B
how is it said in another place, " The Law w
given by Moses" (John i. 17), and here "1
Angels " ? For it is said, " And God car
down in thick darkness."' (Ex. xix. 16, 2(

" For if the word spoken by angels was stea
fast." What is " was steadfast " ? True, as 0
may say ; and faithful in its proper season ; a:
all the things which had been spoken came
pass. Either this is his meaning, or that th
prevailed, and the threatenings were coming
be accomplished. Or by " the word " he mea
injunctions. For apart from the Law, Ang'
sent from God enjoined many things : for i
stance at Bochim, in the Judges, in [the histc
of] Samson. (Judg. ii. i; xiii. 3.) For tl
is the cause why he said not " the Law " I
"the word." And he seems to me haply ratli
to mean this, viz., those things which are co
mitted to the management of angels. Wl
shall we say then? The angels who were 1
trusted with the charge of the nation were tl
present, and they themselves made the trumpt
and the other things, the fire, the thick darkne
(Ex. xix. 16.)

" And every transgression and disobedienc
saith he. Not this one and that one, but " evei
one. Nothing, he saith, remained unaveng
but " received a just recompense of rewar
instead of [saying] punishment. Why r
spake he thus? Such is the manner of Pi
not to make much account of his phrases,
indifferently to put down words of evil sou
even in matters of good meaning. As also
another place he saith, " Bringing into capti''
every thought to the obedience of Chris'
(2 Cor. X. 5.) And again he hath put "
recompense " for punishment,' as here he cat
punishment " reward." " If it be a righte
thing," he saith, " with God to recomp«
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to


* This last clause seems unconnected as it stands here. If
were MS. authority one should be glad to transfer it a few
lower, after the management of Angels; rd 5ia twc oy-yeAwv c
lxy)9ttTa, or to place here the words " What shall we say," do '
" thick darkness."

' See St. Chrys. on the passage, 2 Cor. x. 5 [p. 242, O. T.]. ''
expression *' captivity " was the " word of evil sound."

* Rom. i. 37.


)MILY III.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


379


0 are troubled rest." (2 Thess. i. 6, 7.)
at is, justice was not violated, but God went
th against them, and caused the penalty to
ne round on the sinners, though not all their
s are made manifest, but only where the ex-
!ss ordinances were transgressed.
' How then shall we," he saith, " escape if we
jlect so great salvation?" Hereby he signi-
1, that that other salvation was no great thing,
ill too did he add the "So great." For not
m wars (he saith) will He now rescue us, nor
itow on us the eartli and the good things that
; in the earth, but it will be the dissolution of
ith, the destruction of the devil, the kingdom
Heaven, everlasting life. For all these things
hath briefly expressed, by saying, " if we neg-
t so great salvation."

"7.] Then he subjoins what makes this worthy

jelief. " Which at the first began to be spoken

the Lord " : that is, had its beginning from

fountain itself. It was not a man who

lUght it over ' into the earth, nor any created

tier, but the Only-Begotten Himself.

' And was confirmed unto us by them that

mrd [Him]." What is " confirmed " ? It was

bieved,^ or, it came to pass. For (he saith)

V, have the earnest ; ' that is, it hath not been

e inguished, it hath not ceased, but it is strong

a 1 prevaileth. And the cause is, the Divine

I VI I- works therein. It means they who heard

iie Lord, themselves confirmed us. This

^reat thing and trustworthy : which also

saith in the beginning of his Gospel, " As

> delivered unto us, which from the begin-

n ^ were eyewitnesses and ministers of the

Wrd." (Luke i. 2.)

rlow then was it confirmed? What if those

th heard were forgers? saith some one. This

oection then he overthrows, and shows that

•ace was not human. If they had gone

, God would not have borne witness to

thn ; for he subjoined (ver. 4), " God also bear-

ir witness with them." Both they indeed bear

s, and God beareth witness too. How

1 le bear witness ? not by word or by voice,

^'h this also would have been worthy of

) : but how? "By signs, and wonders,

livers miracles." (Well said he, "divers


ferried it over; fiie5r6p5/iev<T€i', the word is specially ap-
■ messages between earth and heaven, by Pseudo-Dionys.
:> Celesti Hierarchia, c. xv. 6. *' The Angels arc called
to express their rapid power of making things, how it
tlmost to all things without time; and their motion in the
if those who ferry over, from above downwards, and again
■ lower parts up the steep, both drawing out the things of
y order towards that loftier height, and moving those of

irder to come forth in the way of sympathy and care for

riors."

Teufljj. Dunaeus suggested initrrtJtByi, " it was accredited,"

is no MS. authority for the change.

Chrys. seems to have had in view 2 Cor. i. ai, 22, where
ling" is connected with the earnest of " the Spirit." [The

IS, " how he which stablishes us with you in Christ, and
Tinted iM, is God; who hath also sealed uc, and given the
witat of the Spirit in our hearts." — F. G.]


miracles," declaring the abundance of the gifts :
which was not so in the former dispensation,
neither so great signs and so various.) That is,
we did not believe them simply, but through
signs and wonders : wherefore we believe not
them, but God Himself.

" And by gifts of the Holy Ghost, according
to His own will."

What then, if wizards also do signs, and the
Jews said that He "cast out devils through
Beelzebub"? (Luke xi. 15.) But they do
not such kind of signs : therefore said he " di-
vers miracles " : for those others were not mira-
cles, [or powers,*] but weakness and fancy, and
things altogether vain. Wherefore he said, " by
gifts of the Holy Ghost according to His own
will."

[8.] Here he seems to me to intimate some-
thing further. For it is not likely there were
many there who had gifts, but that these had
failed, upon their becoming more slothful. In-
order then that even in this he might comfort
them, and not leave them to fall away, he re-
ferred all to the will of God. He knows (he
says) what is expedient, and for whom, and
apportions His grace accordingly. Which also
he [Paul] does in the Episde to the Corinthians,
saying, " God hath set every one of us, as it
pleased Him." (i Cor. xii. 18.) And again,
" The manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal." ( i Cor. xii. 7.)

" According to His will." He shows that the
gift is according to the will of the Father. But
oftentimes on account of their unclean and sloth-
ful life many have not received a gift, and some-
times also those whose life is good and pure have
not received one. Why, I pray you ? Lest they
might be made haughty, that they might not be
puffed up, that they might not grow more neg-
ligent, that they might not be more excited.
For if even without a gift, the mere consciousness
of a pure life be sufficient to lift a man up, much
more when the grace is added also. Wherefore
to the humble, to the simple, it was rather given,
and especially to the simple : for it is said, " in
singleness and gladness of heart." (Acts ii. 46.)
Yea, and hereby also he rather urged them on,
and if they were growing negligent gave them a
spur. For the humble, and he who imagines no
great things concerning himself, becomes more
earnest when he has received a gift, in that he
has obtained what is beyond his deserts, and
thinks that he is not worthy thereof. But he
who thinks he hath done well, reckoning it to be
his due, is puffed up. Wherefore God dispen-
seth this profitably : which one may see taking
place also in the Church : for one hath the word
of teaching, another hath not power to open his


* ivfa/ictc.


38o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV


mouth. Let not this man (he says) be grieved
because of this. For " the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal."
(i Cor. xii. 7.) For if a man that is an house-
holder knoweth to whom he should entrust any-
thing, much more God, who understands the
mind of men, " who knoweth all things or ever
they come into being." ' One thing only is
worthy of grief, Sin : there is nothing else.

Say not, Wherefore have I not riches? or. If
I had, I would give to the poor. Thou knowest
not, if thou hadst them, whether thou wouldest
not the rather be covetous. For now indeed
thou sayest these things, but being put to the
trial thou wouldest be different. Since also
when we are satisfied, we think that we are able
to fast ; but when we have gone without a little
space, other thoughts come into us. Again,
when we are out of the way of strong drink, we
think ourselves able to master our appetite, but
no longer so, when we are caught by it.

Say not. Wherefore had I not the gift of teach-
ing? or. If I had had it, I should have edified
innumerable souls. Thou knowest not, if thou
hadst it, whether it would not be to thy condem-
nation,— whether envy, whether sloth, would
not have disposed thee to hide thy talent. Now,
indeed, thou art now free from all these, and
though thou give not "the portion of meat"
(Luke xii. 42), thou art not called to ac-
count : but then, thou wouldest have been re-
sponsible for many.

[9.] And besides, neither now art thou with-
out the gift. Show in the little, what thou
wouldst have been, if thou hadst had the other.
" For if" (he says) "ye are not faithful in that
which is little, how shalt any one give you that
which is great? " (Luke xvi. 11.) Give such
proof as did the widow; she had two farthings,-
and she cast in all, whatsoever she possessed.

Dost thou seek riches ? Prove that thou think-
est lightly of the few things, that I may trust thee
also concerning the many things. But if thou
dost not think lightly even of these, much less
wilt thou do so of the other.

Again, in speech, prove that thou canst use
fitly exhortation and counsel. Hast thou not
external eloquence ? hast thou not store of
thoughts ? But nevertheless thou knowest these
common things. Thou hast a child, thou hast
a neighbor, thou hast a friend, thou hast a
brother, thou hast kinsmen. And though pub-
licly before the Church, thou art not able to
draw out a long discourse, these thou canst ex-
hort in private. Here, there is no need of rhet-
oric, nor of elaborate discourse : prove in these,
that if thou hadst skill of speech, thou wouldest
not have neglected it. But if in the small mat-


> Hut. Stu. 4a.


' o^oAoiff.


ter thou art not in earnest, how shall I trust f
concerning the great?

For, that every man can do this, hear w
Paul saith, how he charged even lay peoj
" Edify," he says, "one another, as also ye c
(i Thess. V. II.) And, "Comfort one anot
with these words." (i Thess. iv. 18.) (
knoweth how He should distribute to ev
man. Art thou better than Moses? hear 1
he shrinks from the hardship. " Am I," s'
he, " able to bear them ? for Thou saidst to
Bear them up, as a nursing-father would beai
the sucking-child." (Num. xi. 12.) What t
did God? He took of his spirit and gave i,
the others, showing that neither when he )|
them was the gift his own, but of the Spirit,
thou hadst had the gift, thou wouldst perchai
have been lifted up, perchance wouldst thou 1 1
beeil turned out of the way. Thou knowest
thyself as God knoweth thee. Let us not
To what end is that ? on what account is t!
When God dispenseth, let us not demanc
account of Him : for this [is] of the utterr-
impiety and folly. We are slaves, and slave?
apart from our Master, knowing not even
things which are before us.

[10.] Let us not then busy ourselves al
the counsel of God, but whatsoever He 1
given, this let us guard, though it be sri
though it be the lowest, and we shall be <•
gether approved. Or rather, none of the
of God is small : art thou grieved because 1
hast not the gift of teaching? Then tell
which seems to you the greater, to have the
of teaching, or the gift of driving away disea
Doubtless the latter. But what ? Tell me ; 1
it not seem to thee greater to give eyes to
blind than even to drive away diseases?
what ? Tell me ; doth it not seem to thee gn
to raise the dead than to give eyes to the bl
What again, tell me ; doth it not seem to
greater to do this by shadows and napkins,
by a word ? Tell me then, which wouldst tl
Raise the dead with shadows and napkirui
have the gift of teaching? Doubtless thoui
say the former, to raise the dead with shao
and napkins. If then I should show to 1
that there is another gift far greater than
and that thou dost not receive it when it is in
power to receive it, art not thou justly depn
of those others? And this gift not one on
but all may have. I know that ye open
your mouths and are amazed, at being to
that it is in your power to have a greate i
than raising the dead, and giving eyes to t
blind, doing the same things which were ■ i
in the time of the Apostles. And it seen t
you past belief.


3 iroAAaKis, see Mr. Field's note.


Homily III.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


381


What then is this gift ? charity. Nay, believe
toe; for the word is not mine, but Christ's,
speaking by Paul. For what saith he ? " Covet
karnestly the best gifts : and yet show I unto
TOU a more excellent way." (i Cor. xii. 31.)
tvhat is this, "yet more excellent"? What he
'neans is this. The Corinthians were proud over
heir gifts, and those having tongues, the least
;ift, were puiTed up against the rest. He saith
herefore, Do ye by all means desire gifts? I
how imto you a way of gifts not merely excel-
•ing but far more excellent. Then he saith,
' Though I speak with the tongues of Angels,
'nd have not charity, I am nothing. And though
have faith so as to remove mountains, and have
lOt charity, I am nothing." (i Cor. xiii. i, 2.)

Hast thou seen the gift? Covet earnestly
his gift. This is greater than raising the dead,
'his is far better than all the rest. And that it
^> so, hear what Christ Himself saith, discours-
Hg with His disciples, " By this shall all men
now that ye are My disciples." (John xiii.
'5.) And showing how. He mentioned not the
■jiiracles, but what? " If ye have love one with

■ nother." And again He saith to the Father,
I Hereby shall they know that Thou hast
pnt Me, if they be one." (John xvii. 21.)

• nd He said to His disciples, " A new com-

• landment I give to you, that ye love one

■ nother." (John xiii. 34.) Such an one

erefore is more venerable and glorious than

ose who raise the dead ; with reason. For

at indeed is wholly of God's grace, but this, of

ine own earnestness also. This is of one who

• ) a Christian indeed : this shows the disciple of

- iirist, the crucified, the man that hath nothing

ommon with earth. Without this, not even

'•■ :artyrdom can profit.

And as a proof, see this plainly. The blessed
^- lul took two of the highest virtues, or rather
■^jree; namely, those which consist in miracles,
' 1 knowledge, in life. And without this the oth-

■ i, he said, are nothing. And I will say how
■'-ijese are nothing. "Though I give my goods
'M feed the poor," he says, " and have not char-
'•i|, I am nothing." (i Cor. xiii. 3.) For it is
''issible not to be charitable even when one
S'f:ds the poor and exhausts one's means.


[11.] And indeed these things have been suf-
ficiently declared by us, in the place concerning
Charity : ' and thither we refer the readers.
Meanwhile, as I was saying, let us covet ear-
nestly the Gift, let us love one another ; and we
shall need nothing else for the perfect acquisi-
tion of virtue, but all will be easy to us without
toils and we shall do all perfectly with much
diligence.

But see, even now, it is said, we love one
another. For one man hath two friends, and
another three. But this is not to love for God's
sake, but for the sake of being beloved. But to
love for God's sake hath not this as its principle
of Love ; but such an one will be disposed
towards all men as towards brethren ; loving
those that are of the same faith as being true
brothers ; heretics and Heathen and Jews,
brothers indeed by nature, but vile and unprof-
itable,— pitying and wearing himself out and
weeping for them. Herein we shall be like God
if we love all men, even our enemies ; not, if we
work miracles. For we regard even God with
admiration when He worketh wonders, yet much
more, when He showeth love towards man, when
He is long-suffering. If then even in God this
is worthy of much admiration, much more in
men is it evident that this rendereth us admi-
rable.

This then let us zealously seek after : and
we shall be no way inferior to Paul and Peter
and those who have raised innumerable dead,
though we may not be able to drive away a
fever. But without this [Love], though we
should work greater miracles even than the
Apostles themselves, though we should expose
ourselves to innumerable dangers for the faith :
there will be to us no profit from any. And
these things it is not I that say, but he, the very
nourisher of Charity, knoweth these things. To
him then let us be obedient ; for thus we shall
be able to attain to the good things promised,
of which may we all be made partakers, by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to
the Father with the Holy Ghost, be the glory,
now and for ever and world without end. Amen.


* His Homily on i Cor. xiii. 3 [pp. 444 sqq. O. T.] is referred to-


382


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I'


HOMILY IV.

Hebrews ii. 5-7.


" For unto Angels He hath not put in subjection the
world to come, whereof we speak. But one in a
certain place testified, saying, What is man that
Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that
Thou visitest him ? Thou madest him a little lower
than the Angels."

[1.3 I COULD have wished to know for certain
whether any hear with fitting earnestness the
things that are said, whether we are not casting
the seeds by the wayside : for in that case I
should have made my instructions with more
cheerfulness. For we shall speak, though no
one hear, for the fear which is laid on us by our
Saviour. For, saith He, testify to this people ;
even if they hear not, thou shalt thyself be guilt-
less. (See Ezek. iii. 19.) If however I had
been persuaded of your earnestness, I should
have spoken not for fear only, but should have
done it with pleasure also. For now indeed,
even if no man hear, even if my work, so long
as I fulfill my own part, brings no danger, still
the labor is not altogether pleasant; For what
profit is it, when though I be not blamed, yet
no one is benefited ? But if any would give heed
we shall receive advantage not so much from
avoiding punishment ourselves as from your
progress.

How then shall I know this ? Having taken
notice of some of you, who are not very atten-
tive, I shall question them privately, when I
meet them. And if I find that they retain any
of the things that have been spoken (I say not
all, for this would not be very easy for you) , but
even if [they retain] a few things out of many,
it is plain I should have no further doubts about
the rest. And indeed we ought, without giving
notice beforehand, to have attacked you when
off your guard. However it will suffice, if even
in this way I should be able to attain my pur-
pose. Nay rather, even as it is, I can attack you
when you are off your guard. For that I shall
question you, I have forewarned you ; but when I
shall question you I do not as yet make evident.
For perhaps it may be to-day ; perhaps to-mor-
row, perhaps after twenty or thirty days, perhaps
after fewer, perhaps after more. Thus has God
also made uncertain the day of our death. Nor
hath He allowed it be clear to us, whether it
shall befall us to-day, or to-morrow, or after a
whole year, or after many years ; that through
the uncertainty of the expectation we may
through all time keep ourselves firm in virtue.
And that we shall indeed depart, He hath said,


— but when. He hath not yet said. Thus too
have said that I shall question you, but I ha\
not added when, wishing you always to \
thoughtful.

And let no man say, I heard these things foi
or five weeks ago, or more, and I cannot reta
them. For I wish the hearer so to retain the
as to have his recollection perpetual and not a
to fade, nor yet that he should disown what
spoken. For I wish you to retain them, not,
order to tell them to me, but that ye may ha-
profit ; and this is of most serious interest to rr,
Let no one then say this.

[2.] However, I must now begin with wh
follows in the epistle. What then is set befo
us to speak on to-day?

" For not to angels," he says, " did He put
subjection the world to come,^ whereof we speak
Is he then discoursing concerning some oth
world ? No, but concerning this. Therefore
added " whereof we speak," that he might r
allow the mind to wander away in search ,
some other. How then does he call it "ti
world to come " ? Exactly as he also says
another place, "Who is the figure of him tl
was to come," ^ (Rom. v. 14,) when he
speaking about Adam and Christ in the Epis
to the Romans ; calling Christ according to t "
flesh " Him that was to come " in respect of I '
times of Adam, (for [then] He was to com'
So now also, since he had said, " but when
bringeth in the First-Begotten into the world
that thou mightest not suppose that he is speak '
of another world, it is made certain from ms
considerations and from his saying " to com
For the world was to come, but the Son of G
always was. This world then which was about'
come, He put in subjection not to Angels but;'
Christ. For that this is spoken with reference » .
the Son (he says) is evident : for surely no 1 J
would assert the other alternative, that it I)
reference to Angels.

Then he brings fonvard another testim '
also and says, " but one in a certain place t( •
fied, saying." Wherefore did he not men 1
the name of the prophet, but hid it? Yea, 1
in other testimonies also he doth this : as w 1
he saith, " but when He bringeth in again -'
First-Begotten into the world. He saith, And t
all the Angels of God worship Him. And ap
I will be to Him a Father. And of the An


1 rnv ii4AX,ov9av,


* TOW /icAAoi^Of .


lOMII.Y IV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


383


ie saith, Who maketh His angels spirits. And,
rhou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foun-
lations of the earth" (c. i. 6, 5, 7, 10) : — so
.Iso here he saith, " but one in a certain place
estified, saying." And this very thing (I con-
;eive) is the act of one that conceals himself,
md shows that they were well skilled in the
Scriptures ; his not setting down him who ut-
ered the testimony, but introducing it as familiar
ind obvious.

" What is man that Thou art mindful of him,
ir the son of man that Thou visitest him?
"hou madest him a little lower than the angels :
"hou crownedst him with glory and honor." '
Ver. 8.) " Thou hast put all tilings in subjec-
ion under his feet."

Now although these things were spoken of

uman nature generally, they would neverthe-

!;ss apply more properly to Christ according to

iie flesh. For this, "Thou hast put all things

|i subjection under his feet," belongs to Him

iuher than to us. For the Son of God visited

I3 when we were nothing : and after having

isumed our [nature]," and united it to Him-

blf, He became higher than all.

" For," he says, " in that He hath put all

lings in subjection under Him, He left nothing

3t put under Him : but now we see not yet all

Ungs put under Him." What he means is

is ; — since he had said, " Until I make Thine

uniies Thy footstool" (c. i. 13), — and it

1- likely that they would still be grieved, —

uii having inserted a few things after this par-

ithctically, he added this testimony in confir-

aiion of the former. For that they might not

:v, How is it that He hath put His enemies

r His feet, when we have suffered so much?

ifficiently hinted at it in the former place

Ueed (for the word "until " showed, not what

sould take place immediately, but in course of

me) but here he foUoweth it up. For do not

Sppose (he says) that because they have not

jt been made subject, they are not to be made

sjbject : for that they must be made subject, is

edent ; for, on this account was the prophecy

ajken. " For," he says, " in that He hath put

aj things under Him, He left nothing not put

"'er Him." How then is it that all things

not been put under Him? Because they

'■ Hereafter to be put under Him.

If then all things must be made subject to

1. but have not yet been made subject, do

grieve, nor trouble thyself. If indeed when

nd were come, and all things were made

it, thou wert still suffering these things,

reason wouldst thou repine : " But now we


B. add Ka'i (coTcVTTfffac avTov in'i Ta tpya Tuv yeipiiv uov.

tiisc is omitted from the text of the Epistle by critical editors

New Testament, and is not commented on by St. Chrysostom.

l»^ bracketed by I,u., Tr., W. H., and the Basle ed., but retained

inkc Revision. — F. G.] ^ to tf Tj^wf.


see not yet all things put under Him." The
King has not yet clearly conquered. Why then
art thou troubled when suffering affliction ? the
preaching [of the Gospel] hath not yet pre-
vailed over all ; it is not yet time that they
should be altogether made subject.

[3.] Then again there is another consolation ;
if indeed He who is hereafter to have all put in
subjection under Him, hath Himself also died
and submitted to sufferings innumerable. (Ver.
9.) " But," he says, " we see Him who was
made a little' lower than the angels, even Jesus,
for the suffering of death " — then the good things
again, — " crowned with glory and honor." Seest
thou, how all things apply to Him ? For the
[expression], "a little," would rather suit Him,
who was only three days in Hades, but not our-
selves who are for a long time in corruption.
Likewise also the [expression] " with glory and
honor " will suit Him much more than us.

Again, he reminds them of the Cross, thereby
effecting two things ; both showing His care
[for them] and persuading them to bear all
things nobly, looking to the Master. For (he
would say) if He who is worshiped of Angels,
for thy sake endured to have a little less than the
.Angels, much more oughtest thou who art infe-
rior to the Angels, to bear all things for His sake.
Then he shows that the Cross is " glory and
honor," as He Himself also always calls it, saying,
" That the Son of Man might be glorified "
(John xi. 5 ) ; and, " the Son of Man is glorified."
(John xii. 23.) If then He calls the [sufferings]
for His servants' sake " glory," much more
shouldest thou the [sufferings] for the Lord.

Seest thou the fruit of the Cross, how great it
is ? fear not the matter : for it seemeth to thee
indeed to be dismal, but it brings forth good
things innumerable. From these considerations
he shows the benefit of trial. Then he says,
"That He by the grace of God should taste
death for every man."

" That by the grace of God," he says. And
He indeed because of the grace of God towards
us suffered these things. " He who spared not
His Own Son," he says, "but delivered Him up
for us all." (Rom. viii. 32.) Why? He did
not owe us this, but has done it of grace. And
again in the Epistle to the Romans he says,
" Much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace which is by one man Jesus Christ, hath
abounded unto many." (Rom. v. 15.)

" That by the grace of God He should taste
death for every man," not for the faithful only,
but even for the whole world : for He indeed
died for all ; But what if all have not believed?
He hath fulfilled His own [part].

Moreover he said rightly "taste death for


' on " for a short time.'


384


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


every man," he did not say "die." For as if
He really was tasting it, when He had spent a
little time therein. He immediately arose.

By saying then " for the suffering of death,"
he signified real death, and by saying " superior
to angels," he declared the resurrection. For
as a physician though not needing to taste the
food prepared for the sick man, yet in his care
for him tastes first himself, that he may persuade
the sick man with confidence to venture on the
food, so since all men were afraid of death, in
persuading them to take courage against death,
He tasted it also Himself though He needed
not. " For," He says, " the prince of this world
Cometh and findeth nothing in Me." (John
xiv. 30.) So both the words " by grace " and
" should taste death for every man," establish
this.

[4.] Ver. 10. " For it became Him, for whom
are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the
Captain of their salvation perfect through suf-
ferings." He speaks here of the Father. Seest
thou how again he applies the [expression] " by
whom"' to Him? Which he would not have
done, had it been [an expression] of inferiority,
and only applicable to the Son. And what he
says is this : — He has done what is worthy of
His love towards mankind, in showing His First-
born to be more glorious than all, and in setting
Him forth as an example to the others, like
some noble wrestler that surpasses the rest.

" The Captain of their salvation," that is, the
Cause of their salvation. Seest thou how great
is the space between? Both He is a Son, and
we are sons ; but He saves, we are saved. Seest
thou how He both brings us together and then
separates us ; " bringing," he says, " many sons
unto glory " : here he brings us together, —
" the Captain of their salvation," again he
separates.

" To make perfect through sufferings."^ Then
sufferings are a perfecting, and a cause of salva-
tion. Seest thou that to suffer affliction is not
the portion of those who are utterly forsaken ;
if indeed it was by this that God first honored
His Son, by leading Him through sufferings?
And truly His taking flesh to suffer what He
did suffer, is a far greater thing than making
the world, and bringing it out of things that are
not. This indeed also is [a token] of His loving-
kindness, but the other far more. And [the
Apostle] himself also pointing out this very thing,
says, " That in the ages to come He might show
forth the exceeding riches of His goodness. He
both raised us up together, and made us sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus."
(Eph. ii. 7, 6.)


* di' o{r, see above, note 4, p. 366.

' suffering perfects and works salvation.


" For it became Him for whom are all things
and by whom are all things in bringing many
sons to glory, to make the Captain of their sal-
vation perfect through sufferings." For (he
means) it became Him who taketh tender care,
and brought all things into being, to give up the
Son for the salvation of the rest, the One for
the many. However he did not express himself
thus, but, " to make perfect through sufferings,"
showing the suffering for any one, not merely
profits " him," but he himself also becomes more
glorious and more perfect. And this too he says
in reference to the faithful, comforting them by
the way : for Christ was glorified then when He
suffered. But when I say, He was glorified, do
not suppose that there was an accession of glory
to Him : for that which is of nature He always
had, and received nothing in addition.

[5.] "For," he says, "both He that sancti-
fieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one,
for which cause He is not ashamed to call them
brethren." Behold again how he brings [them]
together, honoring and comforting them, and
making them brethren of Christ, in this respect
that they are " of one." ^ Then again guarding
himself and showing that he is speaking of thai
which is according to the flesh, he introduces,
" For He who sanctifieth," [i.e.] Christ, " and
they who are sanctified," ourselves. Dost thou
see how great is the difference ? * He sanctifies,
we are sanctified. And above he said, "the
Captain of their salvation. For there is onf
God, of whom are all things." ^ (i Cor. viii. 6.)

" For which cause He is not ashamed to cal
them brethren." Seest thou how again he show:
the superiority ? For by saying, " He is it
ashamed," he shows that the whole comes ii
of the nature of the thing, but of the loving affet
tion of Him who was " not ashamed " of anv
thing, [yea] of His great humility. For thom
we be "of one," yet He sanctifieth and we a
sanctified : and great is the difference." Moi
over " He " is of the Father, as a true Son, tl
is, of His substance ; " we," as created, that i^
brought out of things that are not, so that th
difference is great. Wherefore he says, " He
not ashamed to call them brethren" (ver. i:
" saying, I will declare Thy name unto My breii
ren." (Ps. xxii. 22.) For when He clotln
Himself with flesh. He clothed Himself ai
with the brotherhood, and at the same tiiii
came in the brotherhood.

This indeed he brings forward naturally. ?•'
this(ver. 13) " I will put my trust in Him"(2Sai;
xxii. 3) , what does it mean ? For what follows th
is also [introduced] naturally. " Behold, I an
the children which God hath given Me." (Is^


* e^ evb
" Thisc


• TO HftTOV,

citation is connected with " they are of one," the intcrvc
ing words, " Then again . . . salvation," being introduced pare:
thetically. ^ to ixiaov.


)MII,Y IV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


385


i. 18.) For as here He shows Himself a
ither, so before, a Brother. " I will declare
ly name unto My brethren," He saith.
And again he indicates the superiority and
e great interval [between us], by what follows
er. 14) : " Since then the children," he saith,
ire partakers of flesh and blood " (thou seest
lere he saith the likeness is? in reference to
s flesh), "in like manner He also Himself
3k part of the same." Let all the Heretics
1 ashamed, let those hide their faces who say
lit He came in appearance and not in reality.'
iir he did not say, " He took part of these "
ily, and then say no more ; although had he
d thus, it would have been sufficient, but he
erted something more, adding " in like man-
r," not in appearance, he means, or by an
ige (since in that case " in like manner " is
: preserved) but in reality ; showing the broth-
lood.

"6.] Next he sets down also the cause of the
momy.^ " That through death," he says,
le might destroy him that had the power of
ith, that is, the devil."

-lere he points out the wonder, that by what
devil prevailed, by that was he overcome,
the very thing which was his strong weapon
inst the world, [namely], Death, by this
ist smote him. Li this he exhibits the great-
of the conqueror's power. Dost thou see
great good death hath wrought ?
er. 15. " And should deliver them," he says,
10 through fear of death were all their life-
subject to bondage." Why (he means) do
shudder? Why do you fear him that hath
brought to nought ? He is no longer ter-
, but has been trodden under foot, hath been
ly despised ; he is vile and of no account.
Im. i. 10.)

It what is " through fear of death were all
• life-time subject to bondage"? He either
IS this, that he who fears death is a slave,
submits to all things rather than die ; or this,
all men were slaves of death and were held
r his power, because he had not yet been
I away ; or that men lived in continual fear,
expecting that they should die, and being
of death, could have no sense of pleasure,
this fear was present with them. For this
ted at in saying, " All their life-time." He
shows that the afflicted, the harassed, the
;uted, those that are deprived of country
if substance and of all other things, spend
lives more sweetly and more freely than
[Of old time who were in luxury, who suf-
no such afflictions, who were in continual
xity, if indeed these " all their life-time "


', St. Iren. pp. 450, 482, 497, O. T.
the Incarnation, [oi/coi'o^ia is not so much the Incar-
1 the whole arrangement of the Christian dispensation —
I especial reference to Christ's death. — F. G.]


were under this fear and were slaves ; while the
others have been made free and laugh at that
which they shudder at. For this is now as if,
when one was being led away to a captivity lead-
ing to death, and in continual expectation of it,
one should feed him up with abundant dainties
(something such as this was Death of old) ; but
now, as if some one taking away that fear to-
gether with the dainties, were to promise a con-
test, and propose a combat that should lead no
longer to death, but to a kingdom. Of which
number wouldst thou have wished to be — those
who are fed up in the prison-house, while every
day looking for their sentence, or those who
contend much and labor willingly, that they may
crown themselves with the diadem of the king-
dom? Seest thou how he has raised up their
soul, and made them elated? He shows too,
that not death alone has been put an end to,
but that thereby he also who is ever showing
that war without trace against us, I mean the
devil, hath been brought to nought ; since he
that fears not death is out of reach of the devil's
tyranny. For if " skin for skin, yea all things a
man would give for his life " (Job ii. 4) — when
any one has determined to disregard even this,
of what henceforward will he be the slave ? He
fears no one, he is in terror of no one, he is higher
than all, and more free than all. For he that
disregards his own life, much more [doth he dis-
regard] all other things. And when the devil
finds a soul such as this, he can accomplish in it
none of his works. For what ? tell me, shall he
threaten the loss of property, and degradation,
and banishment from one's country? But these
are small matters to him who "counteth not
even his life dear" (Acts xx. 24) unto him, ac-
cording to the blessed Paul. Thou seest that in
casting out the tyranny of death, he also over-
threw the strength of the devil. For he who
has learnt to study innumerable [truths] con-
cerning the resurrection,'' how should he fear
death? How should he shudder any more?

[7.] Therefore be ye not grieved, saying, why
do we suffer such and such things ? For so the vic-
tory becomes more glorious. And it would not
have been glorious, unless by death He had de-
stroyed death ; but the most wonderful thing is
that He conquered him by the very means by
which he was strong, showing in every point the
abundance of His means, and the excellence of
His contrivances. Let us not then prove false
to the gift bestowed on us. " For we," he says,
" have received not a spirit of fear, but a spirit
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind."
(Rom. viii. 15 ; 2 Tim. i. 7.) Let us stand then
nobly, laughing death to scorn.

But [I pause] for it comes over me to groan


386


WORKS OF ST, CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV


bitterly [at th« thought of] wIiIiIm i < in t Ii;ttl)
r«iitc<l ii» up, anfl wmthcr wr h.iv. i.M.nj^lit our-
■elvcK down. For whrti I n'i tl>. w ulitiKN in the

tMlbiic |»t.i' '■., ll,r |'r...inln;' , .... i lli, ■ ' .it
nn life, 111. I,. ,■,■,1,1,;.,, 1 II.. 1 i,h

l,,|..'M,l, l,r||, vr irii , I ,.n . I, I I,- 1.,.. li,-,...

i,. ill,, .,, .111.1 |rw., .I,.| I,. 1. I|. ■I ll, ..II. I

1,. |.,1. ill nil. I |..l III. . , , . .:|,' 1,1 , I iM/li im l(,

'i. ..rii I'.ir wli,il. ■.. I I nil, .ill. I , -.,11.1 . "..-ly, I
lili;ili talk to II" |,.ii|,.,,, when pliil". .'i|iIii/iiik
conccrninu (III I' ..in. • ii'.n. VVIiyi* il'i .nr.r ilic
heathen <l(> nut itttcmi to whut I* xitiil i)^ tiic,
Imt I'l wliil In i\ni\f liv vi,u |.'(ir llir-y will miy

.11 .,11. . , ■ ,-, I,. I. ,-, ill ■ . I 1. II..V. , j l,r

tti^lv to iU:n[ilM: tlc.lUl, wiil;ll lit; In liol ul;lt lo nUU

another dead ? '

Heautiftil thing* were ipoken by Paul, l)cniitl-
M and worthy o( Heaven, and of the I(jvc of
God to man. For what doea he «ay ? " Ami I Ic
•hall deliver them who through fear of dciith,
were all their life-time tul^ect to I nii • "
But ve do not allow thetie thingi to be i.. ii . .1,
flghtina against them by your de.c(U. Ami ynt
many tninKx cxiitt for thii very end, ( lod biiililitiK
a Mtronghold itK'tin'*^ 't> '''"^ "'' miKlii 'l<">iroy
thii tame evil cuitom, l''<>r I'll tin-, whii iiii-;in
the bright torchev? Dun. ii.,i ,. n.i ii.. m i,..|orc
aaathletei? And what { m. m | ii><' liyiniii.i' ho
wfl not glorify Ood, ami ii . iii.mkH iluit at l;isi.
He hail crowned the dr|i;ui. i .1.. . ii. ii 11. in ,
freed him from hli laborN, ili 1 1 i u.; m

certainty. He ha« him with lliiii.ciii' Arc not iln'
Hymn* for thin? I« not Pnaliiimly for iIiIhi' All
theie are the acta of thoae rcjoii;iti)(. " I'or," ii
it laid, "in any merry? let hitn n\nn pHiilimt."
(

g

me or hliii wlio \n |iIiiI(imo|

the affliction, for tliU Ik noiliinK iv " '"' i"ii|iii<-
Ing! — ahowme a inmi who m o,r v. ly .iiiii. n.in
itnelf i* philoiophicttl, and llivn 1 will hcliuvu ilit;
rcKiirrcction,

Anil IikI.'i'I. th.it wfimfn rn({.iKcd In tln'
affairN of ii.i lii. .li.ml.l .m i iIhih in no way .nr
prlling. Aii'l v I 111. Ill il till, ivi'ii JH (lrc;i(lliil ;
for from iIk-ih .iI..« i , iIk' mum- iiliilimophy rc-
ipiii'-.l VVhcTcluii il ,., I'l.il '.iiyii, "Hill con-
i.iiiiiic lliciii will. Il ,11. I ,l. . |i, I WDilId lint
lii'.i- yini i|.,ii.ii ml, lliil \'- finrioW 111)1. rv. II .1 .
Ill' i< .1 wliu li.ivr 11.. Ii..|.. " (1 'I'llCHH, iv. I ; )

II. V. i.ii' not tiiiH i.. .'.Ill 111, , iHir to |)cr|)clii.il
Ml). II,,, liiii lo w. nil. II III. I 111. II in lli(! worlil.
I'.iii l,..r.. ■,. 1 ilii , I II.. I .. .1,. Mlfiil, lint when
liny III. Ill ..I n.,111,111, |(ii(l» m.ih;' 1.1 11'- I rm i(i..i| l.)
the worlil, In- I'MiH Ills li.'iir, imlI I., i.n' 1 . m..

Icnily will I < ,111 hi' I ill 1 1'.' nil ,. . 111].,' Ill III llii , :'
lli'licvr III. will 11 I '.IV il linn;' . n. 1. .|.,ii. .1 .


m Mia, m any merry r ici nun riiik |iminnK.
(Ian. V. 13.) Hut lo [hcnv. iIiIiikh tlu; hirallirn
Jive no heed. Kor (am: will nay) do not tril
me of him who \n |miloMii|ilii( al' when out of


I Tin W....I .." I'.'i I. '

Ihinklni ■fi't «t..-rilti„M ^^^' iliiiig%.
' flMriaM'


. ', |.iill*nl, u will n< of
' iiorMl«*'l 14 HM'Mtiittf •


they ought, luch peraonit ithould be excluded
a long time from the threihuldt of the ' ' '
For thoae who are indeed worthy of belnf;
for, are theoe who ittill fear and vhudder ut <ii nn,
who have no faith in the renurrectbn.

'Hilt I do not diabelleve the r«'<iirriifi.
(unrr miyH) 'but I long after hi* iKxii ly ' V
llicii, I'll iiir, when he f(oc»( from hoini',
for a I'lii;/ almrncc, doht mjt thou do lli.
' Vi-.i, bill I do weep then al»o' (nUr. ttay») '
tiioMMi ait I lon(( after him.' Hni iliai h
fomliKt of tlioHC that rcidly l.n:. .hi i
a ,101 i;ilc», thii that of her who iki.jjan. .1 :.,

K'lMIII.

riiink, what thou ulngetit on that oi<af>i".
" Kcliirn unto thv rc»t, 0 mv HonI, for the I >
hath dealt bountifully with thcc," (I'h. cxvl. 7;
And again, " I will fear no evil, for Thou iir
with me." (1'*. xxiii. 4.) And ac .In "I!
art my refuge from the aflliction wl..
paHHCth nic." (I'i». xxxii. 7,) 'ITiInk wli
I'wtlmK mean. Hut thou doitt not give h<
art drunk from grief.

(,'onHider carefully the funeral lament n
otIicrM that thou mityeHt have a renicdy m ihim
own c;a»c, " Ucturn, () my i«oiil, to thy i. 1 f..
llic Lord Imth dealt bountifully with tliii
me, HiiycHt thou that the l/ord hath deal* '
fully with thee, and weepeNt? I* not tl.
I'liiic. ii il not liypocriny ? For If Ind"
I. ill, I.. li. v'st tlie tliingx thou Hayeitt, tli,
I . .ii|,. iilii.'iiH ; but if thou art in i»port hh'
a |,iii. iii'l iliiiiki-'4 thcHc thingK fabi'
il"',i 111. Ill 'ihi. |, ,:iliii.i'f' Why doHt til'
(■inline- III'' ;ili. II. 1,11,1 , f Why ifoHt ihou !.■
aw. IV ill' ii.i" I ' .■' I'liit lliii* woillil be 111'
niailiii. II Aii'l v<'l far more the other.

I'or III. |.i. 'Ml, llii'M, I jidviKe you

lime (,(11. ..n. I liiill lli';il llii- IMllllcr 1J|. I

(MIHly : I'.i iii'l. . 'I I ".. :n' .ll, ..li.n.l ' '

lliin |»r.i' ii. ' ...111. i'l 1. ■. '.II , 'll . . ' ini', I
way iiii" 111.' < lini. h, 'I li. . I , "f ill.
then vv will lii'M'Mlicr ( cirii-> I. And m.
I ' hli)'.' .111.1 ll iiify, both lo rich and !".■

lli wolii. 11 iii'l nil 11

May < .'..l iii'l. . 'I i'l 'III lli'il you (ill deii;irl.

of 111 ■■: nl. .1. .i.'l ,1. • ..l.llli" I., ill.- lllll

rill. I III.. 1 , ll',','.' I'M. ',11 ..I. I III .', I" .III' ii'li'd

III. II "11., I,, "I. , ,lll'l III. I , I.', '1,11, "llii

,111. I :'i ni'l . Iiil'li. I,. ,ili.| I'll ,il j;l,ill'l ' llll.ll. I.

I "1' ' II "I'l I '. , iii'l ili,ii untimely di-alli m,'

II , . I II ,M.iy llil', Ihi'ii lie, :iiiil ll.)

|M.iv. .111. 1 I . ■Ii.irt the |iri'l.ii. . in. I .ill ..i '
lii-'.i. ' ll ( iml liir ('.'u'li iiIImi, ;niil li/ in.. I'
|.ii\'i ill ('omiiiiiii I'.III il (which Ooil I'll
in. I iiiiv il nrvrr ha|i|M'ii) atiy bittii '''

'li'iiil'l ... .iir, bitter. I mean, not in il'. i-i'

(|.,i ll, ii, . I', nil ill' i,' i'. nil liilli'l il. ,illi, f'
lilll. 1 . n.il .11 .ill li.iiii .1. . |i), lllll lull. I 111 ii|

of your diMpovitiuti, if u slnmld liajipdi, and


JMII.V IV.]


HOMII.II'S ON lll'.ItRKWS.


387


Duld hire theiie mourning women, believe me

icii [ Nfiy (I N|iciik nut wittiiiiit meaning' but

I liMvc resolved, Id liiiii wlio will, be angry),

It pcrmm we will cxcliidc Ikmii llir (Ihiinh for

oiiX tiitic, iiH we ilo the idolater. I'or if I'liiil

IIh " the coveloiiH iiiiiii nil idoliiter" (l'',|ih. v,

, iiiiK li more liim who lirlii^M in the |irii( liceH

the idoliterit over 11 lieliever.

I'l'ilill me, for wliiil riiime doHl tlioii invite

'IS, and the Min«(!rHi' Ih it not to afford

ii .MiiKiiif' Is it not to honor tlii! departed i*

liy then ilo'.t thou iiiNiilt himi* And why doMt

)ii iiiiike liim ji |)iililic. hIiow? And why dost

Ml makir x.iiiie a» on 11 Htagi;? We eoiiie, dln-

rsiiiK of the tliinKH eone(;rnirij{ the resiirree-

iiistriietiiiK all, even tlio»(! who have not

lieeii Hinitlen, liy the honor shown to him, to

r il nohly if any siteli liiiii^ should lia|i|ien :

dost thou liriiiK those who overthrow our

iiliiiiKsJ as mill h as in them lielh? What

■ worse than tliis ridicule und mockery?

,ii more grievous than this im:oiiHiHteiicy i*

, I He iish.uneil and show reverence : jjiit

will not, we cannot endure the l)rinf{in)( in

n the (Jhiirch of practicen Hodestriiciive. l''or,

lid, " them that sin rclMike lieforc all."

Inn. V. 30.) And an to tlioHc mi)tcr;i)>le and

K lied women, we throitf(li yon forhid them'

r to introduce ihcmselveH into the fimerals of

faiilifiil, IcHt we should ohlif^e them in ^ood

ie,i to wail over their own evils, and teach

II not to do these thiiif^i* in the ills of others,

rather to weep for their own misfortunes.

an affection.'itc father too, when he hatt «

rderlv son, not only .idvisex him not to draw

to the wicked, hut (tuts them in fear also,

id then, I advise you, and those women

i^h yon, tliat you do not invite sucli pers/His,

tliat tliey do not .ittcnd. And tnay (»(m1 ^rant

my words may produce some effect, and

my thre.al may avail. Hut if (which (lod

d) we should he disregarded, we li.'ive no

henceforward but to {nit our threat into

ution, chantining you by the law* of thi;

:ch, and th'>se women a* iMsflt* them.

if any man is otMtinate and contemptu-
let him hear Christ »aying even now, " If
one trespaM against thee, go, tell him his
between thee ami him alofle"! but if he
lot he persuaded, " take with Inee one or
' iSiit if even no he contradict, " tell it Uy
Church, hut if he shall alito refuse to hear
jhurch, let him be unto thee at a heathen
anda oiihlican." (Matt, xviii. 15, t6, 17,)
when a man trespames against me,
will not be pcrsiiadwJ, [the I/;rd] com-
s me thus to turn away from him, judge


itni wtiitff »«r«


Iff »«r« tuMtmi tut tm tfHMMl 9U Oufli


ye In what light I ought to hold him who trei'
passes against himself, and against (iod. For do
not you yourselves condemn us when we come

down so gently upon you?

If however any man disregard the homis which
we inliiit, again let Christ instruct liini, saving,
" Whatsoever ye shall liind on carlli sliiifl he
tioiinil In heaven ; and whatsorvrr yc shull loose
on earth shall lie loosed in lieitven," (Malt, xvlll.
iH.) l''or though we ourselves he nilseralile Mini
good for nothing and worthy to lie desplsnl, ns
indiM'il we are ; yet are we not uverigiiig our-
selves nor warding off anger, lint lire luriiig for
your salv.'ilion,

lie inlluenced liy reverence, I beseech you.
and respect. l''or if a man liear witli u frlemi
wlien he attacks him more vehemently thiin ho
ought, ascertaining his obiei I, und that he docs
it with kind intention, and not out of insolence ;
mm h more f should lie bear with | a teacher when
ri-bnking him, and u teacher wlio does n(;t him-
self say these tilings ns of autliority, tior ns one
in the position of a ruler, but in tiint of u kindly
guardian. Kor wc do not sny tliese things ns
wishing to extiibit our authority, (for how c<juld
we, praying thnt wc may never come to llie trial
of them?) but grieving and lamenting for yoti.

i'orgive me then, und let no man disregnrd
ttie bimds of the (,'hurch. l''or it is not ninn
who liinds, but (,'hrist who has given unto us
this authority, nnd makes men lords of this m;
great dignity. For we indeed wish to use this
power for loosing; or rather, wc wish to have
no need even of that, for we wish that there
should not be any bound amons us — wc are
not so miserable and wretched fat that] even
thoiigl) some of us ut extreme good-for-noth'
ings. If however we be compelled [lO to act],
forgive us. I<'or it is not of our own accord, nor
wisliing it, but rather out of sorrow tor you that
are lioimd ttiat we put the chfllns around you.
lint if nny man despise these chains, the time
of judgment will come, which shall teoch him.
And what comes after I do not wish to speak
of, lest I should wound yimr minds. Vot in the
first place iniieed wc do not wish to be br0U|^t
into tills necessity ; but if we are so brought, we
fiiirili our own pnrt, we cost arotind the chaim.
And if any man burst thrrnigh them, I have don«
my part, ami am henceforth free from blame,
and thcni wilt have to give account to film who
commanded me to Mnd.

V(>t neither, when a king is sitting in publiCi
if any of the guard who stand beside him be
commanded to bind one of the attendants, and
to put the chains arotmd [him], and h« sboukl
not only thrust this man away, tnit also break
the bonds in pieces, Is it the guard who miStn
the insult, attd not much more the King wtio
gave the order. Kor if He claim u His own.


388


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV V


the things which are done to the faithful, much
more will He feel as if Himself insulted when
he is insulted who has been appointed to teach.

But God grant that none of those who are
over this Church should be driven to the neces-
sity of [inflicting] these bonds. For as it is a
good thing not to sin, so is it profitable to en-
dure reproof. Let us then endure the rebuke,
and earnestly endeavor not to sin ; and if we
should sin let us bear the rebuke. For as it is
an excellent thing not to be wounded, but, if
this should happen, to apply the remedy to the
wound, so also in this case.

But God forbid that any man should need
such remedies as these. " But we are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany


salvation, though we thus speak." (c. vi. 9,)
But we have discoursed more vehemently foi
the sake of greater security. For it is bette;
that I should be suspected by you of being i
harsh, and severe, and self-willed person, thar
that you should do things not approved of God
But we trust in God, that this reproof will noi
be unserviceable to you, but that ye will be sc
changed, that these discourses may be devotee
to encomiums on you and to praises : that wf
may all be counted worthy to attain to thos(
good things, which God hath promised to ther
that love Him in Christ Jesus our Lord, wit
whom to the Father together with the Hoi
Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ev(
and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY V.

Hebrews ii. 16, 17.


4


" For verily He taketh not hold of Angels, but of the
seed of Abraham He taketh hold.' Wherefore in
all things it behooved Him to be made like unto His
brethren."

[i.] Paul wishing to show the great kindness
of God towards man, and the Love which He
had for the human race, after saying : " Foras-
much then as the children were partakers of
blood and flesh. He also Himself likewise took
part of the same " (c. v. 14) — follows up the
subject in this passage. For do not regard
lightly what is spoken, nor think this merely a
slight [matter]. His taking on Him our flesh.
He granted not this to Angels ; " For verily He
taketh not hold of .Angels, but of the seed of
Abraham." What is it that he saith? He took
not on Him an Angel's nature, but man's. But
what is "He taketh hold of"? He did not
(he means) grasp that nature, which belongs to
Angels, but ours. But why did he not say, " He
took on Him," but used this expression, " He
taketh hold of "? It is derived from the figure
of persons pursuing those who turn away from
them, and doing everything to overtake them as
they flee, and to take hold of them as they are
bounding away. For when human nature was
fleeing from Him, and fleeing far away (for we
" were far off" — Eph. ii. 13), He pursued after
and overtook us. He showed that He has done
this only out of kindness, and love, and tender
care. As then when he saith, "Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation " (c. i.


> marg. of £. V.


14) — he shows His extreme interest in beha
of human nature, and that God makes gre.
account of it, so also in this place he sets
forth much more by a comparison, for he saj
" He taketh not hold of angels." For in ve
deed it is a great and a wonderful thing, ar
full of amazement that our flesh should sit (
high, and be adored by Angels and Archange
by the Cherubim and the Seraphim. For m
self having oftentimes thought upon this, I a
amazed at it, and imagine to myself great thin
concerning the human race. For I see that t
introductions are great and splendid, and tl
God has great zeal on behalf of our nature.

Moreover he said not " of men (simply) 1
taketh hold," but wishing to exalt them [t
Hebrews] and to show that their race is gn
and honorable, he says, "but of the seed
Abraham He taketh hold."

" Wherefore it behooved [Him] in all thii
to be made like unto His brethren." What
this, " in all things " ? He was bom (he meat
was brought up, grew, suffered all things nee
sary, at last He died. This is, " in all things
be made like unto His brethren." For after
had discoursed much concerning His majc
and the glory on high, he then begins conce
ing the dispensation. And consider with 1
great power [he doth this]. How he represe
Him as having great zeal " to be made like u
us " : which was a sign of much care. For li
ing said above, " Inasmuch then as the child
were partakers of flesh and blood. He also H
self in like manner took part of the sam(


lOMlLY v.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


389


this place also he says, "in all things to be

lade like unto His brethren." Which is all

ut saying, He that is so great. He that is " the

ghtness of His glory," He that is " the ex-

ress image of His person," He that " made the

Grids," He that " sitteth on the right hand of

le Father," He was willing and earnest to be-

3me our brother in all things, and for this

luse did He leave the angels and the other

swers, and come down to us, and took hold

us, and wrought innumerable good things.

e destroyed Death, He cast out the devil from

s tyranny, He freed us from bondage : not by

otherhood alone did He honor us, but also in

her ways beyond number. For He was will-

ig also to become our High Priest with the

ther : for he adds,

[2.] "That He might become a merciful and
ithful High Priest in things pertaining to God."
sr this cause (he means) He took on Him our
sh, only for Love to man, that He might have
ercy upon us. For neither is there any other
.use of the economy, but this alone. For He
w us, cast on the ground, perishing, tyrannized
er by Death, and He had compassion on us.
To make reconciliation," he says, " for the sins
the people. That He might be a merciful and
thfiil High Priest."

What is "faithful"? True, able. For the
III is a faithful High Priest, able to deliver
TO their sins those whose High Priest He is.
order then that He might offer a sacrifice
lie to purify us, for this cause He has become


Accordingly he added, "in things pertaining
God," — that is, for the sake of things in
ition to God. We were become altogether
emies to God, (he would say) condemned,
graded, there was none who should offer sac-
ice for us. He saw us in this condition, and
d compassion on us, not appointing a High
est for us, but Himself becoming a High
est. In what sense He was " faithful," he
ed [viz.], " to make reconciliation for the sins
the people."

'^ei. 18. "For," he says, "in that He hath

fered Himself being tempted. He is able to

cor them that are tempted." This is alto-

ler low and mean, and unworthy of God.

'or in that He hath suffered Himself," he says.

of Him who was made flesh that he here

iks, and it was said for the full assurance of

hearers, and on account of their weakness.

t is (he would say) He went through the

experience of the things which we have

'ered ; " now " He is not ignorant of our

ferings ; not only does He know them as

,, but as man also He has known them, by

trial wherewith He was tried ; He suffered

ich, He knows how to sympathize. And yet


God is incapable of suffering : but he describes
here what belongs to the Incarnation, as if he
had said. Even the very flesh of Christ suffered
many terrible things. He knows what tribula-
tion is ; He knows what temptation is, not less
than we who have suffered, for He Himself also
has suffered.

(What then is this, " He is able to succor
them that are tempted " ? It is as if one should
say. He will stretch forth His hand with great
eagerness. He will be sympathizing.)

[3.] Since they wished for something great,
and to have an advantage over the [converts]
from the Gentiles, he shows that they have an
advantage in this while he did not hurt those
from the Gentiles at all. In what respect now
is this ? Because of them is the salvation, be-
cause He took hold of them first, because fi-om
that race He assumed flesh. " For," he says,
" He taketh not hold of angels, but of the seed
of Abraham He taketh hold." Hereby he both
gives honor to the Patriarch, and shows also
what " the seed of Abraham " is. He reminds
them of the promise made to him, saying, " To
thee and to thy seed will I give this land " (Gen.
xiii. 15) ; showing by the very least thing, the
nearness [of the relationship] in that they were
" all of one." But that nearness was not great :
[so] he comes back to this, and thenceforward
dwells upon the dispensation which was after
the flesh, and says, Even the mere willing to be-
come man was a proof of great care and love ;
but now it is not this alone, but there are also
the undying benefits which are bestowed on us
through Him, for, he says, " to make reconcili-
ation for the sins of the people."

Why said he not, of the world, instead of " the
people"? for He bare away the sins of all.
Because thus far his discourse was concerning
them [the Hebrews]. Since the Angel also said
to Joseph, " Thou shalt call His name Jesus,
for He shall save His people." (Matt. i. 21.)
For this too ought to have taken place first, and
for this purpose He came, to save them and
then through them the rest, although the con-
trary came to pass. This also the Apostles said
at the first, " To you [God] having raised up His
Son, sent [Him] to bless you " (Acts iii. 26) :
and again, " To you was the word of this Salva-
tion sent." (Acts xiii. 26.) Here he shows the
noble birth of the Jews, in saying, " to make rec-
onciUation for the sins of the people." For a
while he speaks in this way. For that it is He
who forgives the sins of all men. He declared
both in the case of the paralytic, saying, " Thy
sins are forgiven " (Mark ii. 5) ; and also in
that of Baptism : for He says to the disciples,
" Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost." (Matt, xxviii. 19.)


390


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily V


[4.] But when Paul has once taken in hand the
flesh, he proceeds to utter all the lowly things,
without any fear : for see what he says next :

C. iii. I, 2. "Wherefore, holy brethren, par-
takers of the heavenly calling, consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession,
Christ Jesus, who was faithful to Him that
appointed [^or made] Him, as also Moses [was
faithful] in all His house."

Being about to place Him before Moses in
comparison, he led his discourse to the law of
the high-priesthood ; for they all had a high
esteem for Moses : moreover, he is already
beforehand casting down the seeds of the
superiority. Therefore he begins from the
flesh, and goes up to the Godhead, where
there was no longer any comparison. He
began from the flesh [from His Human na-
rure], by assuming for a time the equality,
and says, "as also Moses in all His house":
nor does he at first show His superiority lest
the hearer should start away, and straightway
stop his ears. For although they were believers,
yet nevertheless they still had strong feeling of
conscience as to Moses. "Who was faithful,"
he says, "to Him that made Him" — made
[Him] what? "Apostle and High Priest."
He is not speaking at all in this place of His
Essence, nor of His Godhead ; but so far con-
cerning human dignities.

"As also Moses in all His house," that is,
either among the people, or in the temple. But
here he uses the expression " in His house," just
as one might say, concerning those in the house-
hold ; even as some guardian and steward of a
household, so was Moses to the people. For that
by "house" he means the people, he added,
"whose house we are" (c. iii. 6) ; that is, we
are in His creation. Then [comes] the supe-
riority.

Ver. 3. " For this man was counted worthy of
more glory than Moses," (Again [he is speaking]
of the Flesh) , " inasmuch as he who hath builded
[the house] hath more honor than the house " ;
[Moses] himself also (he means) was of the
house. (Moreover he did not say. For this one
was a servant, but the Other a master, but he
covertly intimated it.) If the people were the
house and he was of the people, then he certainly
was of the household. For so also we are accus-
tomed to say, such an one is of such an one's
house. For here he is speaking of a house, not
of the temple, for the temple was not constructed
by God, but by men. But He that made' him
[is] God. Moses he means. And see how he
covertly shows the superiority. "Faithful," he
says, "in all His house," being himself also of


' KaravKtvatTai.

* wot^trai. Referring to what is implied in ver. a, that Moses
was faithful to Him that made him.


the house, that is, of the people. The builde;
has more honor than the house, yet he did no-
say " the artificer hath more honor than hi
works," but "he that hath builded the house
than the house." (Ver. 4.) "But He thatbuil
all things is God." Thou seest that he is speak
ing not about the temple but about the wholt
people.

Ver. 5. "And Moses verily [was] faithful ir
all His house, as a servant, for a testimony 0
those things which were to be spoken." Set
also another point of superiority, that [which i
derived] from the Son and the servants. Yo 1
see again that by the appellation of The Son, h
intimates true relationship. (Ver. 6.) "But Chris,
as a Son over His own house." Perceivest tho 1
how he separates the thing made and the make; |
the servant and the son? Moreover He indee i
enters into His Father's property as a master, bi '
the other as a servant. 1

"Whose" [i.e.] God's "house are we, if w |
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of th |
hope firm unto the end." Here again he encoui ,
ages them to press forward nobly, and not to fall |
for we shall be the "house " of God (he says)
as Moses was, " if we hold fast our confident |
and our rejoicing firm unto the end." He how |
ever (he would say) that is distressed in hij
trials, and who falls, doth not glory : he that i
ashamed, he that hideth himself, has no conii'
dence, he that is perplexed doth not glory.

And then he also commends them, saying,
we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing
the hope firm unto the end," implying that the
had even made a beginning ; but that there is nee
of the end, and not simply to stand, but to hav
their hope firm "in full assurance of faith," with
out being shaken by their trials.

[5.] And be not astonished, that the [words
" Himself being tempted" (c. ii. 18) are spoke
more after the manner of men. For if tb
Scripture says of the Father, who was not mad
flesh, "The Lord looked down from heaver
and beheld all the sons of men" (Ps. xiv. 3
that is, accurately acquainted Himself with a
things ; and again, " I will go down, and sei
whether they do altogether according to the ci
of them" (Gen. xviii. 21); and again, "Go
cannot endure the evil ways of men " (Gen. v
5?), the divine Scripture shows forth tt'
greatness of His wrath : much more, who eve
suffered in the flesh, these things are said
Christ. For since many men consider exp«
rience the most reliable means of knowledge, I
wishes to show that He that has suffered kno»i
what human nature suffers.

" Whence' holy brethren " (he says " whence
instead of "for this cause "), "partakers of a


' 66tv,


)MILY v.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


391


^venly calling " — (seek nothing here, if ye

\/e been called yonder — yonder is the reward,

jider the recompense. What then ?) " Con-

ler the Apostle and High Priest of our pro-

jsion, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to Him

\t appointed Him, as also Moses [was faith-

i] in all His house." (What is " who was

hful to Him that appointed Him ? " it is, well

posed, protecting what belongs to Him, not

>wing them to be lightly carried away, " as

) Moses in all His house ") that is, know who

Wr High Priest is, and what He is, and ye will

i(;d no other consolation nor encouragement.

iw he calls Him " Apostle," on account of His

i.'ing been " sent," and " high priest of our

cfession," that is of the Faith. This One also

r< entrusted with a people, as the other with

t leadership of a people, but a greater one,

jl upon higher grounds.

' For a testimony of those things which shall

xspoken." What meanest thou? Doth God

the witness of man ? Yes, certainly. For

' all to witness heaven and earth and hills

viiig by the prophet, "Hear, O heaven, and

'-.IT, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken"

. i. 2 — and " Hear ye ravines,' founda-

f the earth, for the Lord hath a controversy

lis people" — Mic. vi. 2), much more

;i 1 ; that is, that they may be witnesses, when

h n selves [the Jews] shameless.

'er. 6. " But Christ as a Son." The one

a.'s care of the property of others, but this One

ifiis own. "And the rejoicing of the hope."

\ 1 said he " of the hope." For since the good

were all in hope, and yet we ought so " to

fast," as even now to glory as for things

had already come to pass : for this cause

.-.)s, " the rejoicing of the hope."

Ind adds, " let us hold it firm unto the end."

[V>m. viii. 24.) For " by hope we are saved " ;

f ierefore " we are saved by hope," and " are

•-•'ig: with patience " (Rom. viii. 25), let us not

ved at present things, nor seek now those

ive been promised afterwards ; " For " (he

' hope which is seen is not hope." For

he good things are great, we cannot re-

ihem here in this transitory life. With

bject then did He even tell us of them

hand, when He was not about to give them

In order that by the promise He might

1 our souls, that by the engagement He

strengthen our zeal, that He might anoint

(ring us for our contests] and stir up our

For this cause then all these things were


Chrys. had mentioned hills (Soufoi) as called to witness by
the verse preceding this (Mic. vi. i) occur the words,
^ ft:'/ls hear Thy voice"; and this verse itself runs, " Hear
C/Soucol) according to tlie Alexandrine MSS. of the LXX.
aountaias " (opij according to the Vatican) , " the judgment
rd, and ye ravines," &c.


[6.] Let us not then be troubled, let no man
be troubled, when he seeth the wicked prosper-
ing. The recompense is not here, either oi
wickedness or of virtue ; and if in any instance
there be either of wickedness or of virtue, yet
is it not according to desert, but merely as it
were a taste of the judgment, that they who
believe not the resurrection may yet even by
things that happen here be brought to their
senses. When then we see a wicked man rich,
let us not be cast down ; when we see a good man
suffering, let us not be troubled. For yonder
are the crowns, yonder the punishments.

Yea and in another point of view, it is not
possible either that a bad man should be alto-
gether bad, but he may have some good things
also : nor again that a good man should be alto-
gether good, but he may also have some sins.
When therefore the wicked man prospers, it is
for evil on his own head, that having here re-
ceived the reward of those few good things, he
may hereafter be utterly punished yonder : for
this cause does he receive his recompense in
this life. And happy is he most of all who is
punished here, that having put away all his sins,
he may depart approved, and pure, and without
having to be called to account. And this Paul
teacheth us when he says, " For this cause many
[are] weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep." (i Cor. xi. 30.) And again, " I have
delivered such an one to Satan." (i Cor. v. 5.)
And the prophet says, " for she hath received
of the Lord's hand her sins double " (Isa. xl. 2) ;
and again David, " Behold mine enemies that
they are multiplied above the hairs of my head,'
and [with] an unjust hatred have they hated
me": "and forgive Thou all my sins." (Ps.
XXV. 19, 18.) And again another: "O Lord,
our God, give peace unto us ; for Thou hast ren-
dered all things to us again." (Isa. xxvi. 12.)

These however are [the words] of one show-
ing that good men receive here the punishments
of their sins. But where are the wicked [men-
tioned] who receive their good things here, and
there are utterly punished ? Hear Abraham say-
ing to the rich man, " Thou didst receive good
things," and "Lazarus evil things." (Lukexvi.
25.) What good things? For in this place by
saying "thou receivest,'" and not thou " hadst
taken,* " he shows that it was according to what
was due to him that each was treated, and that
the one was in prosperity, and the other in ad-
versity. And he says, " Therefore he is com-
forted " here (for thou seest him pure from sins)
" and thou art tormented." Let us not then be
perplexed when we see sinners well off here ;
but when we ourselves are afflicted, let us rejoice.


' The words " above the hairs of my head " arc part of another
Psalm, xl. 13, or Ixix. 4.

3 aircAo^cv. * cAo^cs.


392


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILI


For this very thing is paying off the penalty ' of
sins.

[7.] Let us not then seek relaxation: for
Christ promised tribulation to His disciples :
and Paul says, "All who will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim.
iii. 12.) No noble-spirited wrestler, when in the
lists,' seeks for baths, and a table full of food
and wine. This is not for a wrestler, but for
a sluggard. For the wrestler contendeth with
dust, with oil, with the heat of the sun's ray,
with much sweat, with pressure and constraint.
This is the time for contest and for fighting,
therefore also for being wounded, and for being
bloody and in pain. Hear what the blessed Paul
says, " So fight I, not as one that beateth the
air." (i Cor. ix. 26.) Let us consider that
our whole life is in combats, and then we shall
never seek rest, we shall never feel it strange
when we are afflicted : no more than a boxer
feels it strange, when he combats. There is
another season for repose. By tribulation we
must be made perfect.

And even if there be no persecution, nor trib-
ulation, yet there are other afflictions which befall
us every day. And if we do not bear these, we
should scarcely endure those. " There hath no
temptation taken you," it is said, " but such as
is common to man." (i Cor. x. 13.) Let us
then pray indeed to God that we may not come
into temptation ; but if we come into it, let us
bear it nobly. For that indeed is the part of
prudent men, not to throw themselves upon
dangers ; but this of noble men and true phi-
losophers. Let us not then lightly cast ourselves
upon [dangers] , for that is rashness ; nor yet,
if led into them, and called by circumstances,
let us give in, for that is cowardice. But if
indeed the Gospel ^ call us, let us not refuse ;
but in a simple case, when there is no reason,
nor need, nor necessity which calls us in the
fear of God, let us not rush in. For this is
mere display, and useless ambition. But should
any of those things which are injurious to religion
occur, then though it be necessary to endure ten
thousand deaths, let us refuse nothing. Chal-
lenge not trials, when thou findest the things
that concern godliness prosper as thou desirest.
Why draw down needless dangers which bring
no gain ?

These things I say, because I wish you to
observe the laws of Christ who commands us
to " pray that we enter not into temptation "
(Matt. xxvi. 41), and commands us to "take
up the cross and follow " Him. (Matt. xvi. 24.)
For these things are not contradictory, nay they
are rather exceedingly in harmony. Do thou
be so prepared as is a valiant soldier, be con-


• Ki^iniyna,


tinually in thine armor, sober, watchful, (
looking for the enemy : do not however bi
wars, for this is not [the act] of a soldier bu
a mover of sedition. But if on the other h
the trumpet of godliness call thee, go forth
mediately, and make no account of thy life,
enter with great eagerness into the contests, bi
the phalanx of the adversaries, bruise the fac
the devil, set up thy trophy. If however go
ness be in nowise harmed, and no one lay w
our doctrines (those I mean which relate to
soul), nor compel us to do anything displea;
to God, do not be officious.

The life of the Christian must be full of bl(
sheddings ; I say not in shedding that of otl
but in readiness to shed one's own. Let us
pour out our own blood, when it is for Ch
sake, with as great readiness as one would
out water (for the blood which flows about
body is water), and let us put off our flesh
as much good temper, as one even would a
ment. And this shall we do, if we be not b(
to riches, if not to houses, if not to affectioi
we be detached from all things. For if
who live this life of [earthly] soldiers bid fari
to all things, and whithersoever war calls t
there present themselves, and make joun
and endure all things with ready mind ; 11
more ought we, the soldiers of Christ, s i
have prepared ourselves, and to set oursi
firm against the war of the passions.

[8.] There is no persecution now, and
grant there may never be : but there is an(
war, that of the desire of money, of envy, 0
passions. Paul, describing this war, says, '
wrestle not againstflesh and blood." (Eph. vi
This war is ever at hand. Therefore he -w-
us to stand ever armed. Because he wish(
to stand ever armed, he says, " Stand, h:
girded yourselves about." (Eph. vi. 14.) V
itself also belongs to the time present, anci
presses that we ought ever to be armed,
great is the war through the tongue, great
through the eyes ; this then we must keep ■
— great [too] is that of the lusts.

Therefore he begins at that point to anr
soldier of Christ : for " stand," saith he, " h
your loins girt about," and he added '
truth." (Eph. vi. 14.) Why "with tn
Because lust is a mockery and a lie : »
fore the prophet says, " My loins are filled il
mockings." (Ps. xxxviii. 7.) The thing '"
pleasure, but a shadow of pleasure. " 1 i
your loins," he says, " girt about with tr
that is, with true pleasure, with tempi
with orderly behavior. For this cause he vi
this advice, knowing the unreasonableni '
sin, and wishing that all our members ;
be hedged round ; for " unjust anger," it i
" shall not be guiltless." (Ecclus. i. 22.)


lOMILY VI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


393


Moreover he wishes us to have around us a
reastplate and a buckler. For desire is a wild
east which easily springs forth, and we shall
ave need of walls and fences innumerable, to
vercome, and to restrain it. And for this cause
rod has built this part [of our body] especially
ith bones, as with a kind of stones, placing
•ound it a support, so that [desir,e] might not
; any time, having broken or cut throughi easily
jure the whole man. For it is a fire (it is said)
id a great tempest, and no other part of the
jdy could endure this violence. And the sons
if the physicians too say that for this cause the
ings have been spread under the heart, so that
le heart being itself [put] into something soft
id tender, by beating as it were into a sort of
)onge, may continually be rested, and not [by
riking] against the resisting and hard sternum,

(cive hurt through the violence of its beatings.

c iiave need therefore of a strong breastplate,
1 as to keep this wild beast alway quiet.


We have need also of an helmet ; for since
the reasoning faculty is there, and from this it is
possible for us either to be saved, when what is
right is done, or it is possible for us to be ruined
— therefore he says, " the helmet of salvation."
(Eph. vi. 17.) For the brain is indeed by na-
ture tender, and therefore is covered above with
the skull, as with a kind of shell. And it is to
us the cause of all things both good and evil,
knowing what is fitting, or what is not so. Yea
and our feet too and our hands need armor,
not these hands, nor these feet, but as before
those of the soul — the former by being em-
ployed about what is right, the latter, that they
may walk where they ought. Thus then let us
thoroughly arm ourselves, and we shall be able
to overcome our enemies, and to wreathe our-
selves with the crown in Christ Jesus our Lord,
with whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY VI.


Hebrews iii. 7-1 1.


■Aherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye will
liear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation in the day of temptation in the wilder-
ness, when your fathers tempted Me, proved Me,
and saw My works forty years. Wherefore I was
^'rieved with that generation, and said, They do
alway err in their heart, and they have not known
My ways. So^ I sware in My wrath they shall not
enter into My rest."

[ 1 .] Paul, having treated of hope, and having

f d that " We are His house, if we hold fast the

iiifidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm

\U) the end " (c. iii. ver. 6) ; next shows that

\ ought to look forward with firmness, and

1 proves this from the Scriptures. But be

; cntive, because he has expressed this in a

iinner somewhat difficult and not readily to

1| comprehended. And therefore we must first

nke our own statements, and after we have

' Hy explained the whole argument, then make

the words of the Epistle. For you will no

r need us, if you have understood the

c of the Apostle.

. jHis discourse was concerning Hope, and that

iliehooves us to hope for the things to come,

a 1 that for those who have toiled here there

"1 assuredly be some reward and fruit and

■.hment. This then he shows from the

het; and what says he? "Wherefore as


the Holy Ghost saith. To-day if ye will hear
His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation, in the day of temptation in the
wilderness : when your fathers tempted Me,
proved Me, and saw My works forty years.
Wherefore I was grieved with that generation,
and said, they do alway err in their heart, and
they have not known My ways. So ^ I sware in
My wrath, they shall not enter into My rest."

He says that there are " three " rests : one,
that of the Sabbath, in which God rested from
His works ; the second, that of Palestine, into
which when the Jews had entered they would be
at rest from their hardships and labors ; the third,
that which is Rest indeed, the kingdom of
Heaven; which those who obtain, do indeed
rest from their labors and troubles. Of these
three then he makes mention here.

And why did he mention the three, when he is
treating of the one only? That he might show
that the prophet is speaking concerning this one.
For he did not speak (he say's) concerning the
first. For how could he, when that had taken
place long before? Nor yet again concerning
the second, that in Palestine. For how could
he? For he says, "They shall not enter into My
rest." It remains therefore that it is this third.

[2.] But it is necessary also to unfold the


394


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV


history, to make the argument more clear. For
when they had come forth out of Egypt, and
had accompUshed a long journey, and had re-
ceived innumerable proofs of the power of God,
both in Egypt, and in the Red Sea (of. Acts
vii. 36), and in the wilderness, they determined
to send spies to search out the nature of the
land ; and these went and returned, admiring
indeed the country, and saying that it abounded
in noble fruits, nevertheless it was a country of
strong and invincible men : and the ungrate-
ful and senseless Jews, when they ought to have
called to mind the former blessings of God, and
how when they were hemmed in in the midst of
the armies of so many Egyptians, He rescued
them from their perils, and made them masters
of their enemies' spoils ; and again, in the wil-
derness He clave the rock, and bestowed on
them abundance of waters, and gave them the
manna, and the other wonderful things which
He wrought ; [when they ought, I say, to have
remembered this,] and to have trusted in God,
they considered none of these things, but being
struck with terror, just as if nothing had been
done, they said, we wish to go back again into
Egypt, " for God hath brought us out thither "
(it is said) " to slay us, with our children and
wives." (Cf. Num. xiv. 3.) God therefore
being angry that they had so quickly cast off the
memory of what had been done, sware that that
generation, which had said these things, should
not enter into the Rest ; and they all perished
in the wilderness. When David then, he says,
speaking at a later period, and after these events,
after that generation of men, said, " To-day, if
ye will hear His voice, harden not your hearts,"
that ye may not suffer the same things which
your forefathers did, and be deprived of the
Rest ; he evidently [said this] as of some [future]
rest. For if they had received their Rest (he
says) why does He again say to them, "To-day
if ye will hear His voice harden not your hearts,"
as your fathers did? What other rest then is
there, except the kingdom of Heaven, of which
the Sabbath was an image and type ?

[3.] Next having set down the whole testi-
mony (and this is, " To-day if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provo-
cation in the day of temptation in the wilderness,
when your fathers tempted Me, proved Me, and
saw My works forty years. Wherefore I was
grieved with that generation, and said. They do
alway err in their heart, and they have not
known My ways. So I sware in My wrath, they
shall not enter into My rest "), he then adds :

Ver. 12. "Take heed, brethren, lest there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in de-
parting from the living God." For from hard-
ness unbelief ariseth : and as in bodies, the parts
that have become callous and hard do not yield


to the hands of the physicians, so also souls
are hardened yield not to the word of C
For it is probable besides that some even
believed as though the things which had t
done were not true.

Therefore he says, " Take heed lest there
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in dep
ing from the living God." For since the a
ment from the future is not so persuasive
from the past, he reminds them of the hist
in which they had wanted faith. For if ;
fathers (he says) because they did not hop*
they ought to have hoped, suffered these thi
much more will you. Since to them also is
word addressed : for, " To-day " (he says
" ever," so long as the world lasts.

[4.] Ver. 13. Wherefore "exhort ye one
other daily, while it is called to-day." Th:
edify one another, raise yourselves up : lest
same things should befall you. " Lest any
of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of
Seest thou that sin produces unbelief? F'
unbelief brings forth an evil life, so also a
"when it is come into a depth of evils, becoi
contemptuous"' (Prov. xviii. 3), and hf
become contemptuous it endures not eve
believe, in order thereby to free itself from
For "they said" (one says), "The Lord
not see, neither shall the God of Jacob reg£
(Ps. xciv. 7.) And again, "Our lips are
own : who is Lord over us? " (Ps. xii. 4) ;
again, " Wherefore hath the wicked man
voked God to wrath?" (Ps. x. 13) ; and a
" The fool hath said in his heart, there
God ; they are corrupt and become abomir
in their doings." (Ps. xiv. i.) "There i
fear of God before his eyes, for he was deci
before Him, to find out^ his iniquity an
hate." (Ps. xxxvi. i, 2.) Yea and Christ
says this same thing, " Every one that d
evil, hateth the light and cometh not to
light." (John iii. 20.)

Then he adds (ver. 14), " For we have
made partakers of Christ." What is this,
have been made partakers of Christ"?
partake of Him (he means) ; we were i
One, we and He — since He is the Head
we the body, " fellow-heirs and of the
body ; we are one body, of His flesh and o
bones." (Eph. iii. 6 ; Rom. xii. 5 ; Eph. v

" If we hold fast the beginning of our (
dence [or, the principle of our subsister
steadfast unto the end." What is "the
ciple of our subsistence " ? The faith by v
we stand, and have been brought into beinji
were made to exist, as one may say.

[5.] Then he adds (ver. 15), "Whem


1 KaTa<ftpov€l. * Tov fifpeiv.

3 apj^rjv T^? i'lroo'Taa' «(*)?. St. Chrys. understands vm
its prior sense, as "subsistence," "subsisting," "being 1
into real existence."


iOMILY VI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.-


395


aid,' To-day if ye hear His voice, harden not
rouT hearts, as in the provocation." This is a
ransposition,^ " when it is said, To-day if ye
iear His voice, harden not your hearts." [It
must be read thus :]

I (Ch. iv. I, 2.) " Let us fear lest a promise
leing left us of entering into His rest, any of
ou should seem to come short of it ; for to us
as the Gospel preached ' as well as unto them,
hen it is said, To-day if ye hear His voice "
for " To-day " is " at every time " *) .
Then [he adds] " but the word of hearing did
tot profit them, as they were not mixed' by
lith with them that heard." How did it not
rofit ? Then wishing to alarm them, he shows
le same thing by what he says :

(Ch. iii. 16-19.) "For some when they had
eard did provoke, howbeit not all that came
ut of Egypt by Moses : And with whom was
le grieved forty years ? Was it not with them
lat had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wil-
erness? And to whom swear He that they
lould not enter into His rest, but to them that
'3lieved not ? So '' we see, that they could not
Iter in because of unbelief." After again re-
Sating the testimony, he adds also the question,
hich makes the argument clear. For he said
le repeats) , " To-day if ye hear His voice,
irden not your hearts, as in the provocation."
f whom does he speak (he says) [as] having
;en hardened? Of whom [as] not believing?
it not of the Jews?

Now what he says is to this effect. They also
ard, as we hear : but no profit came to them,
o not suppose then that by " hearing " what is
oclaimed ye will be profited ; seeing that they
';i0 heard, but derived no benefit because they
■^id not believe.

^ I Caleb then and Joshua, because they agreed
it with those who did not believe, escaped the
i(ngeance that was sent forth against them.
Ad see how admirably he said, not. They did
J t agree, but, " they were not mixed " — that
" they stood apart, but not factiously when all
t: others had one and the same mind. Here
• -i ieems to me that a faction too is hinted at.'
[6.] (Ch. iv. 3.) For " we who have believed,"
says, " do enter into rest." From what this
evident, he adds : " as He said, as I have
'sbm in My wrath, if they shall enter into My


■ T(p Ae'yfffOot, " in its being said." ' leaft' vjripQarov.

:i.tt is, these words are addressed to us as well as to them.

yKeKpafjiefov^. Sav. and Ben- have avyiteKpaixevrji (i.e.

The received text of the New Testament hsLS avyKiKpafit-

fhe word not being mixed." [This is also given in the margin

li. and of the Revisers.] Lachmann [and Tisch., W. H., and

-rKevisers] read iTvyKeKepaiTti-evov<;, which is the reading of some

■■*6. of St. Chrys. » And.

" ^ ftiviTTtirdai, That is, is indirectly condemned, by the contrast

■ 'onduct of Caleb and Joshua. St. Chrys. reverses the expres-

the Epistle, and says, " Caleb and Joshtia were not mixed

"^ unbelievers," when the Apostle had said, *' the unbelievers

w: not mixed with them,**


rest : although the works were finished from the
foundation of the world." This indeed, is not
evidence that we shall enter in, but that they
did not enter in. What then? Thus far he
aims to show that as that rest does not hinder
the speaking of another rest, so neither does
this [exclude] that of Heaven. Up to this
point then, he wishes to show that they [the
Israelites] did not attain to the rest. For be-
cause he means this, he says (ver. 4, 5), " For
he spake in a certain place of the seventh day
on this wise. And God did rest the seventh day
from all His works. And in this place again,
If they shall enter into My rest." Thou seest
how that doth not hinder this from being a rest ?

Ver. 6, 7. " Seeing therefore it remaineth "
(he says) " that some must enter therein, and
they to whom it was first preached entered not
in because of unbelief : again he limiteth a cer-
tain day, saying in David, To-day, after so long
a time; as it has been said before."' But what
is it that he means ? " Seeing then " (he means)
that "some must" certainly "enter in," and
" they did not enter in." And that an entrance
is proclaimed, and that " some must enter in,"
let us hear from what this is clear. Because
after so many years (he says) David again says :
"To-day if ye will hear His voice, harden not
your hearts " (ver. 8), " For if Joshua had given
them rest he would not afterward have spoken
of another day." It is evident, that he says
these things, as of persons who are to attain
some recompense.

[7.] Ver. 9. "There remaineth therefore a
rest' for the people of God." Whence [does
this appear] ? From the exhortation, " Harden
not your hearts": for if there were no rest,
these exhortations would not have been given.
Neither would they have been exhorted not to
do the same things [with the Jews] lest they
should suffer the same things, unless they were
about to suffer the same. But how were they
who were in possession of Palestine about to
suffer the same things [i.e. exclusion from the
rest] unless there were some other rest ?

And well did he conclude the argument. For
he said not rest but "Sabbath-keeping" ; calling
the kingdom " Sabbath-keeping," by the appro-
priate name, and that which they rejoiced in
and were attracted by. For as, on the Sabbath
He commands to abstain from all evil things ;
and that those things only which relate to the
Service of God should be done, which things
the Priests were wont to accomplish, and what-
soever profits the soul, and nothing else ; so
also [will it be] then. However it is not he


• npo€ipriTai. This is the correct reading of the sacred text Heb.
iv. 7: for which the common editions [i.e. the_ Textiis Heceptus^
All critical editors have irpoeip. — F. G.] hav« <ip7)Ttti, '* it is s*i4.**

* aa^^artcr^oT,


396


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOM


who spoke thus, but what? (Ver. io),"For
he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased
from his own works, as God [did] from His."
As God ceased from His works, he says, so he
that hath entered into His rest [hath ceased].
For since his discourse to them was concerning
rest, and they were desirous to hear when this
would be, he concluded the argument with this.

[8.] And [he said] "To-day,"' that they
might never be without hope. " Exhort one
another daily," he says, [" while it is called to-
day,"] that is, even if a man have sinned, as
long as it is " To-day," he has hope : let no
man then despair so long as he lives. Above
all things indeed, he says, " let there not be an
evil heart of unbelief." (c. iii. 12.) But even
suppose there should be, let no man despair,
but let him recover himself; for as long as we
are in this world, the "To-day" is in season.
But here he means not unbelief only, but also
murmurings : " whose carcasses," he says, " fell
in the wilderness." ^

Then, lest any think that they will simply be
deprived of rest only, he adds also the punish-
ment, saying (c. iv. 12), "For the Word of
God is quick, and powerful ; and sharper than
any two-edged sword, and pierceth even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow : and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart." Here he
is speaking of Hell and of punishment. " It
pierceth " (he says) into the secrets of our
heart, and cutteth asunder the soul. Here it
is not the falling of carcasses nor, as there, the
being deprived of a country, but of a heavenly
kingdom ; and being delivered to an everlasting
hell, and to undying punishment and vengeance.

(Ch. iii. 13.) " But exhort " one another." Ob-
serve the gentleness and mildness [of the expres-
sion] : he said not " Rebuke," but " Exhort."
Thus we are required to bear ourselves towards
those who are straightened by affliction. This
he says also in writing to the Thessalonians,
" Warn them that are unruly " (i Thess. v. 14),
but in speaking of the feeble-minded, not so,
but what ? " Comfort the feeble-minded, sup-
port the weak, be patient toward all men " ; that
is, do not cease to hope ; do not despair. For
he that does not encourage one who is straight-
ened by affliction, makes him more hardened.

[9.] "Lest any of you," he says, "be hard-
ened by the deceitfulness of sin." He means
either the deceit of the devil (for it is indeed a
deceit, not to look for the things to come, to


* St. Chrys. returns here to c. iii. 13, connecting the** To-day if
ye hear His voice, harden not your heart," with " Exhort one another
daily while it is called To-day '*: as he had said, *' to-day is at every
time,"

' The words of the Apostle, c. iii. 17, are those of Num. xiv.
29, &c., where murmuring is the sin specified.

' irapofcaAcire. The word includes the idea of comforting and
encotiraging as well as of exhorting.


think that we are without responsibility, ai
we shall not pay the penalty for our deed:
neither will there be a resurrection) ; or
other sense insensibility [or] despairing
ceit. For to say, ' What is there left ?
sinned once for all, I have no hope of n
ing myself,' is deceit.

Then he suggests hopes to them, sayin
14) , " We are made partakers of Christ " ;
saying. He that so loved us. He that coui
worthy of so great things, as to make i
Body, will not suffer us to perish. Let i
sider (he says) of what we have been t
worthy : we and Christ are One : let us n
distrust Him. And again, he hints at tha
had been said in another place, that
suffer, we shall also reign with Him." (
ii. 12.) For this is [implied in] "We ar
partakers," we partake of the same things
of Christ also partakes.

He urges them on from the good
" for we are," he says, " partakers of (
Then, again, from gloomy ones (c. iv. iV
us fear, lest at any time a promise being
of entering into His rest, any of you shoul
to come short of it." For that is manifi
confessed.

(Ch. iii. 9.) "They proved Me," H
"and saw My works forty years." See
that it is not right to call God to accoi
whether He defend [our cause] or not.
Him ? For against those [of old] he no\
this charge, that " they tempted God
that will have proof either of His powe
His providence, or of His tender care, d
yet believe, either that He is powerful or
man. This he hints also in writing tl
[Hebrews] who probably already wist
their trials, to obtain experience and
evidence of His power and His provideni
for them. Thou seest that in all cases tli
ocation and the angering arises from unl'

What then does he say? (c. iv. 9.)
reraaineth therefore a rest for the pe
God." And see how he has summed
whole argument. " He sware," saith
those former ones, " that they should n
into " the " rest," and they did not (
Then long after their time discoursing
Jews, he says, " Harden not your he:
your fathers, showing that there is anot
For of Palestine we have not to speak :
were already in possession of it. Nor c
speaking of the seventh [day] ; for s
was not discoursing about that which h;
place long before. It follows therefore
hints at some other, that which is rest ii

[10.] For that is indeed rest, wher
sorrow and sighing are fled away " (I
10) : where there are neither cares, no


21


Homily VI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


397


>or struggle, nor fear stunning and shaking the

oul ; but only that fear of God which is full of

lelight. There there is not, " In the sweat of

hy face thou shalt eat thy bread," nor " thorns

nJ thistles" (Gen. iii. 19, 18) ; no longer, " In

orrow thou shalt bring forth children, and to

hy husband shall be thy desire and he shall rule

er thee." (Gen. iii. 16.) All is peace, joy,

ladness, pleasure, goodness, gentleness. There

i no jealousy, nor envy, no sickness, no death

whether of the body, or that of the soul. There

no darkness nor night ; all [is] day, all light,

11 things are bright. It is not possible to be

'eary, it is not possible to be satiated : we shall

hvays persevere in the desire of good things.'

Would you that I should also give you some

nage of the condition there ? It is impossible.

;ut yet, so far as it is possible, I will try to give

ou some image. Let us look up into the heaven,

■hen without any intervening cloud it shows forth

s crown [of stars] . Then when we have dwelt

( )ng on the beauty of its appearance, let us think

) lat we too shall have a pavement, not indeed

I ich [as this], but as much more beautiful as

il le gold is than the clay, and [let us think] on

f( le higher roof which is again beyond ; then on

le Angels, the Archangels, the infinite multitude

H " unbodied powers, the very palace of God

f self, the Throne of the Father.

Qi But language is too weak (as I said) to set

I rth the whole. Experience is necessary, and

3, e knowledge which [cometh] by experience.

ell me, how was it (think you) with Adam in

,j iradise ? This course of life is far better than

1) at, as much as heaven [is better] than earth.

J, [11.] But however let us search after another

( lage still. If it happened that he who now

,j igns was master of the whole world, and then

I IS troubled neither by wars nor by cares, but

.J IS honored only and lived delicately ; and had

ij :ge tributes, and on every side gold flowed in

jj him, and he was looked up to, what feelings

. ) you think he would have, if he saw that all

„ e wars in all parts of the world had ceased ?

,ij mething such as this will it be. But rather I

jl, ve not even yet arrived at that image [which

ji ieek] ; therefore I must search after another

J, Consider then, I pray you : for as some royal

i,° ild, so long as he is in the womb, has no sense

,jj] anything, but should it happen that he sud-

nly came forth from thence, and ascended the

jc
s


* [The insatiate yet satisfied;
The full yet craving still.
Vikm 0/ Bernard dt Mirlaix, translated by Dr. Nealc, p.


n


royal throne, not gradually, but all at once re-
ceived possession of all things ; so is it as regards
this [present] and that [future] state. Or, if
some captive, having suffered innumerable evils,
should be caught up at once to the royal throne.

But not even thus have I attained to the
image exactly. For here indeed whatever good
things a person may obtain, even shouldst thou
say the kingdom itself, during the first day in-
deed his desires are in full vigor, and for the
second too, and the third, but as time goes on,
he continues indeed to have pleasure, but not so
great. For whatever it be, it always ceases from
familiarity with it. But yonder it not only does
not diminish, but even increases. For consider
how great a thing it is, that a soul after depart-
ing thither, should no longer look for an end of
those good things, nor yet change, but increase,
and life that has no end, and life set free from
all danger, and from all despondency and care,
full of cheerfulness and blessings innumerable.

For if when we go out into a plain, and there
see the soldiers' tents fixed with curtains, and
the spears, and helmets, and bosses of the buck-
lers glittering, we are lifted up with wonder ; but
if we also chance to see the king himself running
in the midst or even riding with golden armor,
we think we have everything ; what thinkest
thou [it will be] when thou seest the everlasting
tabernacles of the saints pitched in heaven ? (For
it is said, " They shall receive you into their
everlasting tabernacles " — Luke xvi. 9) when
thou seest each one of them beaming with light
above the rays of the sun, not from brass and
steel, but from that glory whose gleamings the
eye of man cannot look upon ? And this indeed
with respect to the men. But what, if one were
to speak of the thousands of Angels, of Archan-
gels, of Chenibim, of Seraphim, of thrones, of
dominions, of principalities, of powers, whose
beauty is inimitable, passing all understanding?

But how far shall I go in pursuing what can-
not be overtaken? " For eye hath not seen," it
is said, "nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God
hath prepared for them that love Him." (i
Cor. ii. 9.) Therefore nothing is more pitiable
than those who miss, nor anything more blessed
than those who attain. Let us then be of the
blessed, that we may attain to the everlasting
good things that are in Christ Jesus our Lord,
with whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.


'5-J


398


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOM


HOMILY VII.

Hebrews iv. 11-13.


" Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man
fall after the same example of unbelief. For the
word of God is quiclc [i.e. living] and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart, neither is there any creature
that is not manifest in His sight, but all things are
naked and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom
we have to do."

[i.] Faith is indeed great and bringeth sal-
vation, and without it, it is not possible ever to
be saved. It suffices not however of itself to
accomplish this, but there is need of a right con-
versation also. So that on this account Paul
also exhorts those who had already been counted
worthy of the mysteries ; saying, " Let us labor
to enter into that rest." " Let us labor " (he
says), Faith not sufficing, the life also ought to
be added thereto, and our earnestness to be
great ; for truly there is need of much earnest-
ness too, in order to go up into Heaven. For if
they who suffered so great distress in the Wilder-
ness, were not counted worthy of [the promised]
land, and were not able to attain [that] land,
because they murmured and because they com-
mitted fornication : how shall we be counted
worthy of Heaven, if we live carelessly and in-
dolently ? We then have need of much earnest-
ness.

And observe, the punishment does not extend
to this only, the not entering in (for he said not,
" Let us labor to enter into the rest," lest we
fail of so great blessings), but he added what
most of all arouses men. What then is this?
" Lest any man fall, after the same example of
unbehef." What means this? It means that we
should have our mind, our hope, our expecta-
tion, yonder, lest we should fail. For that [oth-
erwise] we shall fail, the example shows, " lest
[&c.] after the same," he says.

[2.] In the next place, lest hearing [the
words] " after the same [example]," thou
shouldest think that the punishment is the
same, hear what he adds ; " For the Word of
God is quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two-edged sword, and pierceth even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart." In these
words he shows that He, the Word of God,
wrought the former things also, and lives, and
has not been quenched.'


' [St. Chiys. here understands the K&fot of the Second Person of


Do not then when hearing the Wori
of it lightly. For " He is sharper," 1
" than a sword." Observe His condesc
and hence consider why the proph*
needed to speak of saber " and bow and
" If ye turn not," it is said, " He will w
sword, He hath bent His bow and
ready." (Ps. vii. 12.) For if now, aftei
a time, and after their being perfected,* H
smite down by the name of the Word a
needs these expressions in order to ;
superiority [arising] from the compai
the Gospel with the law] : much more
old].

" Piercing," he says, " even to the
asunder of soul and spirit." What is th
hinted at something more fearful. Ei
He divides the spirit from the soul, or
pierces even through them disembodiec
a sword through bodies only. Here h
that the soul also is punished, and that
oughly searches out the most inwarc
piercing wholly through the whole man

" And is a discerner of the thoughts
tents of the heart, neither is there any
that is not manifest in His sight."
words most of all he terrified them
not (he says) be confident if ye still
in the Faith, but without full assurari
judges the inner heart, for there Hi
through, both punishing and searching

And why speak I of men ? he says,
if thou speak of Angels, of Archangel
Chembim, of the Seraphim, even of an
ture " whatsoever : all things are laid
that Eye, all things are clear and
there is nothing able to escape it ; " j
are naked and opened unto the eyes
with whom we have to do."

But what is " opened "**? [It is] a
from the skins which are drawn off froi
tims. For as in that case, when a
killed them, and has drawn aside the ;
the flesh, he lays open all the inward
makes them manifest to our eyes ; so ;
things lie open before God. And c
pray thee, how he constantly needs 1 Ei


the Trinity. It is now generally interpreted as a per
the spoken or written word sent forth by Him. — F. G

' Haxatpav. ^ poiJ.(i>aiav.

* ftera TtXetMirty, i.e. by Baptism. [The meaning
can hardly here be restricted to the baptism of the i
rather refers to the perfection of the means of salva
Gospel, which the Apostle so often expresses in tl
TcA<iuiris. — F. G.] ' "Tpox


ifi


Homily VII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


399


ages ; which arose from the weakness of the
hearers. For that they were weak, he made
plain, when he said that they were " dull," and
" had need of milk, not of strong meat." " All
things are naked," he says, " and opened unto
the eyes of Him, with whom we have to do."

(C. V. II, 12.)

[3.] But what is, " after the same example of

unbelief" ? As if one should say, why did they

bf old not see the land ? They had received an

kirnest of the power of God ; they ought to

lave believed, but yielding too much to fear,

md imagining nothing great concerning God,

md being faint-hearted, — so they perished.

\nd there is also something more to be said, as,

hat after they had accomplished the most part

)f the journey, when they were at the very doors,

it the haven itself, they were sunk into the sea.

This I fear (he says) for you also. This is [the

neaning of] " after the same example of unbe-

lef."

For that these also [to whom he is writing]

ad suffered much, he afterwards testifies, say-

ig, " Call to mind the former days, in which

fter that ye had been enlightened, ye endured

' great fight of afflictions." (c. x. 32.) Let

^ 0 man then be faint-hearted, nor fall down

1 ear the end through weariness. For there are,

li lere are those who at the beginning engage in

»• le fight with the full vigor of zeal ; but a little

ts ter, not being willing to add to all, they lose

ly 1. Your forefathers (he says) are sufficient to

struct you not to fall into the same [sins], not
'• I suffer the same things which they suffered.
s his is, " After the same example of unbelief"
Jn et us not faint, he means (which he says also
H ;ar the end [of the Epistle]. " Lift up the
i?i inds which hang down, and the feeble knees ") :
■. lest any man," he says, " fall after the same
atample." (c. xii. 12.) For this is to fall
aijdeed.

idlThen, lest when thou hearest, " any man fall
i: I :er the same example," thou shouldest con-
•'.' ive of the same death which they also under-
ves :nt, see what he says : " For the Word of God

quick and powerful and sharper than any two-
i ged sword." For the Word falls upon the
ro! its of these [men] more severely than any
1 a ord, causing grievous wounds ; and inflicts
;:e ! al blows. And of these things he need not
■rd e the proof, nor establish them by argument,
50 i ^■ing a history so fearful. For (he would say)
-il I at kind of war destroyed them ? What sort of
.'! l Drd ? Did they not fall simply of themselves ?

r let us not be careless because we have not

,, 0 fered the same things. While "it is called
-t G -day," it is in our power to recover our-
'^ fes.

i'^ For lest on hearing the things that belong to
«o* : soul we should grow negligent, he adds also


what concerns the body. For then it is as a
king, when his officers are guilty of some great
fault, first strips them (say) of their command,
and after depriving them of their belt, and their
rank, and their herald,' then punishes them : so
also in this case the sword of the Spirit works.

[4.] Next he discourses of the Son, "with
whom we have to do," he says. What is " with
whom we have to do"? To Him (he would
say) we have to render account for the things
we have done? Even so. How then [must
we act] that we fall not, nor be faint-hearted ?

These things indeed (he would say) are suffi-
cient to instruct us. But we have also " a great
High Priest, that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God." Because he added [it],
for this reason he went on, " For we have not
an High Priest who cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities." Therefore he said
above, " In that He hath suffered Himself being
tempted. He is able to succor them which are
tempted." See then how here also he does the
same. And what he says is to this effect : He
went (he says) the road which we also [are
going] now, or rather even a more rugged one.
For He had experience of all human [sufferings].

He had said above " There is no creature
that is not manifest in His sight," intimating
His Godhead ; then, since he had touched on
the flesh, he again discourses more condescend-
ingly, saying (ver. 14), "Having then a great
High Priest, that is passed into the heavens " :
and shows that His care is greater and that He
protects them as His own, and would not have
them fall away. For Moses indeed (he says)
did not enter into the rest, while He [Christ]
did enter in. And it is wonderful how he has
nowhere stated the same, lest they might seem
to find an excuse ; he however implied it, but
that he might not appear to bring an accusation
against the man," he did not say it openly. For
if, when none of these things had been said,
they yet brought forward these [charges], say-
ing, This man hath spoken against Moses and
against the law (see Acts xxi. 21, 28) ; much
more, if he had said. It is not Palestine but
Heaven,' would they have said stronger things
than these.

[5.] But he attributes not all to the Priest,
but requires also what is [to come] from us, I
mean our profession. For " having," he says,
" a great High Priest, who is passed into the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession " [or "confession"*]. What sort


• Having a «Tip«( was a special mark of dignity, belonging (o
certain offices. Sec Mr. Field's notes. » i.e. Moses.

* There are two points of superiority over Moses implied in the
words '*«ha«- ifi--passe4-4n<othe-He»vens.-^*-T.-T4»al Cliiist ciittKd
into the rest which He promised His people, while Closes did not.
2. That tltat rest is Heaven, not the earthly Canaan. .

« oixo^oYio osed of the Creed [»odtaior< g«neraUy of .ih* ptofei-
sion of a Christian. — F. G.J.


400


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[H


of profession does he mean? That there is a
Resurrection, that there is a retribution : that
there are good things innumerable ; that Christ
is God, that the Faith is right. These things
let us profess, these things let us hold fast. For
that they are true, is manifest from the fact, that
the High Priest is within. We have not failed
of [our hopes], let us confess ; although the
realities are not present, yet let us confess : if
already they were present they were but a lie.
So that this also is true, that [our good things]
are deferred. For our High Priest also is
Great.

Ver. 15. "For we have not an High Priest,
who cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities." He is not (he means) ignorant
of what concerns us, as many of the High
Priests, who know not those in tribulations, nor
that there is tribulation at any time. For in the
case of men it is impossible that one should
know the affliction of the afflicted who has not
had experience, and gone through the actual
sensations. Our High Priest endured all things.
Therefore He endured first and then ascended,
that He might be able to sympathize with
us.

But was " in all points tempted like as we are,
yet without sin." Observe how both above he
has used the word " in like manner," ' and here
"after the likeness." (c. ii. 14.) That is, He
was persecuted, was spit upon, was accused, was
mocked at, was falsely informed against, was
driven out, at last was crucified.

"After our likeness, without sin." In these
words another thing also is suggested, that it is
possible even for one in afflictions to go through
them without sin. So that when he says also
"in the likeness of flesh" (Rom. viii. 3), he
means not that He took on Him [merely] " the
likeness of flesh," but " flesh." Why then did
he say "in the Ukeness"? Because he was
speaking about "sinful flesh" :^ for it was " like "
our flesh, since in nature it was the same with
us, but in sin no longer the same.

[6.] Ver. 16. "Let us come then boldly
[with confidence] unto the throne of His grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need."

What " throne of grace " is he speaking of?
that royal throne concerning which it is said,
"The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on
My right hand." (Ps. ex. i.)

What is "let us come boldly"? Because
" we have a sinless High Priest " contending
with the world. For, saith He, " Be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world " (John xvi.
33) ; for, this is to suffer all things, and yet to


be pure from sins. Although we (he n
under sin, yet He is sinless.

How is it that we should " approach
Because, tiow it is a throne of Gra>
throne of Judgment. Therefore bole
we may obtain mercy," even such i
seeking. For the affair is [one of] mv
A royal largess.

" And may find grace to help in timjc
[for help in due season]." He well i
help in time of need." If thou appi c
(he means) thou wilt receive both
mercy, for thou approachest " in due :
but if thou approach then^ no lo
thou receive it]. For then the aj
unseasonable, for it is not " then a
Grace." Till that time He sitteth gr;
don, but when the end [is come],
riseth up to judgment. For it is sa
O God, judge the earth." (Ps. Ixxxii.
us come boldly," or he says again
" evil conscience," that is, not being
for such an one cannot " come with 1
On this account it is said, " I have i
in an accepted time and in a day c
have I succored thee." (2 Cor. vi.
even now for those to find repentam
after baptism is of grace.

But lest when thou hearest of an H
thou shouldst think that He standeth
with leads to the throne.* But a ]
not sit, but stands. Seest thou that
to be made High Priest, is not of 1
of grace and condescension, and hun

This is it seasonable for us also r
" Let us draw near " asking " boldl
only bring Faith and He gives all th:
is the time of the gift ; let no man
himself. Then [will be] the time of
when the bride-chamber is shut, whe
is come in to see the guests, wher
shall be accounted worthy thereof,
received as their portion the Patriarc
but now it is not as yet so. For s
spectators assembled, still is the cod it
the prize in suspense.

[7.] Let us then be earnest. For
saith, " I so run not as uncertainly."
26.) There is need of running, and
vehemently. He that runneth [a
none of those that meet him ; wh<
passing through meadows, or through
he that runneth looketh not at


1 iropairAiftriwc.

' The words of Rom. viii. 3, to which St. Chrys. alljdes, are
' God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful nesh," &c.


e

7


' TOTe, "at the Day of Judgment," opposed to
life"; as «K«t, " there," " yonder," is the usual «
future state, opposed to tcTaOSa, " here," " in this ^ pd

* "The throne of (irace," as he has said, is t>
which He sits at the right hand of the Father. _

^ The Arians maintained that our Lord was Prie n
Nature antecedent to the Incarnation. See the O: fd
of St. Athanasius against Arianism, p. 202, note
note 1. ; cf. also S. Cyril, Book 3 against Ncstorius]


of


[ =


Homily VII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


401


¥


tors, but at the prize. Whether they be rich
or whether they be poor, whether one mock at
him, or praise him, whether one insult, or cast
stones at him, or plunder his house, whether he
see children, or wife, or anything whatever. He
s occupied in one thing alone, in running, in
nfeiining the prize. He that runneth, never
itandeth still, since even if he slacken a little,
le has lost the whole. He that runneth, not
)nly slackens nothing before the end, but then
;ven especially straineth his speed.

This have I spoken for those who say ; In
)ur younger days we used discipline,' in our
,'ounger days we fasted, »i>w we are grown old.
Now most of all it behooves you to make
/our carefulness more intense. Do not count
ip to me the old things especially done well :
)e now youthful and vigorous. For he that
unneth this bodily race, when gray hairs have
ivertaken him, probably is not able to run as
le did before : for the whole contest depends
m the body ; but thou — wherefore . dost thou
jilessen thy speed? For in this race there is
eed of a soul, a soul thoroughly awakened :
nd the soul is rather strengthened in old age ;
hen it is in its full vigor, then is it in its pride.

For as the body, so long as it is oppressed by
svers and by one sickness after another, even
J, g fit be strong, is exhausted, but when it is freed
rem this attack, it recovers its proper force, so
Iso the soul in youth is feverish, and is chiefly
ossessed by the love of glory, and luxurious
ving, and sensual lusts, and many other imagina-
ions ; but old age, when it comes on, drives
way all these passions, some through satiety,
I i ome through philosophy. For old age relaxes
ne powers of the body, and does not permit
le soul to make use of them even if it wish,
ut repressing them as enemies of various kinds,
; sets her in a place free from troubles and pro-
uces a great calm, and brings in a greater fear.
For if none else does, it is said, yet they who
re grown old know, that they are drawing to
leir end, and that they certainly stand near to
eath. When therefore the desires of this life
re withdrawing, and the expectation of the
idgment-seat is coming on, softening the stub-
ornness of the soul, does it not become more
ttentive, if one be willing?
[8.] What then (you allege) when we see eld
len more intractable than young ones ? Thou
Uest me of an excess of wickedness. For in
le case of madmen too, we see them going over
Irecipices, when no man pushes them. When
— lierefore, an old man has the diseases of the
: ••-■ pung, this is an excess of wickedness ; besides
>t even in youth would such an one have an
■^cuse : since he is not able to say, " Remem-


a


li'kii

sa

:eoi

cen

"ni
■.:m
Fori
:C011

Foi


; ''• In


ber not the sins of my youth, and my igno-
rances." (Ps. XXV. 7.) For he who in old age
remains the same, shows that even in youth, he
was what he was not from ignorance, nor from
inexperience, nor from the time of life, but from
slothfulness. For that man may say, " Remem-
ber not the sins of my youth, and mine igno-
rances," who does such things as become an old
man, who changes in old age. Hut if even in
age he continue the same unseemly courses, how
can such an one be worthy of the name of an
old man, who has no reverence even for the time
of life ? For he who says, " Remember not the
sins of my youth, nor my ignorances," utters
this, as one doing right in his old age. Do not
then, by the deeds of age, deprive thyself also
of pardon for the sins of youth.

For how can what is done be otherwise than
unreasonable, and beyond pardon? An old
man sits in taverns. An old man hurries to
horse-races — an old man goes up into theaters,
running with the crowd like children. Truly it
is a shame and a mockery, to be adorned out-
side with gray hairs, but within to have the mind
of a child.

And indeed if a young man insult [him], he
immediately puts forward his gray hairs. Rev-
erence them first thyself ; if however thou dost not
reverence thy own even when old, how canst thou
demand of the young to reverence them ? Thou
dost not reverence the gray hairs, but puttest
them to shame. God hath honored thee with
whiteness of hairs : He hath given thee high
dignity. Why dost thou betray the honor ? How
shall the young man reverence thee, when thou
art more wanton than he ? For the hoary head
is then venerable, when it acts worthily of
the gray head ; but when it plays youth, it will
be more ridiculous than the young. How then
will you old men be able to give these exhorta-
tions to the young man when you are intoxicated
by your disorderliness ?

[9.] I say not these things as accusing the
old, but the young. For in my judgment they
who act thus even if they have come to their
hundredth year, are young ; just as the young if
they be but little children, yet if they are sober-
minded, are better than the old. And this doc-
trine is not my own, but Scripture' also recog-
nizes the same distinction. " For," it says,
" honorable age is not that which standeth in
length of time, and an unspotted life is old age."
(Wisd. iv. 8, 9.)

For we honor the gray hair, not because we
esteem the white color above the black, but be-
cause it is a proof of a virtuous life ; and when
we see them we conjecture therefrom the in-
ward hoariness. But if men continue to do


3 [^ ypai^^, the same form of quotation as in the case of the
caaouical Scriptures. — F. G.l


402


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOM


what is inconsistent with the hoary head, they
will on that account become the more ridiculous.
Since we also honor the Emperor, and the pur-
ple and the diadem, because they are symbols
of his office. But if we should see him, with the
purple, spitted on, trodden under foot by the
guards, seized by the throat, cast into prison,
torn to pieces, shall we then reverence the pur-
ple or the diadem, and not rather weep over
the pomp itself? Claim not then to be honored
for thy hoary head, when thou thyself wrongest
it. For it ought indeed itself to receive satisfac-
tion from thee, because thou bringest disgrace
on a form so noble and so honorable.

We say not these things against all [old per-
sons], nor is our discourse against old age simply
(I am not so mad as that), but against a youthful
spirit bringing dishonor on old age. Nor is it
concerning those who are grown old that we
sorrowfully say these things, but concerning
those who disgrace the hoary head.

For the old man is a king, if you will, and
more royal than he who wears the purple, if he
master his passions, and keep them under sub-
jection, in the rank of guards. But if he be
dragged about and thrust down from his throne,
and become a slave of the love of money, and
vainglory, and personal adornment, and luxu-
riousness, and drunkenness, anger, and sensual
pleasures, and has his hair dressed out with oil,
and shows an age insulted by his way of life,
of what punishment would not such an one be
worthy ?

[lo.] But may ye not be such, O young
men ! for not even for you is there the excuse
for sinning. Why so ? Because it is possible to
be old in youth : just as there are youths in old
age, so also the reverse. For as in the one case
the white hair saves no one, so in the other the
black is no impediment. For if it is disgraceful
for the old man to do these things of which I
have spoken, much more than for the young
man, yet still the young man is not freed from
accusation. For a young man can have an ex-
cuse only, in case he is called to the manage-
ment of affairs, when he is still inexperienced,
when he needs time and practice ; but no longer
when it is necessary to display temperance and
courage, nor yet when it is needful to keep his
property.

For it sometimes happens that the young man
is blamed more than the old. For the one needs
much service, old age making him feeble : but
the other being able, if he will, to provide for
himself, what sort of excuse should he meet with,
when he plunders more than the old, when he
remembers injuries, when he is contemptuous,
when he does not stand forward to protect
others more than the old man, when he utters


many things unseasonably, when he is i
when he reviles, when he is drunken?

And if in the [matter of] chastity 1
that he cannot be impleaded,' consider t
also he has many helps, if he will. For ;
desire trouble him more violently than
the old, yet nevertheless there are mar
which he can do more than an old man
charm that wild beast. What are these
Labors, readings, watchings through tb
fastings.

[ii.] What then are these things to
says) who are not monastics? Sayest 1
to me ? Say it to Paul, when he says, " "'
with all perseverance and supplication
vi. 1 8), when he says, " Make not pro\
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof." (1
14.) For surely he wrote not these
solitaries only, but to all that are in cit
ought the man who lives in the world
any advantage over the solitary, save
living witha wife? In this point he h
ance, but in others none, but it is his d
all things equally with the solitary.

Moreover the Beatitudes [pronoun
Christ, were not addressed to solitar
since in that case the whole world wo
perished, and we should be accusing
cruelty. And if these beatitudes were
to solitaries only, and the secular perso
fulfill them, yet He permitted marriage,
has destroyed all men. For if it be not
with marriage, to perform the duties of
all things have perished and are destro
the [functions] of virtue are shut up in

And, how can marriage be honorat
so hinders us? What then? It is pos
very possible, even if we have wives, ■
after virtue, if we will. How? 1
"wives," we "be as though we had
we rejoice not over our "possession
"use the world as not abusing it." (i

29. 3I-)

And if any persons have been hin 1
marriage state, let them know that m :
not the hindrance, but their purpc
made an ill use of marriage. Since
wine which makes drunkenness, but ^
purpose, and the using it beyond due
Use marriage with moderation, and t
be first in the kingdom, and shalt enjo
things, which may we all attain by the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ with wh(
Father together with the Holy Ghost
might, honor, now and for ever and w
out end. Amen.


1 that is, if he have fallen into sin in this respect.


k


loMILV VIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


403


HOMILY VIII.

Hebrews v. 1-3.


For every high priest taken from among men, is cgrdained
for men in things pertaining to God, that he may
offer both gifts and sacrilices for sins : who can have
compassion on ' the ignorant and on them that are
out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed
with infirmity; and by reason hereof he ought, as
for the people so also for himself to offer for sins."

[i.] The blessed Paul wishes to show in the

:xt place that this covenant is far better than

I e old. This then he does by first laying down

mote considerations. For inasmuch as there

IS nothing bodily or that made a show,^ no

mple for instance, nor Holy of Holies, nor

iest with so great apparel, no legal observ-

i, ces, but all things higher and more perfect,

' id there was nothing of bodily things, but all

is in things spiritual, and things spiritual did

it attract the weak, as things bodily ; he

aroughly sifts this whole matter.

And observe his wisdom : he makes his begin-

ig from the priest first, and continually calls

' m an High Priest, and from this first [point]

' 3ws the difference [of the two Dispensations].

■ ■ 1 this account he first of all defines what a

. iest is, and shows whether He has any things

3per to a Priest, and whether there are any

ns of priesthood. It was however an objec-

, n in his way that He [Christ] was not even

'' U-bom, nor was He of the sacerdotal tribe,

^ I r a priest on earth. How then was He a

est ? some one may say.

^nd just as in the Epistle to the Romans,

'ing taken up an argument of which they

'^ -e not easily persuaded, that Faith effects

t which the labor of the Law could not, nor

sweat of the daily life, he betook himself to

Patriarch and referred the whole [question]

^ ;hat time : so now here also he opens out the

er path of the Priesthood, showing its supe-

ity from the things which happened before.

as, in [the matter of] punishment, he

igs before them not Hell alone, but also

t happened to their fathers,'* so now here

■''')''l, he first establishes this position from things

'■'•feent. For it were right indeed that earthly

Hgs should be proved from heavenly, but

n the hearers are weak, the opposite course

"^•|ken.

2.] Up to a certain point he lays down first
things which are common [to Christ and
r High Priests], and then shows that He is


itratonaStlv.
ill. 7, &c.


' iftayTiurTtKOv.


superior. For comparative* excellence arises
thus, when in some respects there is community,
in others superiority ; otherwise it is no longer
comparative.

" For every High Priest taken from among
men," this is common to Christ ; " is ordained
for men in things pertaining to God," and this
also ; " that he may off'er both gifts and sacrifices
for the people," and this too, [yet] not en-
tirely : what follows however is no longer so :
" who can have compassion * on the ignorant,
and on them that are out of the way," from this
point forward is the superiority, " inasmuch as
himself also is encompassed with infirmity ; and
by reason hereof he ought as for the people, so
also for himself, to offer for sins."

Then also [there are] other [points] : He is
made [Priest] (he says) by Another and does
not of Himself intrude into [the office]. This
too is common (ver. 4), "And no man taketh
this honor to himself, but he that is called of
God as was Aaron."

Here again he conciliates* them in another
point, because He was sent from God : which
Christ was wont to say throughout to the Jews.
" He that sent Me is greater than I," and, " I
came not of Myself." (John xii. 49 ; xiv. 28 ;
viii. 42.)

He appears to me in these words also to hint
at the priests of the Jews, as being no longer
priests, [but] intruders and corrupters of the law
of the priesthood ; (ver. 5 ) "So Christ also glo-
rified not Himself to be made an High Priest."

How then was He appointed (one says) ? For
Aaron was many times appointed as by the Rod,
and when the fire came down and destroyed those
who wished to intrude into the priesthood. But
in this instance, on the contrary, they [the Jew-
ish Priests] not only suffered nothing, but even
are in high esteem. Whence then [His appoint-
ment] ? He shows it from the prophecy. He
has nothing [to allege] perceptible by sense,
nothing visible. For this cause he affirms it
from prophecy, from things future ; " But He
that said unto Him Thou art My Son, to-day
have I begotten Thee." What has this to do
with the Son? Yea (he says) it is a prepara-
tion for His being appointed by God.


* n Kara avyKotatv,

^ [St. Chrys. nas not drawn attention to the nice distinction be-
tween tLfrptrtnaOtir equal " to liear reasonably with," applied to
the earthly High Priest, and avtitraBtly equal " to sympathize
with," applied to Christ. — F. G.J

'' dtpantvu.


404


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMI


Ver. 6. " As He saith also in another place,
Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Mel-
chisedech." Unto whom now was this spoken ?

Who is " after the order of Melchisedech " ?
No other [than He]. For they all were under
the Law, they all kept sabbaths, they all were
circumcised ; one could not point out any other
[than Him].

[3.] Ver. 7, 8. "Who in the days of His
flesh, when He had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, to
Him that was able to save Him from death, and
was heard in that He feared ; though He were
a Son, yet learned He obedience by the things
which He suffered." Seest thou that he sets
forth nothing else than His care and the exceed-
ing greatness of His love ? For what means the
[expression] " with strong crying " ? The Gospel
nowhere says this, nor that He wept when He
prayed, nor yet that He uttered a cry. Seest
thou that it was a condescension ? For he could
not [merely] say that He prayed, but also
" with strong crying."

"And was heard," (he says), "in that He
feared ; though He were a Son, yet learned He
obedience by the things which He suffered."
(Ver. 9, 10), "And being made perfect He be-
came the Author of eternal salvation unto all
them that obey Him : called of God an High
Priest after the order of Melchisedech."

Be it with " crying," why also " strong [cry-
ing] and tears"?

"Having offered," (he says), "and having
been heard in that He feared." What sayest
thou ? Let the Heretics ' be ashamed. The Son
of God " was heard in that He feared." And
what more could any man say concerning the
prophets ? And what sort of connection is there,
in saying, " He was heard in that He feared,
though He were Son, yet learned He obedience
by the things which He suffered " ? Would any
man say these things concerning God? Why,
who was ever so mad? And who, even if he
were beside himself, would have uttered these
things? "Having been heard," (he says), "in
that He feared. He learned obedience by the
things which He suffered." What obedience?
He that before this had been obedient even unto
death, as a Son to His Father, how did He after-
wards learn ? Seest thou that this is spoken con-
cerning the Incarnation ?

Tell me now, did He pray the Father that He
might be saved from death ? And was it for this
cause that He was " exceeding sorrowful, and said,
If it be possible, let this cup pass from Me " ?
(Matt. xxvi. 38, 39.) Yet He nowhere prayed
the Father concerning His resurrection, but on
the contrary He openly declares, " Destroy this


^ Heretics who denied the reality of our Lord's human nature.


temple and within three days I will rais
(John. ii. 19.) And, "I have power
down My life, and I have power to take
No man taketh it from Me, I lay it dowi
self." (John x. 18.) What then is it ;
He pray? (And again He said, "Be
go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of M
be betrayed unto the chief priests and
and they shall condemn Him to deal
they shall deliver Him to the Gentiles, 1
and to scourge, and to crucify Him ;
third day He shall rise again " (Matt
19), and said not, "My Father shall
up again.") How then did He pray cc
this? But for whom did He pray? I
who believed on Him.

And what he means is this, ' He i
listened to.' For since they had noi
right opinion concerning Him, he saic
was heard. Just as He Himself also w
soling His disciples said, " If ye lovec
would rejoice, because I go to My
(John xiv. 28), and "My Father is gre
I." But how did He not glorify Hii
who " made Himself of no reputatioi
ii. 7), He who gave Himself up? For,
" He gave Himself" up " for our sins."
i. 4.) And again, " Who gave Himself
for us all." (i Tim. ii. 6.) What is
Thou seest that it is in reference to
that lowly things are spoken concern
self : So also here, " Although He were
was heard in that He feared," it is s
wishes to show, that the success was oi
rather than of God's favor. So great
was His reverence, that even on accou
God had respect unto Him.

" He learned," he saith, to obey Go
again he shows how great is the gain
ings. " And having been made perfect;
" He became the Author of salvation
that obey Him." (Cf. supra, pp. 3;
But if He, being the Son, gained obedi
His sufferings, much more shall we.
see how many things he discourses a
dience, that they might be persuac
For it seems to me that they woul
restrained. " From the things," he sa;
He suffered He " continually " learned
God. And being " made perfect " th
ferings. This then is perfection, ai
means must we arrive at perfection,
only was He Himself saved, but becam
also an abundant supply of salval
" being made perfect He became the
salvation to them that obey Him."

[4.] "Being called," he says, "c
High Priest after the order of Melch
(ver. 11) "Of whom we have many
say and hard to be uttered [or ex lu


It

G
d


flOMlLY VIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


405


Vhen he was about to proceed to the difference
)f the Priesthood, he first reproves them, point-
ng out both that such great condescension was
' milk," and that it was because they were chil-
Iren that he dwelt longer on the lowly subject,
elating to the flesh, and speaks [about Him] as
bout any righteous man. And see, he neither
ept silence as to the doctrine altogether, nor
lid he utter it ; that on the one hand, he might
aise their thoughts, and persuade them to be
erfect, and that they might not be deprived of
he great doctrines ; and on the other, that he
[light not overwhelm their minds.

" Of whom," he says, " we have many things
) say and hard to be explained, seeing ye are
ull of hearing." Because they do not hear,
I le doctrine is " hard to be explained." For
hen one has to do with men who do not go
long with him nor mind the things that are
poken, he cannot well explain the subject to
lem.

But perhaps some one of you that stand here,

puzzled, and thinks it a hard case, that
wing to the Hebrews, he himself is hindered
om hearing the more perfect doctrines. Nay
ither, I think that perhaps here also except a
;w, there are many such [as they] , so that this
lay be said concerning yourselves also : but for
le sake of those few I will speak.

Did he then keep entire silence, or did he

sume the subject again in what follows ; and

3 the same as in the Epistle to the Romans?

^ or there too, when he had first stopped the

' louths of the gainsayers, and said, " Nay but,

'' man, who art thou that repliest against God ? "

Rom. ix. 20), he then subjoined the solution.

- nd for my own part I think that he was not

'en altogether silent, and yet did not speak it

* It, in order to lead the hearers to a longing
■" or the knowledge]. For having mentioned
"" he subject], and said that certain great things
'^ sre stored up in the doctrine, see how he frames
i s reproof in combination with panegyric.

^ For this is ever a part of Paul's wisdom, to
ix painful things with kind ones. Which he also
': )es in the Epistle to the Galatians, saying, " Ye
j' d nm well ; who did hinder you? " (Gal. v. 7.)
■^ nd, " Have ye suffered so many things in vain ?
^! it be yet in vain " (Gal. iii. 4), and, " I have
^ infidence in you in the Lord." (Gal. v. 10.)
'' hich he says also to these [Hebrews], " But
^ : are persuaded better things of you, and
'' ings that accompany salvation." (c. vi. 9.)

* )r these two things he effects, he does not
" erstrain them, nor suffer them to fall back ; for

the examples of others are sufficient to arouse

e hearer, and to lead him to emulation ; when

' man has himself for an example and is bidden

'■i emulate himself, the possibility follows at the

laj me time. He therefore shows tWs also, and does

ra


not suffer them to fall back as men utterly con-
demned, nor as being alway evil, but [says] that
they were once even good ; (ver. 12) for " when
for the time ye ought to be teachers," he says.
Here he shows that they had been believers
a long while, and he shows also that they ought
to instruct others.

[5.] At all events observe him continually
travailing to introduce the discourse concerning
the High Priest, and still putting it off. For hear
how he began : " Having a great High Priest
that is passed into the heavens" (c. iv. 14) ;
and omitting to say how He was great, he
says again, " For every High Priest taken from
among men, is appointed for men in things per-
taining to God." (c. V. I.) And again, "So
Christ also glorified not Himself to be made
an High Priest." (c. v. 5.) And again after
saying, " Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech " (c. v. 6), he again puts
off [the subject], saying, " Who in the days of
His Flesh offered prayers and supplications."
(c. V. 7.) When therefore he had been so many
times repulsed, he says, as if excusing himself.
The blame is with you. Alas ! how great a
difference ! When they ought to be teaching
others, they are not even simply learners, but the
last of learners. (Ver. 12), "For when for the
time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need again
that some one ' teach you again which be the first
principles^ of the oracles of God." Here he
means the Human Nature [of Christ]. For as
in external literature it is necessary to learn the
elements first, so also here they were first taught
concerning the human nature.

Thou seest what is the cause of his uttering
lowly things. So Paul did to the Athenians also,
discoursing and saying, " The times of this igno-
rance God winked at : but now commandeth all
men everywhere to repent, because He hath
appointed a day in the which He will judge the
world in righteousness by that Man whom He
hath ordained, whereof He hath given assurance
unto all men, in that He hath raised Him from
the dead." (Acts xvii. 30, 31.) Therefore, if he
says anything lofty, he expresses it briefly, while
the lowly statements are scattered about in many
parts of the Epistle. And thus too he shows
the lofty ; since the very lowliness [of what is
said] forbids the suspicion that these things
relate to the Divine Nature. So here also the
safe ground was kept.'

But what produces this dullness? This he
pointed out especially in the Epistle to the
Corinthians, saying, "For whereas there is


' Tii-a. The common editions have riva, " that one teach you
which be," &c., as is read in the received version of the Epistle,
where Lachman adopts the readint; riva.

' " the elements of the beginning."

^ That is, he took care to provide against being understood to
refer to His Divine Nature, wnen he said lowly things concerning
Christ.


4o6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HoMir


among you envy and strife and divisions, are
ye not carnal?" (i Cor. iii. 3.) But observe,
I beseech you, his great wisdom, how he always
deals according to the distempers before him.
For there the weakness arose more from igno-
rance, or rather from sin; but here not from
Bins only, but also from continual afflictions.
Wherefore he also uses expressions calculated
to show the difference, not saying, " ye are be-
come carnal," but " dull " : in that case " carnal,"
but in this the pain is greater. For they [the
Corinthians] indeed were not able to endure
[his reproof], because they were carnal : but
these were able. For in saying, " Seeing ye are
become dull of hearing" (c. v. 11), he shows
that formerly they were sound in health, and
were strong, fervent in zeal, which he also after-
wards testifies respecting them.

[6.] " And are become such as have need of
milk, not of strong meat." He always calls the
lowly doctrine " milk," both in this place and in
the other. " When," he says, " for [i.e. " be-
cause of"] the time ye ought to be teachers " :
because of that very thing, namely the time, for
which ye ought especially to be strong, for this
especially ye are become backsliding. Now he
calls it " milk," on account of its being suited
to the more simple. But to the more perfect it
is injurious, and the dwelling on these things is
hurtful. So that it is not fitting that matters of
the Law should be introduced ' now or the com-
parison made from them, [such as] that He was
an High Priest, and offered sacrifice, and needed
crying and supplication. Wherefore see how
these things are unhealthful * to " us " ; but at
that time they nourished them being by no means
unhealthful to them.

So then the oracles of God are true nourish-
ment. " For I will give unto them," he saith,
" not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water,
but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord."
(Amos viii. 11.)

" I gave you milk to drink, and not meat "
(i Cor. iii. 2) ; He did not say, I fed you, show-
ing that such [nourishment] as this is not food,
but that [the case is] like that of little children
who cannot be fed with bread. For such have
not drink given them, but their food is to them
instead of drink.

Moreover he did not say, "ye have need,"
but " ye are become such as have need of milk
and not of strong meat." That is, ye willed
[it] ; ye have reduced yourselves to this, to this
need.

Ver. 13. "For every one that partaketh of
milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness : for


* The allowing the observances of the law, as well as the dwelling
thus on the human characteristics of our Lord, were suited for the
beginners, but would be injurious to us.

> irpoirirTarat, Said of that which cannot be digested or causes
nausea*


he is a babe." What is " the Word [dc
of righteousness " ? He seems to me here
at conduct also. That which Christ als
" Except your righteousness shall exct
righteousness of the Scribes and Pha
(Matt. V. 20), this he says likewise, "u
in the word of righteousness," that is, he
unskilled in the philosophy that is above
able to embrace a perfect and exact lif
else by "righteousness" he here means
and the high doctrine concerning Him.

That they then were " become dull," I
but from what cause, he did not add, le
to themselves to know it, and not wis
make his discourse hard to bear. But in
of the Galatians he both " marveled
i. 6) and " stood in doubt " (Gal. i
which tends much more to encourage, .
the language] of one who would never 1
pected that this should happen. Foi f
[what] the doubting [implies].

Thou seest that there is another
Thou seest that there is another full ag
us become of " full age " in this sense :
the power even of those who are child'
the young to come to that " full age " :
not of nature, but of virtue.

[7.] Ver. 14. " But strong meat beloi
them that are of full age [perfect], evt
who by reason of use have their senses e
to discern both good and evil." Those
" their senses exercised," nor did the)
good and evil." He is not speaking n
cerning life [conduct], when he says '
cern good and eril," for this is poss
easy for every man to know, but coi
doctrines that are wholesome and subli
those that are corrupted and low. T
knows not how to distinguish bad ai
food. Oftentimes at least it even puts 1
its mouth, and takes what is hurtful ; an<
all things without judgment ; but not
full grown man. Such [babes] are t
lightly listen to everything, and give up t
indiscriminately : which seems to me t
these [Hebrews] also, as being lightly '
about," and now giving themselves to th e
to those. Which he also hinted near
[of the Epistle], saying, "Be not carri
by divers and strange doctrines." (c.
This is the meaning of " to discern g
evil." " For the mouth tasteth meat, but
trieth words." (Job xxxiv. 3.)

[8.] Let us then learn this lesson,
when thou hearest that a man is not a
nor a Jew, straightway believe him to be
tian ; but examine also into all the othe
for even Manichaeans, and all the heres


' oicpoi' Koi igKpl^WfiCl'OI'.


' TcXtionjc.


HOMILV VIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


407


put on this mask, in order thus to deceive the
more simple. But if we " have the senses " of
the soul " exercised to discern both good and
evil," we are able to discern such [teachers].

But how do our " senses " become " exer-
cised " ? By continual hearing ; by experience
of the Scriptures. For when we set forth the
error of those [Heretics], and thou hearest to-
day and to-morrow ; and provest that it is not
right, thou hast learnt the whole, thou hast
known the whole : and even if thou shouldest
li not comprehend to-day, thou wilt comprehend
to-morrow.

" That have," he says, their " senses exer-
cised." Thou seest that it is needful to exer-
cise our hearing by divine studies, so that they
may not sound strangely. " Exercised," saith
he, " for discerning," that is, to be skilled.

One man says, that there is no Resurrection ;

and another looks for none of the things to

come ; another says there is a different God ;

mother that He has His beginning from Mary.

m (^nd see at once how they have all fallen away

. From want of moderation,' some by excess, others

i(j, by defect. As for instance, the first Heresy of

' , ill was that of Marcion ; this introduced another

iifferent God, who has no existence.^ See the

.„, ;xcess. After this that of Sabellius, saying that

jjj he Son and the Spirit and the Father are One.'

;g *Jext that of Marcellus and Photinus, setting

,.j brth the same things. Moreover that of Paul of

.,( Jamosata, saying that He had His beginning from

jjj Vlary. Afterwards that of the Manichjeans ; for

. . his is the most modern of all. After these the

,j; leresy of Arius. And there are others too.

,ji And on this account have we received the

„ j "aith, that we might not be compelled to attack

T] enumerable heresies, and to deal with them, but

: whatever any man might have endeavored either

' 3 add or take away, that we might consider spu-

'.^ ious. For as those who give the standards do

,', ot oblige [people] to busy themselves about

"" leasures innumerable, but bid them keep to

"^j 'hat is given them ; so also in the case of

';. octrines.

tlfi [9-] But no man is willing to give heed to

,, le Scriptures. For if we did give heed, not

f nly should we not be ourselves entangled by

■\j eceit, but we should also set others free who

'^ re deceived, and should draw them out of dan-

" srs. For the strong soldier is not only able to

f; " elp himself, but also to protect his comrade,

' id to free him from the malice of the enemy.

ut as it is, some do not even know that there

*"■ e any Scriptures. Yet the Holy Spirit indeed

^ ade so many wise provisions in order that they

ight be safely kept.

And look at it from the first, that ye may


;5t«


' IJ iiUTfiat. ' Cf. St. Irenxus, iv. 33. 2, p, 405, O. T.

• *y- The common texts add irpdawjror, *' one person.


learn the unspeakable love of God. He inspired
the blessed Moses ; He engraved the tables, He
detained him on the mount forty days ; and again
as many [more] to give the Law. And after this
He sent prophets who suffered woes innumerable.
War came on ; they slew them all, they cut them
to pieces, the books were burned. Again, He
inspired another admirable man to publish them,
Ezra I mean, and caused them to be put together
from the remains. And after this He arranged
that they should be translated by the seventy.
They did translate them. Christ came. He re-
ceives them ; the Apostles disperse them among
men. Christ wrought signs and wonders.

What then after so great painstaking? The
Apostles also wrote, even as Paul likewise said,
" they were written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come." (i
Cor. X. II.) And again Christ said, "Ye do
err not knowing the Scriptures " (Matt. xxii.
29) : and again Paul said, " That through pa-
tience and comfort of the Scriptures we may
have hope." (Rom. xv. 4.) And again, "All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable." (2 Tim. iii. i6.) And "let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly." (Col. iii.
16.) And the prophet, "he shall meditate in
His Law day and night" (Ps. i. 2), and again
in another place, " Let all thy communication
be in the law of the Most High." (Ecclus. ix.
15.) And again, "How sweet are Thy words
unto my throat." (He said not to my hearing,
but to my " throat ") ; " more than honey and
the honeycomb to my mouth." (Ps. cxix. 103.)
And Moses says, " Thou shalt meditate in them
continually, when thou risest up, when thou sit-
test, when thou liest down." (Deut. vi. 7.)
"Be in them" (i Tim. iv. 15), saith he. And
innumerable things one might say concerning
them. But notwithstanding, after so many
things there are some who do not even know
that there are Scriptures at all. For this cause,
believe me, nothing sound, nothing profitable
comes from us.

[10.] Yet, if any one wished to learn military
affairs, of necessity he must learn the military
laws. And if any one sought to learn navigation
or carpentry or anything else, of necessity he
must learn the [principles] of the art. But in
this case they will not do anything of the kind,
although this is a science which needs much
wakeful attention. For that it too is an art which
needs teachirfg, hear the prophet saying, " Come,
ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you
the fear of the Lord." (Ps. xxxiv. 11.) It
follows therefore certainly that the fear of God
needs teaching. Then he says, " What man is
he that desireth life ? " (Ps. xxxiv. 12.) He means
the life yonder ; and again, " Keep thy tongue
from evil and thy lips from speaking guile ; de-


4o8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I


part from evil and do good, seek peace and
pursue it." (Ps. xxxiv. 13, 14.)

Do you know indeed who said these things,
a prophet or a historian, or an apostle, or an
evangelist ? For my own part I do not think you
do, except a few. Yea and these themselves
again, if we bring forward a testimony from
some other place, will be in the same case as
the rest of you. For see, I repeat the same
statement expressed in other words. " Wash
ye, make you clean, put away your wickedness
from your souls before Mine eyes, learn to do
well, seek out judgment. Keep thy tongue from
evil, and do good : learn to do well." (Isa. i. 16,
17.) Thou seest that virtue needs to be taught?
For this one says, " I will teach you the fear of
the Lord," and the other, " Learn to do well."

Now then do you know where these words
are ? For myself I do not think you do, except
a few. And yet every week these things are
read to you twice or even three times : and the
reader when he goes up [to the desk] first says
whose the book is, £the book] of such a prophet,
and then says what he says, so that it shall be
more intelligible to you and you may not only
know the contents of the Book, but also the
reason of the writings, and who spake these


things. But all in vain ; all to no purpose. F
your zeal is spent on things of this life, and
things spiritual no account is made. Therefc
not even those matters turn out according
your wishes, but there also are many difificulti
For Christ says, " Seek ye the Kingdom
God, and all these things shall be added ur
you." (Matt. vi. 33.) These things He sa
shall also be given in the way of addition : I
we have inverted the order and seek the ea-
and the good things which are in the earth,
if those other [heavenly] things were to
given us in addition. Therefore we have neit
the one nor the other. Let us then at last w;
up and become coveters of the things wh
shall be hereafter ; for so these also will foil
For it is not possible that he who seeks
things that relate to God, should not also atl
human [blessings]. It is the declaration of
Truth itself which says this. Let us not t
act otherwise, but let us hold fast to the coui
of Christ, lest we fail of all. But God is abl«
give you compunction and to make you bet
in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to
Father together with the Holy Ghost be gk
power, honor, now and for ever and world wj
out end. Amen.


HOMILY IX.

Hebrews vi. 1-3.


"Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of
Christ,' let us go on unto perfection, not laying
again the foundation of repentance from dead works,
and of faith toward God; of the doctrine of bap-
tisms, and of laying on of hands; and of resurrec-
tion of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And this
we will do, if God permit."

[i.] You have heard how much Paul found
fault with the Hebrews for wishing to be always
learning about the same things. And with good
reason : " For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need again that some one
teach you the elements of the first principles '^
of the oracles of God." (c. v. 12.)

I am afraid that this might fitly be said to
you also, that " when for the time ye ought to
be teachers," ye do not maintain' the rank of
learners, but ever hearing the same things, and
on the same subjects, you are in the same con-
dition as if you heard no one. And if any man


* Tof Xoyoy Trfi ap\ri^ Tov Xpitrrov. Literally, " the discourse
of the beginning of Christ"; but presently St. Chrys._ substitutes
for this, i} apxi) TOV A670V, " the beginning of the doctrine," as the
words are translated in our version.

* Ttt (rroi^^cia T^? dpp^^f .


should question you, no one will be able )
answer, except a very few who may soon !
counted.

But this is no trifling loss. For oftent!
when the teacher wishes to go on further,
to touch on higher and more mysterious ihu
the want of attention in those who are t.
taught prevents.

For just as in the case of a grammar-ma
if a boy though hearing continually the
elements does not master them, it will be m
sary for him to be continually dinning the s e
things into the boy, and he will not leav< "
teaching, until the boy has been able to 1
them accurately ; for it is great folly to lead »
on to other things, without having put the 4
well into him ; so too in the Church, if whil e
constantly say the same things you learn not ig
more, we shall never cease saying the :■
things. I

For if our preaching were a matter of di; ij
and ambition, it would have been right to j if
from one subject to another and change a Jt
continually, taking no thought for you, but ly


Homily IX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


409


for your applauses. But since we have not de-
voted our zeal to this, but our labors are all for
your profit, we shall not cease discoursing to you
on the same subjects, till you succeed in learn-
ing them. For I might have said much about
Gentile superstition, and about the Manichjeans,
and about the Marcionists, and by the grace of
God have given them heavy blows, but this sort
of discourse is out of season. For to those who
do not yet know accurately their own affairs, to
those who have not yet learned that to be cov-
ietous is evil, who would utter such discourses as
those, and lead them on to other subjects before
the time ?

We then shall not cease to say the same things,
whether ye be persuaded or not. We fear how-
aver, that by continually saying the same things,
{ ye hearken not, we may make the condemna-
:ion heavier for the disobedient.

I must not however say this in regard to you
ill ; for I know many who are benefited by their
:oraing here, who might with justice cry out
igainst those others, as insidiously injuring them'
:>)• their ignorance and inattention. But not even
;o will they be injured. For hearing the same
things continually is useful even to those who
Icnow them, since by often hearing what we know,
!\'e are more deeply affected. We know, for in-
stance, that Humility is an excellent thing, and
'hat Christ often discoursed about it ; but when
|ve listen to the words themselves and the reflec-
jions made upon them, we are yet more affected,
■ven if we hear them ten thousand times.

[2.] It is then a fitting time for us also to say
low to you, " Wherefore leaving the beginning of
jhe doctrine of Christ, let us go unto perfection."
' What is " the beginning of the doctrine " ? ^ He
;t)es on to state it himself, saying, " not laying
gain " (these are his words) " the foundation of
lepentance from dead works, and faith toward
Ijod, of the doctrine of baptisms and of laying
In of hands, of the resurrection of the dead, and
)f eternal judgment."

But if this be " the Beginning," what else is
ur doctrine save to repent " from dead works,"
Ind through the Spirit to receive " the faith," '
1 " the resurrection of the dead, and eternal
iilgment"? But what is "the Beginning"?
The Beginning," he says, is nothing else than this,
hen there is not a strict life. For as it is nec-
^sary to instruct one who is entering on the
udy of grammar, in the Elements'* first, so also
1 1st the Christian know these things accurately,
nd have no doubt concerning them. And
nould he again have need of teaching, he has


' !'i:ijiev6vTti)tf avTov^- ' V «PX^ ^°^ A070U.

The Faith; iriVn? with the article in this place and a little be-
w means the Creed; as we say " the Belief." fVet it would be
^possible to substitute the word "Creed" — "Creed in the resur-
ttion," &c. What is meant is that Christian belief which finds
I'ression in the Creed, as well as elsewhere. — F. G.]
* or " the letters."


not yet the foundation. For one who is firmly
grounded ought to be fixed and to stand steady,
and not be moved about. But if one who has
been catechised and baptized is going ten years
afterwards to hear again about the Faith, and
that we ought to " believe " in " the resurrection
of the dead," he does not yet have the founda-
tion, he is again seeking after the beginning of
the Christian religion. P'or that the Faith is the
foundation, and the rest the building, hear him
[the Apostle] saying ; " I have laid the founda-
tion and another buildeth thereupon." (iCor.
iii. 10.) " If any man build upon this foundation,
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble."
(i Cor. iii. 12.)

" Not laying again " (he says) " the foundation
of repentance from dead works."

[3.] But what is, " let us go on unto perfec-
tion"? Let us henceforth proceed (he means)
even to the very roof, that is, let us have the
best life. For as in the case of the letters the
Alpha" involves the whole, and as the foundation,
the whole building, so also does full assurance
concerning the Faith involve purity of life. And
without this it is not possible to be a Christian,
as without foundations there can be no building ;
nor skill in literature without the letters. Still if
one should be always going round about the
letters, or if about the foundation, not about the
building, he will never gain anything.

Do not however think that the Faith is de-
preciated by being called elementary : for it is
indeed the whole power : for when he says,
" For every one that useth milk is unskilled in
the word of righteousness, for he is a babe "
(c. V. 13), it is not this which he calls
" milk." But to be still doubting about these
things is [a sign] of a mind feeble, and needing
many discourses. For these are the wholesome
doctrines. For we call him "a perfect man"
[i.e. " of full age "] who with the faith has a
right life ; but if any one have faith, yet does
evil, and is in doubt concerning [the faith]
itself, and brings disgrace oti the doctrine, him
we shall with reason call " a babe," in that he
has gone back again to the beginning. So that
even if we have been ten thousand years in the
faith, yet are not firm in it, we are babes ; when
we show a life not in conformity with it ; when
we are still laying a foundation.

[4.] But besides [their way of] life he brings
another charge also against these [Hebrews],
as being shaken to and fro, and needing " to lay
a foundation of repentance from dead works."
For he who changes from one to another, giving
up this, and choosing that, ought first to con-
demn this, and to be separated from the system,
and then to pass to the other. But if he intends

" TO aA(^a.


4IO


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IX


again to lay hold on the first, how shall he touch
the second?

What then of the Law (he says) ? We have
condemned it, and again we run back to it.
This is not a shifting about, for here also [under
the Gospel] we have a law. " Do we then "
(he says) "make void the law through faith?
God forbid, yea we establish the Law." (Rom.
iii. 31.) I was speaking concerning evil deeds.
For he that intends to pursue virtue ought to
condemn wickedness first, and then go in pur-
suit of it. For repentance cannot prove ' them
clean. For this cause they were straightway
baptized, that what they were unable to accom-
plish by themselves, this might be effected by
the grace of Christ. Neither then does repent-
ance suffice for purification, but men must first
receive baptism. At all events, it was necessary
to come to baptism, having condemned the sins
thereby and given sentence against them.

But what is " the doctrine of baptisms " ?
Not as if there were many baptisms, but one
only.* Why then did he express it in the plural ?
Because he had said, "not laying again a founda-
tion of repentance." For if he again baptized
them and catechised them afresh, and having
been baptized at the beginning^ they were again
taught what things ought to be done and what
ought not, they would remain perpetually incor-
rigible.

" And of laying on of hands." For thus did
they receive the Spirit, " when Paul had laid his
hands on them" (Acts xix. 6), it is said.

" And of the resurrection of the dead." For
this is both effected in baptism, and is affirmed
in the confession.

"And of eternal judgment." But why does
he say this? Because it was likely that, having
already believed, they would either be shaken
[from their faith], or would lead evil and sloth-
ful lives, he says, " be wakeful." *

It is not open to them to say. If we live sloth-
fully we will be baptized again, we will be cate-
chised again, we will again receive the Spirit ;
even if now we fall from the faith, we shall be able
again by being baptized, to wash away our sins,
and to attain to the same state as before. Ye
are deceived (he says) in supposing these things.

[5.] Ver. 4, 5. " For it is impossible for those
who were once enlightened and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come,
if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance, crucifying" to themselves the Son

> i<r{ai.

* That is, the Apostle repudiates the teaching of more than one
baptism.

' St. Cnrys/s exposition requires this literal translation of the
participle. He gives two explanations of it, " to renew them by
crucifying afresh," and " seeing they crucify afresh."


of God afresh, and putting Him to an oper
shame."

And see how putting them to shame,' ano
forbiddingly he begins. " Impossible." Nc
longer (he says) expect that which is not possi
ble ; (For he said not, It is not seemly, or, Ii
is not expedient, or. It is not lawful, but " iin
possible," so as to cast [them] into despair)
if ye have once been altogether enlightened.

Then he adds, "and have tasted of tht
heavenly gift. If ye have tasted " (he says'
" of the heavenly gift," that is, of forgiveness
" And been made partakers of the Holy Ghos'
and tasted the good word of God " (he is speals
ing here of the doctrine) " and the powers c
the world to come" (what powers is he speai
ing of? either the working of miracles, or " th
earnest of the Spirit " — 2 Cor. i. 22) " and hav
fallen away, to renew them again unto repen
ance, seeing they crucify to themselves the So
of God afresh and put Him to an open shame
"Renew them," he says, "unto repentance," thi !
is, by repentance, for unto repentance is t
repentance. What then, is repentance e;
eluded ? Not repentance, far from it ! But th
renewing again by the laver.^ For he did m
say, " impossible " to be renewed " unto repen
ance," and stop, but added how " impossibl
[by] crucifying afresh."

To " be renewed," that is, to be made ne^
for to make men new is [the work] of tl
laver only : for (it is said) " thy youth shall I
renewed as the eagle's." (Ps. ciii. 5.) But
is [the work of] repentance, when those wl
have been made new, have afterwards becon'
old through sins, to set them free from this o
age, and to make them strong.' To bring the
to that former brightness however, is not poss
ble ; for there the whole was Grace.

[6.] " Crucifying to themselves," he say
" the Son of God afresh, and putting Him
an open shame." What he means is this. Ba
tism is a Cross, and " our old man was crucifi*
with [Him]" (Rom. vi. 6), for we were "ma
conformable to the likeness of His death " (Roi
vi. 5 ; Phil. iii. 10), and again, "we were burif
therefore with Him by baptism into deatl
(Rom. vi. 4.) Wherefore, as it is not possili
that Christ should be crucified a second tini
for that is to " put Him to an open shame.
For "if death shall no more have dominii
over Him" (Rom. vi. 9), if He rose ag»
by His resurrection becoming superior to deafc
if by death He wrestled with and overcai'
death, and then is crucified again, all th*
things become a fable and a mockery.'"


* f^TpeffTtKws. ' 5ia AovT-poG.
" ffTeppouc Kaivov^, Sav. Ben.

* The common editions add outw? ov^e SamiaQjivai, " so nei
[is it possible] to be baptized [a second time]." The apodi
wanting in the older text, as it is in several other places.

1" [The original has a paronomasia hardly to be leprodu


Homily IX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


411


:hen that baptizeth* a second time, crucifies
ti\m again.

But what is " crucifying afresh " ? [It is]
:rucifying over again. For as Christ died on
the cross, so do we in baptism, not as to the
flesh, but as to sin. Behold two deaths. He
died as to the flesh ; in our case the old man
was buried, and the new man arose, made con-
formable to the likeness of His death. If there-
Fore it is necessary to be baptized [again''], it
;s necessary that this same [Christ] should die
igain. For baptism is nothing else than the
cutting to death of the baptized, and his rising
igain.

And he well said, "crucifying afresh unto
heniselves." For he that does this, as having
brgotten the former grace," and ordering his
)\vn life carelessly, acts in all respects as if there
vere another baptism. It behooves us therefore

0 take heed and to make ourselves safe.

[7.] What is, "having tasted of the heavenly
;ift " ? it is, " of the remission of sins " : for this
s of God alone to bestow, and the grace is a
race once for all. " What then ? shall we con-
jnue in sin that grace may abound ? Far from
: 1 " (Rom. vi. 1,2.) But if we should be always
Ding to be saved by grace we shall never be
nod. For where there is but one grace, and
c are yet so indolent, should we then cease
Inning if we knew that it is possible again to
|ave our sins washed away? For my part I
[link not.

1 He here shows that the gifts are many : and
j) explain it. Ye were counted worthy (he says)
I so great forgiveness ; for he that was sitting
1 darkness, he that was at enmity, he that was
, open war, that was alienated, that was hated
" God, that was lost, he having been suddenly
lightened, counted worthy of the Spirit, of the
iavenly gift, of adoption as a son, of the king-

. )m of heaven, of those other good things, the

: ispeakable mysteries ; and who does not even

us become better, but while indeed worthy of

, edition, obtained salvation and honor, as if he

id successfully accomplished great things ; how

Auld he be again baptized ?

< )n two grounds then he said that the thing

^ impossible, and he put the stronger last:

1st, because he who has been deemed worthy

I such [blessings], and who has betrayed all

t It was granted to him, is not worthy to be

in renewed; neither* is it possible that


^ti. The word is napaS*tynaTi(rpi6<;, of which the irapaSeiy^ia-

" put to an open shame," above is the verb. — F. G.l
i lie later texts add iav7ov^ " that baptizeth himself." St.
however is speaking of a bishop who repeats baptism,
B. add ndMv,
. ipt;, 'Die word is used throughout this passage in the sense
■ ission, as explained in the next clause,
■ 1 he longer text in Sav. and Ben. adds, 6evTe'pt[» Si on ov, ** and
Sftndly because it is not,"&c. : the shorter text has only ov6i,
■ oltting *' secondly." There are many other instances of a similar
n'ligence of style in the genuine text, as also in other works of St.
C vs.


[Christ] should again be crucified afresh : for
this is to " put Him to an open shame."

There is not then any second laver : there is
not [indeed]. And if there is, there is also a
third, and a fourth ; for the former one is con-
tinually disannulled by the later, and this contin-
ually by another, and so on without end.

"And tasted," he says, "the good word of
God " ; and he does not unfold it ; " and the
powers of the world to come," for to live as An-
gels and to have no need of earthly things, to
know that this is the means of our introduction to
the enjoyment of the worlds to come ; this may
we learn through the Spirit, and enter into those
sacred recesses.

What are " the powers of the world to come " ?
Life eternal, angelic conversation. Of these we
have already received the earnest through our
Faith from the Spirit. Tell me then, if after hav-
ing been introduced into a palace, and entrusted
with all things therein, thou hadst then betrayed
all, wouldest thou have been entrusted with them
again ? '

[8.] What then (you say) ? Is there no re-
pentance? There is repentance, but there is no
second baptism : but repentance there is, and it
has great force, and is able to set free from the
burden of his sins, if he will, even him that hath
been baptized much in sins, and to establish
in safety him who is in danger, even though he
should have come unto the very depth of wick-
edness. And this is evident from many places.
" For," says one, " doth not he that falleth rise
again? or he that turneth away, doth not he
turn back to [God]?" (Jer. viii. 4.) It is
possible, if we will, that Christ should be formed
in us again : for hear Paul saying, " My little
children of whom I travail in birth again, until
Christ be formed in you." (Gal. iv. 19.) Onlv
let us lay hold on repentance.

For behold the love of God to man ! We ought
on every ground to have been punished at the
first ; in that having received the natural law, and
enjoyed innumerable blessings, we have not ac-
knowledged our Master, and have lived an unclean
life. Yet He not only has not punished us, but
has even made us . partakers of countless bless-
ings, just as if we had accomplished great things.
Again we fell away, and not even so does He
punish us, but has given medicine of repent-
ance, which is sufficient to put away and blot
out all our sins ; only if we knew the nature of
the medicine, and how we ought to apply it.

What then is the medicine of Repentance?
and how is it made up? First, of the condemna-
tion of our own sins ; ° " For " (it is said) " mine
iniquity have I not hid" (Ps. xxxii. 5) ; and


* The common texts add to «««», " the things in heaven." But
St. Chrys. is speaking of present privileges here on earth,

* The common texts add (tat oirb i^ayoptvanas, '^and [of] from
confession."


412


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I>


again, " I will confess against myself my law-
lessness unto the Lord, and Thou forgavest the
iniquity of my heart." And " Declare thou at
the first thy sins, that thou mayest be justified."
(Isa. xliii. 26.) And, "The righteous man is
an accuser of himself at the first speaking."
(Prov. xviii. 1 7.)

Secondly, of great humbleness of mind : For
it is like a golden chain ; if one have hold of the
beginning, all will follow. Because if thou con-
fess thy sin as one ought to confess, the soul is
humbled. For conscience turning it on itself
causeth it to be subdued.

Other things too must be added to humble-
ness of mind if it be such as the blessed David
knew, when he said, " A broken and a contrite
heart God will not despise." (Ps. li. 17.) For
that which is broken does not rise up, does not
strike, but is ready to be ill-treated and itself
riseth not up. Such is contrition of heart : though
it be insulted, though it be evil entreated, it is
quiet, and is not eager for vengeance.

And after humbleness of mind, there is need
of intense prayers, of many tears, tears by day,
and tears by night : for, he says, " every night
will I wash my bed, I will water my couch with
my tears. I am weary with my groaning." (Ps.
vi. 6.) And again, " For I have eaten ashes as
it were bread, and mingled my drink with weep-
ing." (Ps. cii. 9.)

And after prayer thus intense, there is need
of much almsgiving : for this it is which espe-
cially gives strength to the medicine of repent-
ance. And as there is a medicine among the
physicians' helps which receives many herbs,
but one is the essential, so also in case of re-
pentance this is the essential herb, yea, it may
be everything. For hear what the Divine Scrip-
ture says, " Give alms, and all things shall be
clean." (Luke xi. 41.) And again, " By alms-
giving and acts of faithfulness '' sins are purged
away." (Prov. xvi. 6.) And, " Water will quench
a flaming fire, and alms will do away with great
sins." (Ecclus. iii. 30.)

Next not being angry with any one, not bear-
ing malice ; the forgiving all their trespasses.
For, it is said, " Man retaineth wrath against
man, and yet seeketh healing from the Lord."
(Ecclus. xxviii. 3.) "Forgive that ye may be
forgiven." (Mark xi. 25.)

Also, the converting our brethren from their
wandering. For, it is said,' " Go thou, and con-
vert thy brethren, that thy sins may be forgiven


' (Cat ffi'cTTeaic. [These same two words, eAeTj^oauVat ita\ niir-
Tfts, '* almsgiving and acts of faithfulness," are used by the Septua-
gint to translate *' mercy and truth " in Prov. iii. 3 also, as if TrtffTei?
were the distinct acts of faithfulness which go to malve up truth,
comp. true of heart throughout the Psalms.]

* This seems to be an expression of the doctrine of James v.
19, 30j partially in the language of our Lord, Luke xxii. 33. [Cf.
Acts ill. 29.]


thee." And from one's being in close relation
with* the priests, "and if," it is said, "a ma:
hath committed sins it shall be forgiven him.
(Jas. V. 15.) To stand forward in defense c
those who are wronged. Not to retain anger
to bear all things meekly.

[9.] Now then, before you learned that it i
possible to have our sins washed away by mean
of repentance, were ye not in an agony, becaus
there is no second laver, and were ye not in de
spair of yourselves? But now that we hav
learned by what means repentance and remii
sion is brought to a successful issue, and that w
shall be able entirely to escape, if we be willin
to use it aright, what forgiveness can we possib'
obtain, if we do not even enter on the thougl
of our sins ? since if this were done, all would I
accomplished.

For as he who enters the door, is within ; s
he who reckons up his own evils will also ce
tainly come to get them cured. But should 1
say, I am a sinner, without reckoning them i
specifically,* and saying, This and this sin have
committed, he will never leave off, confessing ii
deed continually, but never caring in earnest fi
amendment. For should he have laid down
beginning, all the rest will unquestionably folk
too, if only in one point " he have shown a b
ginning : for in every case the beginning and tl
preliminaries are difficult. This then let us
as a foundation, and all will be smooth and eas

Let us begin therefore, I entreat you, one wi
making his prayers intense : another with co
tinual weeping : another with downcast ' cou
tenance. For not even is this, which is so smi
unprofitable : for " I saw " (it is said) " that
was grieved and went downcast, and I healed
ways." (Isa. Ivii. 17, 18.)

But let us all humble our own souls by alDi
giving and forgiving our neighbors their ti'
passes, by not remembering injuries, nor aver
ing ourselves. If we continually reflect on <
sins, no external circumstances can make
elated : neither riches, nor power, nor authorii
nor honor ; nay, even should we sit in the im)i
rial chariot itself, we shall sigh bitterly : Sii
even the blessed David was a King, and yet
said, " Every night I will wash my bed," [&
(Ps. vi. 6) : and he was not at all hurt by
purple robe and the diadem : he was not pul
up ; for he knew himself to be a man, and ir
much as his heart had been made contrite,
went mourning.

[10.] For what are all things human? Aa
and dust, and as it were spray before the wi
a smoke and a shadow, and a leaf driven 1
and there ; and a flower ; a dream, and a t
and a fable, wind and air vainly puffed out


* «aT* cI6of •


" <i? eF, or, " once for .ill."
^ Kar)}^eci', ** seriousness."


)MILY X.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


413


.sting away ; a feather that hath no stay, a
earn flowing by, or if there be aught of more
thingness than these.

iFor, tell me, what dost thou esteem great?
lat dignity thinkest thou to be great ? is it that
the Consul ? For the many think no greater
;nity than that. He who is not Consul is not
fhit inferior to him who is in so great splendor,

0 is so greatly admired. Both one and the
ler are of the same dignity ; both of them
ce, after a little while, are no more.

When was he made [Consul] ? For how long
ime ? tell me : for two days ? Nay, this takes
ce even in dreams. But that is [only] a
;am, you say. And what is this? For (tell me)
It is by day, is it [therefore] not a dream ?
ly do we not rather call these things a dream?
'r as dreams when the day comes on are proved
( be nothing : so these things also, when the

1 ht comes on, are proved to be nothing. For
iht and day have received each an equal per-
il of time, and have equally divided all dura-
i I. Therefore as in the day a person rejoices
II in what happened at night, so neither in the

s it possible for him to reap the fruit of

done in the day. Thou hast been made

;> So was I in the night ; only I in the

. , V , thou in the day. And what of this ? Not

■\n so hast thou any advantage over me, except


haply its being said, Such an one is Consul, and
the pleasure that springs from the words, gives
him the advantage.

I mean something of this kind, for I will express
it more plainly : if I say " Such an one is Con-
sul," and bestow on him the name, is it not gone
as soon as it is spoken ? So also are the things
themselves ; no sooner doth the Consul appear,
than he is no more. But let us suppose [that
he is Consul] for a year, or two years, or three
or four years. Where are they who were ten
times Consul ? Nowhere.

But Paul is not so. For he was, and also is
living continually : he did not live one day, nor
two, nor ten, and twenty, nor thirty ; nor ten and
twenty, nor yet thirty years — and die. Even
the four hundredth year is now past, and still even
yet is he illustrious, yea much more illustrious
than when he was alive. And these things in-
deed [are] on earth ; but the glory of the saints
in heaven what word could set forth ?

Wherefore I entreat you, let us seek this glory ;
let us pursue after it, that we may attain it. For
this is the true glory. Let us henceforth stand
aloof from the things of this life, that we may
find grace and mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord :
with whom to the Father, together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor and worship,
now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY X.

Hebrews vi. 7, 8.


Ir the Earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh
' ft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them
by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God.
jBut if it bear * thorns and briars it is rejected, and
inigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned."

I .] Let us hear the oracles of God with fear,

ar and much trembling. For (it is said)

the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto Him

1 irembling." (Ps. ii. 11.) But if even our

nd our exultation ought to be "with trem-

of what punishment are we not worthy, if

en not with terror to what is said, when the

lUs spoken, as now, are themselves fearful?

■ having said that "it is impossible for

A ho have fallen away " to be baptized a


received version is necessarily altered here : St. Chrysos-

];inentary will be more readily understood if it is kept in

■ ihc exact translation would be as below; '• the land which

k in," &c., " partaketh of blessing," &c. " But if it bear

■i thistles, it is reprobate, and nigh unto a curse, whose

burning. ' [There seems to be no need of this slight cor-

' He present participle of the Greek is even more closely

tcil by the A. V. than by the above translation. But in

'"'1 tills note, it must be allowed to stand. — F. G.]


second time, and to receive remission through
the laver, and having pointed out the awfulness
of the case, he goes on : " for the earth which
drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it,
and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom
it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God. But
if it bear thorns and thistles, it is rejected,^ and
nigh unto cursing ; whose end is to be burned."
Let us then fear, beloved ! This threat is not
Paul's, these words are not of man : they are
of the Holy Ghost, of Christ that speaketh in
him. Is there then any one that is clear from
these thorns? And even if we were clear, not
even so ought we to be confident, but to fear
and tremble lest at any time thorns should spring
up in us. But when we are " thorns and thistles "
through and through, whence (tell me) are we
confident ? And are becoming supine ? What is
it which makes us inert ? If " he that thinketh
he standeth " ought to fear " lest he fall " ; for


3 aSoKi^of, " reprobate."


414


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily


(he says) " Let him that thinketh he standeth,
take heed lest he fall" (i Cor. x. 12) ; he that
falleth, how anxious ought he to be that he may
rise up again ! If Paul fears, " lest that by any
means, when he had preached to others, he him-
self should be a castaway" (i Cor. ix. 27) ; and
he who had been so approved is afraid lest he
should become disapproved : ' what pardon shall
we have who are already disapproved, if we have
no fear, but fulfill our Christianity as a custom,
and for form's sake. Let us then fear, beloved :
" For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven."
(Rom. i. 18.) Let us fear, for it "is revealed"
not " against impiety " only, but " against all
unrighteousness." What is " against all unright-
eousness "? [Against all] both small and great.

[2.] In this passage he intimates the loving-
kindness of God towards man : and the teaching
[of the Gospel] he calls " rain " : and what he
said above, " when for the time ye ought to be
teachers" (c. v. 12), this he says here also.
Indeed in many places the Scripture calls the
teaching " rain." For (it says) " I will com-
mand the clouds that they rain no rain upon it "
(Isa. V. 6), speaking of " the vineyard." The same
which in another place it calls " a famine of
bread, and a thirst of water." (Amos viii. 11.)
And again, "The river of God is full of waters."
(Ps. Ixv. 9.)

" For land," he says, " which drinketh in the
rain that cometh oft upon it." Here he shows
that they received and drank in the word, yea
and often enjoyed this, and yet even so they
were not profited. For if (he means) thou hadst
not been tilled, if thou hadst enjoyed no rains,
the evil would not have been so great. For
(it is said) " If I had not come and spoken
unto them they had not had sin." (John xv.
22.) But if thou hast often drunk and received
[nourishment], wherefore hast thou brought forth
other things instead of fruits? For (it is said)
" I waited that it should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth thorns." (Isa. v. 2.)

Thou seest that everywhere the Scripture call-
eth sins " thorns." For David also saith, " I
was turned into mourning when a thorn was fixed
in me." (Ps. xxxii. 4, so LXX.) For it does
not simply come on us, but is fixed in ; and even
if but a little of it remain in, even if we take it
not out entirely, that little of itself in like man-
ner causes pain, as in the case of a thorn. And
why do I say, ' that little of itself ' ? Even after it
has been taken out, it leaves therein for a long
time the pain of the wound. And much care
and treatment is necessary, that we may be per-


1 aSoKtfio^. In the original it is one and the same word which
in the text, Heb. vi. 8, is translated " rejected," in i Cor. ix. 27,
*' a castaway *' : it is in this clause opposed to Sojttfio?. '* approved,**
*' accepted.'* It means rejected after testing, as in case of metals:
which may talce place, as St. Chrys. implies iii this passage, eitlfer
here or hereafter; either for a time or for eternity.


fectly freed from it. For it is not enough mer
to take away the sin, it is necessary also to h
the wounded place.

But I fear however lest the things said ap
to us more than to others. " For," he says, " '
earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh
upon it." We are ever drinking, ever head
but " when the sun is risen " (Matt. xiii. 6)
straightway lose our moisture, and theref
bring forth thorns. What then are the thor
Let us hear Christ saying, that " the care of 1
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke
word, and it becometh unfruitful." (Matt. :

2 2.)

[3.] " For the earth which drinketh in
rain that cometh oft upon it," he says, "
bringeth forth meet herbs." Because nothir
so meet as purity of life, nothing so suitabl
the best life, nothing so meet as virtue.

" And bringeth forth " (saith he) " herbs n
for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth bles
from God." Here he says that God is
cause of all things, giving the heathen a b
who ascribed the production of fruits to
power of the earth. For (he says) it is not
hands of the husbandman which stir up the e
to bear fruits, but the command from C
Therefore he says, " receives blessing from G(

And see how in speaking of the thorns
said not, "bringing forth " thorns," nor did
use this word expressive of what is useful ;
what? "Bearing"' [literally "putting 01
"thorns," as if one should say, "forcing c
" throwing out."

" Rejected " (he says) " and nigh unto (
ing." Oh ! how great consolation in this wt
For he said " nigh unto cursing," not " a cui
Now he that hath not yet fallen into a ci
but is come to be near [thereto] , may also c
to be far off [therefrom].

And not by this only did he encourage tli
but also by what follow^. For he did noti
"rejected and nigh unto cursing," "which
be burned," but what? "Whose end is t
burned," if he continue [such] (he means)
the end. So that, if we cut out and burr
thorns, we shall be able to enjoy those ,
things innumerable and to become appro
and to partake of blessing.

And with good reason did he call sii
thistle,"'' saying "that which beareth thorn!
thistles " ; for on whatever side you lay ho 3n
it, it wounds and stings, and it is unple nt
even to look at.

[4.] Having therefore sufficiently reb ed
them, and alarmed and wounded them, '. in
turn heals them, so as not to cast them
too much, and make them supine. For hi


* TtltTeVffO.

« [rpi^o^i', "abtui.'']


' fx^cpewa.


)MILY X.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


415


ikes one that is " dull," makes him more dull,
then he neither flatters them throughout,
it he should make them supine, nor does he
)und them throughout, but having inserted a
tie to wound them, he applies much to heal
what follows.

For what does he say? We speak not these

ings, as having condemned you, nor as think-

^ you to be full of thorns, but fearing lest this

buld come to pass. For it is better to terrify

lu by words, that ye may not suffer by the

lilities. And this is specially of Paul's wisdom.

(Moreover he did not say, We think, or, we

njecture, or, we expect, or, we hope, but what ?

I'er. 9) " But beloved, we are persuaded better

, ngs of you, and things that accompany salva-

n, though we thus speak." Which word he

ni used in writing to the Galatians : "But I

suaded of you in the Lord, that ye will be

iherwise minded." (Gal. v. 10.) For in that

c, inasmuch as they were greatly to be

! !t uined, and he could not praise them from

iii;s present, he does it from things future

i ye will be none otherwise minded," he

he said not, ye are, but " ye will be none

; . I .\ ise minded." But here he encourages

I 111 from things present. "We are persuaded

3 tcr things of you, beloved, and things that

h oinpany to salvation, though we thus speak."

\ 1 since he was not able to say so much from

' i:^ present, he confirms his consolation from

past ; and says,

10. "For God is not unrighteous to

your work, and ' the love, which ye

J. ihowed toward His name, in that ye have

mistered unto the saints and do minister." O

lid he here restore their spirit, and give

lesh strength, by reminding them of for-

ir tnmgs, and bringing them to the necessity

)fiot supposing that God had forgotten. (For

ifcannot but sin who is not fully assured con-

•Piing his hope, and says that God is unright-

Accordingly he obliged them by all

to look forward to those future things.

le who despairs of present things, and has

up exerting himself, may be restored by

rospect of] things future.) As he him-

10 said in writing to the Galatians, " Ye

n well" (Gal. v. 7) : and again, "Have

ored so many things in vain? if it be yet

i." (Gal. iii. 4.)

i as in this place he puts the praise with
proof, saying, " When for the time ye
to be teachers" (c. v. 12), so also there,
rvel that ye are so soon removed." (Gal.
With the reproof is the praise. F'or
'ing great things we marvel, when they


and Ben. here, and in other places where the text is cited,
' KOTTou, " the labor of love," &c. These words are prob-
part of the sacred text. They are not referred to by St.


fail. Thou seest that praise is concealed under
the accusation and the blame. Nor does he say
this concerning himself only, but also concerning
all. For he said not, I am persuaded, but " we
are persuaded better things of you," even good
things (he means). He says this either in re-
gard to matters of conduct, or to the recompense.

In the next place, having said above, that it
is " reiected and nigh unto a curse," and that it
" shall be for burning," he says, we do not by
any means speak this of you. " For God is not
unrighteous to forget your work, and love."
(Ver. 10.)

[5.] Why then did we say these things ? (Ver.
II, 12) "But we desire that every one of you
do show the same diligence to the full assurance
of hope unto the end ; that ye be not slothful,
but followers of them who through faith and
patience inherit the promises."

" We desire," he says, and we do not there-
fore merely labor for, or even so far as words
go, wish this. But what ? " We desire " that ye
should hold fast to virtue, not as condemning
your former conduct (he means), but fearing
for the future. And he did not say, 'not as
condemning your former conduct, but your pres-
ent ; for ye have fainted, ye are become too in-
dolent ' ; but see how gently he indicated it, and
did not wound them.

For what does he pay? " But we desire that
every one of you do show the same diligence
unto the end." For this is the admirable part
of Paul's wisdom, that he does not expressly
show that they " had " given in, that they
" had " become negligent. For when he says,
" We desire that every one of you " — it is
as if one should say, I wish thee to be always
in earnest ; and such as thou wert before, such
to be now also, and for the time to come. For
this made his reproof more gentle and easy to
be received.

And he did not say, " I will," which would
have been expressive of the authority of a
teacher, but what is expressive of the affection
of a father, and what is more than "willing,"
"we desire." All but saying. Pardon us, even
if we say what is distasteful.

" We desire that every one of you do show
the same diligence to the full assurance of your
hope unto the end." Hope (he means) carries
us through : it recovers us again. Be not wearied
out, do not despair, lest your hope be in vain.
For he that worketh good hopeth also good, and
never despairs of himself.

" That ye may not become dull." » Still » " be-
come " ; and yet he said above, " seeing ye are
become duU^ of hearing." (c. v. 11.) Ob-

* vtaQpoX. The same word is translated *' slothful" and "dull"
in these two passages. It means " sluggish," ** stupid," *' without
quickness in perception or energy in action." • iKfiijv,


4i6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily }


serve however how he Umited the dullness to the
hearing. And here he hints the very same thing ;
instead of ' that ye may not continue in it,' he
says [this]. But again he leads on to that future
time for which they were not yet responsible ;
saying in effect " that ye may not become too
slothful " : since for that which is not yet come
we could not be responsible. For he who in
regard to the present time is exhorted to be
in earnest, as being remiss, will perhaps become
even more slothful, but he who is exhorted with
reference to the future, not so.

" We desire " (he says) " that every one of
you." Great is his affection for them : he cares
equally for great and small ; moreover he knows
all, and overlooks no one, but shows the same ten-
der care for each, and equal value for all ; from
which cause also he the rather persuaded them
to receive what was distasteful in his words.

" That ye be not slothful," he says. For as
inactivity hurts the body, so also inactivity as to
what is good renders the soul more supine and
feeble.

[6.] " But followers " (he says) " of them, who
through faith and patience inherit the promises."
And who they are, he tells afterwards. He said
before, " Imitate your own former well-doings."
Then, lest they should say, What ? He leads them
back to the Patriarch : bringing before them ex-
amples of well-doing indeed from their own his-
tory,' but of the thought of being forsaken, from
the Patriarch ; that they might not suppose that
they were disregarded and forsaken as worthy
of no account, but might know that it is [the
portion] of the very noblest men to make the
journey of life through trials ; and that God has
thus dealt with great and admirable men.

Now we ought (he says) to bear all things
with patience : for this also is believing : whereas
if He say that He gives and thou immediately
receivest, how hast thou also believed ? Since in
that case this is no longer of thy faith, but of Me,
the Giver. But if I say that I give, and give after
an hundred years, and thou hast not despaired ;
then hast thou accounted Me worthy to be be-
lieved, then thou hast the right opinion concern-
ing Me. Thou seest that oftentimes unbehef
arises not from want of hope only, but also from
faintheartedness, and want of patience, not from
condemning him who made the promise.

" For God " (he says) " is not unrighteous to
forget your love " and the zeal " which ye have
showed toward His Name, in that ye have min-
istered unto the saints, and do minister." He
testifies great things of them, not deeds only, but
deeds done with alacrity, which he says also in
another place, " and not only so, but they gave
themselves also to the Lord and to us." (2 Cor.
viii. 5-)


" Which " (he says) " ye have showed towar
His Name, in that ye have ministered to tl
saints, and do minister." See how again ]<
soothes them, by adding "and do minister
Still even at this time (he says) ye are ministe
ing, and he raises them up by showing that thi
had done [what they did] not to them [tl
saints], but to God. "Which ye have showed
(he says) ; and he said not " unto the saints
but " towards God," for this is " toward H
Name." It is for His Name's sake (he mean'
that ye have done all. He therefore who h
the enjoyment from you of* so great zeal ai
love, will never despise you nor forget you.

[7.] Hearing these things, let us, I besee
you, " minister to the saints." For every 1
liever is a saint in that he is a believer. Thou
he be a person living in the world, he is a sail '
" For " (he says) " the unbeheving husband
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving w j
by the husband." (i Cor. vii. 14.) Seehowt
faith makes the saintship. If then we see ev
a secular person in misfortune; let us stretch c
a hand [to him]. Let us not be zealous
those only who dwell in the mountains ; th
are indeed saints both in manner of life and
faith ; these others however are saints by th'
faith, and many of them also in manner of li
Let us not, if we see a monk [cast] into pria
in that case go in ; but if it be a secular perse
refuse to go in. He also is a saint and a broth

What then (you say) if he be unclean a
polluted ? Listen to Christ saying, " Judge
that ye be not judged." (Matt. vii. i.)
thou act for God's sake. Nay, what am I s;
ing? Even if we see a heathen in misfortui
we ought to show kindness to him, and to ev(
man without exception who is in misfortunes, a
much more to a believer who is in the wot
Listen to Paul, saying, " Do good unto all ni'
but especially to those who are of the househi
of faith." (Gal. vi. 10.)

But I know not whence this [notion] has b<!
introduced, or whence this custom hath prevail
For he that only seeks after the solitaries, anc
willing to do good to them alone, and with
gard to others on the contrary is over-curiouS'
his enquiries, and says, 'unless he be worth
unless he be righteous, unless he work miracl
I stretch out no hand ' ; [such an one] has tal
away the greater part of charity,'' yea and
time he will in turn destroy the very thing its
And yet that is charity,* [which is shov


A •Ijco^v.


' airoAauwc.

Mi ii.


a^io?, tav firi


n SiKatoi. Mr. Field retains t-
these clauses.'in accordance with the common editions, thoug
the MSS. omit the negative in the first clause, and the best M>'
the second also, and it was not read by Mutianus. If it be om
the passage would run thus, '* and says, If he be worthy, if h
righteous [I will help him]. Unless he work miracles I stretch
no hand," &c.; which seems to give a good sense.
* i\fr]tioffvvT]f " mercifulness, or " almsgivins."


MII.Y X.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


417


:e


i^ards sinners, towards the guilty. For this is

irity,' not the pitying those who have done

II, but those who have done wrong.

'8.] And that thou mayest understand this, lis-

i to the Parable : " A certain man" (it is said)

'ent down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell

ong thieves" (Luke x. 30, &c.) ; and when

!y had beaten him, they left him by the

y-side, having badly bruised him. A certain

^ite came, and when he saw him, he passed

; A priest came, and when he saw him, he

tened past ; a certain Samaritan came, and

towed great care upon him. For he " bound

his wounds" (Luke x. 34), dropped oil on

m, set him upon his ass, " brought him to

inn, said to the host, Take care of him "

ikex. 35) ; and (observe his great liberality),

id I," he says, " will give thee whatsoever

shalt expend." Who then is his neighbor?

it is said, " that showed mercy on him.

thou then also," He says, " and do like-

(Luke x. 37.) And see what a parable

spake. He said not that a Jew did [so and

to a Samaritan, but that a Samaritan showed

that liberality. Having then heard these

,gs, let us not care only for " those that are

he household of faith" (Gal. vi. 10), and

lect others. So then also thou, if thou see

one in affliction, be not curious to enquire

er. His being in affliction involves a just

on thy aid.^ For if when thou seest an ass

ing thou raisest him up, and dost not curi-

enquire whose he is, much more about a

one ought not to be over-curious in enquir-

hose he is. He is God's, be he heathen or

le Jew ; since even if he is an unbeliever,

he needs help. For if indeed it had been

mitted to thee to enquire and to judge, thou

Idst have well said thus, but, as it is, his mis-

ine does not suffer thee to search out these

For if even about men in good health

not right to be over-curious, nor to be a

body in other men's matters, much less

t those that are in affliction.

] But on another view what [shall we say] ?

;t thou see him in prosperity, in high esteem,

thou shouldst say that he is wicked and

less? But if thou seest him in affliction,

lOt say that he is wicked. For when a


js.


wmioiTvvT), " mercifulness," or " alimsgiving."
t wcaiW


jcai'wfia T^f jSoijdciac.


man is in high credit, we fairly say these things ;
but when he is in calamity, and needs help, it is
not right to say that he is wicked. For this is
cruelty, inhumanity, and arrogance. Tell me
what was ever more iniquitous than the Jews.
But nevertheless while God punished them, and
that justly, yea, very justly, yet He approved of
those who had compassion on them, and those
who rejoiced over them He punished. (Amos
vi. 6.) For " they were not grieved," it is said,
" at the affliction of Joseph."

And again it is said " Redeem [Ransom] those
who are ready to be slain : spare not." (Prov.
xxiv. II.) (He said not, enquire curiously, and
learn who he is ; and yet, for the most part, they
who are led away to execution are wicked,) for
this especially is charity. For he that doeth
good to a friend, doeth it not altogether for God's
sake : but he that [doeth good] to one unknown,
this man acts purely for God's sake. " Do not
spare " thy money, even if it be necessary to
spend all, yet give.

But we, when we see persons in extreme dis-
tress,^ bewailing themselves, suffering things more
grievous than ten thousand deaths, and oftentimes
unjustly, we [I say] are sparing of our money,
and unsparing of our brethren ; we are careful
of hfeless things, but neglect the living soul.
And yet Paul says, " in meekness instruct those
that oppose themselves, if peradventure God
should give them repentance to the acknowledg-
ing of the truth, and they may recover them-
selves out of the snare of the devil who are taken
captive by him, at His will." (2 Tim. ii. 25, 26.)
" If peradventure," he says ; thou seest of how
great long-suffering the word is full.

Let us also imitate Him, and despair of no one.
For the fishermen too, when they have cast many
times [suppose it], have not succeeded ; but
afterwards having cast again, have gained all.
So we also expect that ye will all at once show
to us ripe fruit. For the husbandman too, after
he has sown, waits one day or two days, and is
a long while in expectation : and all at once he
sees the fniits springing up on every side. This
we expect will take place in your case also by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father and also to the
Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for
ever and world without end. Amen.


4i8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


HOMILY XL

Hebrews vi. 13-16.


• Foe when God made promise to Abraham, because He
could swear by no greater, He sware by Himself, say-
ing, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying
I will multiply thee. And so after he had patiently
endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily
swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is
to them an end of all strife."


[i.] Having boldly reflected on the faults of
the Hebrews, and sufficiently alarmed them, he
consoles them, first, by praises, and secondly
(which also is the stronger ground), by the
[thought] that they would certainly attain the
object of their hope. Moreover he draws his
consolation, not from things future, btit again
from the past, which indeed would the rather
persuade them. For as in the case of punish-
ment, he alarms them rather by those [viz. things
future], so also in the case of the prizes [set
before them], he encourages them by these [viz.
by things past], showing [herein] God's way of
dealing. And that is, not to bring in what has
been promised immediately, but after a long
time. And this He does, both to present the
greatest proof of His power, and also to lead us
to Faith, that they who are living in tribulation
without having received the promises, or the re-
■vards, may not faint under their troubles.

And omitting all [the rest], though he had
many whom he might have mentioned, he brought
forward Abraham both on account of the dignity
of his person, and because this had occurred in
a special way in his case.

And yet at the end of the Epistle he says,
that " all these, having seen the promises afar off,
and having embraced them, received them not,
that they without us should not be made per-
fect." (c. xi. 13.) "For when God made
promise to Abraham " (he says) " because He
could swear by no greater. He sware by Himself,
saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and mul-
tiplying I will multiply thee. And so after he
had patiently endured, he obtained the promise."
(c. xi. 39, 40.) How then does he say at
the end [of the Epistle] that "he received
not the promises," and here, that "after he had
patiently endured he obtained the promise " ?
How did he not receive? How did he obtain?
He is not speaking of the same things in this
place and in the other, but makes the consola-
tion twofold. God made promises to Abraham,
and after a long space of time He gave the things
[spoken of] in this place, but those others not
yet


"And so after he had patiently endured, he
obtained the promise." Seest thou that the
promise alone did not effect the whole, but the
patient waiting as well ? Here he alarms them,
showing that oftentimes a promise is thwarted
through faintheartedness.' And this he had
indeed shown through [the instance of] the
[Jewish] people : for since they were faint-
hearted, therefore they obtained not the prom-
ise. But now he shows the contrary by means
of Abraham. Afterwards near the end [of the
Epistle] he proves something more also : [viz.]
that even though they had patiently endured,
they did not obtain ; and yet not even so are
they grieved.

[2.] "For men verily swear by the greater,
and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end
of all strife. But God because He could sweai
by no greater, sware by Himself" Well, who i
then is He that sware unto Abraham ? Is it not j
the Son? No, one says. Certainly indeed iti
was He : however, I shall not dispute [thereon]. I
So when He [the Son] sweareth the same oatn, I
"Verily, verily, I say unto you," is it not plain!
that it was because He could not swear by ar
greater? For as the Father sware, so also tL
Son sweareth by Himself, saying, "Verily, \erily
I say unto you." He here reminds them ah
of the oaths of Christ, which He was constant!
uttering. "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, I.
that believeth on Me shall never die." ( Joli
xi. 26.)

What is, " And an oath for confirmation is !
them an end of all strife"? it is instead of, "1
this every doubtful question is solved" : not thi
or this, but every one.

God, however, ought to have been believt-i
even without an oath : (ver. 17) "wherein" (h
says) " God willing more abundantly to show un:
the heirs of promise the immutability of H
counsel, confirmed it [lit. "mediated"-] by a
oath." In these words he comprehends also tli
believers, and therefore mentions this " jiroii;
ise " which was made to us in common [wit
them]. " He mediated " (he says) " by an oath.
Here again he says that the Son was mediate
between men and God.

Ver. 18. "That by two immutable things,!
which it was impossible that God should lie,
What are these two ? The speaking and pron
ising ; and the adding an oath to the promise


1 o\Lyo'pv}^iaVt


* ifieffinvo'fv.


OMILY XI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


419


or since among men that which is [confirmed]

an oath is thought more worthy of credit, on

is account He added that also.

Seest thou that He regardeth not His own

gnity, but how He may persuade men, and

idures to have unworthy things said concerning

imself. That is He> wishes to impart full assur-

ice. And in the case of Abraham indeed [the

Dos'tle] shows that the whole was of God, not

his patient endurance, since He was even

Uing to add an oath, for He by whom men

ear, by Him also God "sware," that is "by

imself." They indeed as by one greater, but

e not as by one greater. And yet He did it.

jr it is not the same thing for man to swear by

mself, as for God. For man has no power

er himself Thou seest then that this is said

t more for Abraham than for ourselves : " that

(he says) " might have strong consolation,

10 have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope

t before us." Here too again,^ " after he had

tiently endured he obtained the promise."

' Now" he means, and he did not say " when^

; swore." But what the oath is, he showed,

speaking of swearing by a greater. But since

; race of men is hard of behef. He condescends

the same [things] with ourselves. As then

■ our sake He swears, although it be unworthy

Him that He should not be believed, so also

1 [the Apostle] make that other statement :

le learned from the things which He suffered "

v. 8), because men think the going through

perience more worthy of reliance.

What is " the hope set before us " ? From these

1st events] (he says) we conjecture the future.

r if these came to pass after so long a time,

certainly the others will. So that the things

ich happened in regard to Abraham give us

ifidence also concerning the things to come.

'3.] (Ver. 19, 20) "Which [hope] we have

an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast,

I which entereth into that within the veil :

ither the forerunner is for us entered, even

;us, made High Priest forever after the order

Melchisedec." He shows, that while we are

I in the world, and not yet departed from

is] life, we are already among the promises.

r through hope we are already in heaven.

said, " Wait ; for it shall surely be." After-

ds giving them full assurance, he says, " nay

er by hope."^ And he said not, "We are

lin," but 'It hath entered within,' which

more true and more persuasive. For as

anchor, dropped from the vessel, does not


This observation seems to be suggested by the words '_' the

set before us": i.e. this is another instance of obtaining a
e blessing by patient waiting. The next clause bears on the
itle's statement that this oath was made " that we might have
olation." we, " now," at this time; not Abraham, to whom the

was originally made.

€irf(Si}, " at the very time that."

Sav. and Ben. add ^67) ctvx^tc, *' ye have already attained it."


allow it to be carried about, even if ten thousand
winds agitate it, but being depended upon makes
it steady, so also does hope.

And see how very suitable an image he has
discovered : For he said not, Foundation ; which
was not suitable ; but, " Anchor." For that
which is on the tossing sea, and seems not to
be very firmly fixed, stands on the water as upon
land, and is shaken and yet is not shaken. For
in regard to those who are very firm, and philo-
sophic, Christ with good reason made that state-
ment, saying, "Whosoever hath built his house
on a rock." (Matt. vii. 24.) But in respect of
those who are giving way, and who ought to be
carried through by hope, Paul hath suitably set
down this. For the surge and the great storm
toss the boat ; but hope suffers it not to be
carried hither and thither, although winds innu-
merable agitate it : so that, unless we had this
[hope] we should long ago have been sunk.
Nor is it only in things spiritual, but also in
the affairs of this life, that one may find the
power of hope great. Whatever it may be, in
merchandise, in husbandry, in a military expedi-
tion, unless one sets this before him, he would
not even touch the work. But he said not sim-
ply "Anchor," but "sure and steadfast" [i.e.]
not shaken. " Which entereth into that within
the veil"; instead of 'which reacheth through
even to heaven.'

[4.] Then after this he led on to Faith also,
that there might not only be hope, but a very
true [hope]. For after the oath he lays down
another thing too, even proof by facts, because
" the forerunner is for us entered in, even Jesus."
But a forerunner is a forerunner of some one, as
John was of Christ.

Now he did not simply say, " He is entered
in," but "where He is entered in a forerunner
for us," as though we also ought to attain. For
there is no great interval between the forerunner
and those who follow : otherwise he would not
be a forerunner ; for the forerunner and those
who follow ought to be in the same road, and to
arrive after [each other].

" Being made an High Priest forever after the
order," he says, "of Melchisedec." Here is
also another consolation, if our High Priest is
on high, and far better than those among the
Jews, not in the kind [of Priesthood] only, but
also in the place, and the tabernacle, and the
covenant, and the person. And this also is
spoken according to the flesh.

[5.] Those then, whose High Priest He is,
ought to be greatly superior. And as great as
the difference is between Aaron and Christ, so
great should it be between us and the Jews. For
see, we have our victim^ on high, our priest on


420


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XL


high, our sacrifice ' on high : let us bring such
sacrifices as can be offered on that altar, no
longer sheep and oxen, no longer blood and fat.
All these things have been done away ; and
there has been brought in in their stead "the
reasonable service." (Rom. xii. i.) But what is
" the reasonable service " ? The [offerings made]
through the soul ; those made through the spirit.
(" God," it is said, " is a Spirit, and they that
worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in
truth" — John iv. 24); things which have no
need of a body, no need of instmments, nor of
special places, whereof each one is himself the
Priest, such as, moderation, temperance, merci-
fulness, enduring ill-treatment, long-suffering,
humbleness of mind.

These sacrifices one may see in the Old [Tes-
tament] also, shadowed out beforehand. " Offer
to God," it is said, " a sacrifice of righteousness "
(Ps. iv. 5) ; " Offer a sacrifice of praise " (Ps. 1.
14) ; and, "a sacrifice of praise shall glorify
Me " (Ps. 1. 23), and, " the sacrifice of God is a
broken spirit " (Ps. li. 17) ; and " what doth the
Lord require of thee but" to hearken to Him?
(Mic. vi. 8.) " Burnt-offerings and sacrifices for
sin Thou hast had no pleasure in : then I said,
Lo I come to do Thy will, O God ! " (Ps. xl. 6,
7), and again, "To what purpose do ye bring
the incense from Sheba ? " (Jer. vi. 20.) " Take
thou away from Me the noise of thy songs, for I
will not hear the melody of thy viols." (Amos
V. 23.) But instead of these " I will have mercy
and not sacrifice." (Hosea vi. 6.) Thou seest
with what kind of " sacrifices God is well
pleased." (c. xiii. 16.) Thou seest also that
already from the first the one class have given
place, and these have come in their stead.

These therefore let us bring, for the other in-
deed are [the offerings] of wealth and of persons
who have [possessions] , but these of virtue :
those from without, these from within : those
any chance person even might perform ; these
only a few. And as much as a man is superior
to a sheep, so much is this sacrifice superior to
that ; for here thou offerest thy soul as a victim.

[6.] And other sacrifices also there are, which
are indeed whole burnt-offerings, the bodies of
the martyrs : there both soul and body [are
offered]. These have a great savor of a sweet
smell. Thou also art able, if thou wilt, to bring
such a sacrifice.

For what, if thou dost not burn thy body in
the fire ? Yet in a different fire thou canst ; for
instance, in that of voluntary poverty, in that of
affliction. For to have it in one's power to
spend one's days in luxury and expense, and
yet to take up a life of toil and bitterness, and to
mortify the body, is not this a whole burnt-offer-


ing? Mortify thy body, and crucify it, and thon
shall thyself also receive the crown of this mar-
tyrdom. For what in the other case the sword
accomplishes, that in this case let a willing mind
effect. Let not the love of wealth burn, or jws-
sess you, but let this unreasonable appetite itself
be consumed and quenched by the fire of the
Spirit ; let it be cut in pieces by the sword of
the Spirit.

This is an excellent sacrifice, needing no priest
but him who brings it. This is an excellent sac-
rifice, performed indeed below, but forthwith
taken up on high. Do we not wonder that of
old time fire came down and consumed all ? It
is possible now also that fire may come down far
more wonderful than that, and consume all the
presented offerings : ^ nay rather, not consume,
but bear them up to heaven. For it does not
reduce them to ashes, but offers them as gifts to
God.

[7.] Such were the offerings of Cornelius.
For (it is said) " thy prayers and thine alms are
come up for a memorial before God." (Acts x.
4.) Thou seest a most excellent union. Then
are we heard, when we ourselves also hear the
poor who come to us. " He " (it is said) " that
stoppeth his ears that he may not hear thi
poor" (Prov. xxi. 13), his prayer God will not
hearken to. " Blessed is he that considereth the
poor and needy : the Lord will deliver him in
the evil day." (Ps. xl. i.) But what day is
evil except that one which is evil to sinners ?

What is meant by "he that considereth"'
He that understandeth what it is to be a jioot
man, that has thoroughly learned his affliction
For he that has learned his affliction, will cer
tainly and immediately have compassion on him
When thou seest a poor man, do not hurry b}
but immediately reflect what thou woukies:
have been, hadst thou been he. What wouldes
thou not have wished that all should do for thee ':
" He that considereth " (he says). Reflect tha
he is a free-man like thyself, and shares the same
noble birth with thee, and possesses all things in
common with thee ; and yet oftentimes he is not
on a level even with thy dogs. On the contrary,
while they are satiated, he oftentimes lies, sleeps,
hungry, and the free-man is become less honor-
able than thy slaves.

But they perform needful services for thee.
What are these? Do they serve thee well?
Suppose then I show that this [poor man] too
performs needful services for thee far greater
than they do: For he will stand by thee in thr
Day of judgment, and will deliver thee from the
fire. What do all thy slaves do like this ? When
Tabitha died, who raised her up ? The slaves who
stood around or the poor? But thou art not


1 Qvaiaj *' the act of sacrificing." ^Qvtria commonly has the
meaning given in the text, not that m the note. — F. G.]


' Ta irpoJcci/ACi'a.


OMII-Y XI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


421


en willing to put the free-man on an equality
th thy slaves. The frost is hard, and the poor
an is cast out in rags, well-nigh dead, with his
eth chattering, both by his looks and his air
ted to move thee : and thou passeth by, warm
d full of drink ; and how dost thou expect that
od should deliver thee when in misfortune ?
And oftentimes thou sayest this too : ' If it
d been myself, and I had found one that had
)ne many wrong things, I would have forgiven
m ; and does not God forgive ? ' Say not
is. Him that has done thee no wrong, whom
ou art able to deliver, him thou neglectest.
ow shall He forgive thee, who art sinning
ainst Him? Is not this deserving of hell?
And how amazing ! Oftentimes thou adorn-
t with vestments innumerable, of varied colors
d wrought with gold, a dead body, insensible,
longer perceiving the honor ; whilst that which
in pain, and lamenting, and tormented, and
eked by hunger and frost, thou neglectest ;
d givest more to vainglory, than to the fear of
3d.

[8.] And would that it stopped here ; but
mediately accusations are brought against the
plicant. For why does he not work (you
y) ? And why is he to be maintained in idleness ?
t (tell me) is it by working that thou hast
lat thou hast, didst thou not receive it as an
leritance from thy fathers ? And even if thou
ist work, is this a reason why thou shouldest re-
oach another ? Hearest thou not what Paul
th ? For after saying, " He that worketh not,
ither let him eat " (2 Thess. iii. 10), he says,
iut ye be not weary in well doing." (2 Thess.

I3-)
But what say they? He is an impostor.'
hat sayest thou, O man ? Callest thou him an
postor, for the sake of a single loaf or of a
rment? But (you say) he will sell it imme-
itely. And dost thou manage all thy affairs
11? But what? Are all poor through idleness?
no one so from shipwreck ? None from law-
ts ? None from being robbed ? None from dan-
rs? None from illness? None from any other
ficulties? If however we hear any one be-
lling such evils, and crying out aloud, and
)king up naked toward heaven, and with long
ir, and clad in rags, at once we call him. The
postor ! The deceiver ! The swindler 1 Art thou
i ashamed? Whom dost thou call impostor?
ve nothing, and do not accuse the man.
But (you say) he has means, and pretends,
is is a charge against thyself, not against him.
: knows that he has to deal with the cruel,
h wild beasts rather than with men, and
.t, even if he utter a pitiable story, he attracts

one's attention : and on this account he is
ced to assume also a more miserable guise.


iiri9irr]s.


that he may melt thy soul. If we see a person
coming to beg in a respectable dress, This is an
impostor (you say), and he comes in this way
that he may be supposed to be of good birth.
If we see one in the contrary guise, him too we
reproach. What then are they to do ? O the
cruelty, O the inhumanity !

And why (you say) do they expose their
maimed limbs ? Because of thee. If we were
compassionate, they would have no need of
these artifices : if they persuaded us at the first
application, they would not have contrived these
devices. Who is there so wretched, as to be
willing to cry out so much, as to be willing to
behave in an unseemly way, as to be willing to
make public lamentations, with his wife destitute
of clothing, with his children, to sprinkle ashes
on [himself]. How much worse than poverty
are these things? Yet on account of them not
only are they not pitied, but are even accused
by us.

[9.] Shall we then still be indignant, because
when we pray to God, we are not heard ? Shall
we then still be vexed, because when we entreat
we do not persuade ? Do we not tremble for
fear, my beloved?

But (you say) I have often given. But dost
thou not always eat ? And dost thou drive away
thy children often begging of thee? O the
shamelessness ! Dost thou call a poor man
shameless ? And thou indeed art not shameless
when plundering, but he is shameless when beg-
ging for bread ! Considerest thou not how great
are the necessities of the belly? Dost not thou
do all things for this? Dost thou not for this
neglect things spiritual? Is not heaven set be-
fore thee and the kingdom of heaven ? And thou
fearing the tyranny of that [appetite] endurest
all things, and thinkest lightly of that [kingdom].
This is shamelessness.

Seest thou not old men maimed? But O
what trifling ! ' Such an one ' (you say) ' lends
out so many pieces of gold, and such an one so
many, and yet begs.' You repeat the stories
and trifles of children ; for they too are always
hearing such stories from their nurses. I am
not persuaded of it. I do not believe this. Far
from it. Does a man lend money, and beg when
he has abundance ? For what purpose, tell me ?
And what is more disgraceful than begging? It
were better to die than to beg. Where does our
inhumanity stop? What then? Do all lend
money ? Are all impostors ? Is there no one really
poor? "Yea" (you say) "and many." Why then
dost thou not assist those persons, seeing thou
art a strict enquirer into their lives ? This is an
excuse and a pretense.

" Give to every one ^ that asketh of thee, and

' [St. Chrys. here supplies iravrtf equals " every one," from tb«


422


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou
away." (Matt. v. 42.) Stretch out thy hand,
let it not be closed up. We have not been con-
stituted examiners into men's lives, since so we
should have compassion on no one. When thou
callest upon God why dost thou say. Remember
not my sins ? So then, if that person even be a
great sinner, make this allowance in his case
also, and do not remember his sins. It is the
season of kindness, not of strict enquiry ; of
mercy, not of account. He wishes to be main-
tained : if thou art willing, give ; but if not will-
ing, send him away without raising doubts.' Why
art thou wretched and miserable ? Why dost thou
not even thyself pity him, and also turnest away
those who would ? " For when such an one hears
from thee, This [fellow] is a cheat ; that a hypo-
crite ; and the other lends out money ; he neither
gives to the one nor to the other ; for he suspects
all to be such. For you know that we easily sus-
pect evil, but good, not [so easily] .

[10.] Let us " be merciful," not simply so,
but " as our heavenly Father is." (Luke vi. 36.)
He feeds even adulterers, and fornicators, and
sorcerers, and what shall I say? Those having
every kind of wickedness. For in so large a
world there must needs be many such. But
nevertheless He feeds all ; He clothes all. No
one ever perished of hunger, unless one did so
of his own choice. So let us be merciful. If
one be in want and in necessity, help him.

But now we are come to such a degree of un-
reasonableness, as to act thus not only in regard
to the poor who walk up and down the alleys,
but even in the case of men that live in [relig-
ious] solitude.^ Such an one is an impostor, you
say. Did I not say this at first, that if we give
to all indiscriminately, we shall always be corn-


parallel place in Luke vi. 30, though the form of quotation is from
Matt. V. 42. — F. G.]


passionate ; but if we begin to make over-curious
enquiries, we shall never be compassionate?
What dost thou mean ? Is a man an impostor in
order to get a loaf? If indeed he asks for talents
of gold and silver, or costly clothes, or slaves, or
anything else of this sort, one might with good
reason call him a swindler. But if he ask none
of these things, but only food and shelter, things
which are suited to a philosophic life," tell me,
is this the part of a swindler? Cease we from
this unseasonable fondness for meddling, which
is Satanic, which is destructive.

For indeed, if a man say that he is on the list
of the Clergy, or calls himself a priest, then busy
thyself [to enquire], make much ado : since in
that case the communicating * without enquiry is
not without danger. For the danger is about
matters of importance, for thou dost not give
but receivest. But if he want food, make no
enquiry.

Enquire, if thou wilt, how Abraham showed
hospitality towards all who came to him. If he
had been over-curious about those who fled to
him for refuge, he would not have " entertained
angels." (c. xiii. 2.) For perhaps not thinking
them to be angels, he would have thrust them
too away with the rest. But since he used to
receive all, he received even angels.

What? Is it from the life of those that re-
ceive [thy bounty] that God grants thee thy
reward? Nay [it is] from thine own purpose,
from thy abundant liberality ; from thy loving-
kindness ; from thy goodness. Let this be
[found], and thou shalt attain all good things,
which may we all attain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom to the Father and together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.


s & ^t\otTtyf>iai e<rTt, i.e. of the ascetics or solitary life.


Homily XII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


423


HOMILY XII.

Hebrews vii. 1-3.


For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most
High God who met Abraham returning from the
saughter of the Kings, and blessed him: to whom
also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first beine
by interpretation King of Righteousness, and after
that also King of Salem, which is. King of I'eace
without father, without mother, without genealogy'
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life'
but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest
continually."


[i.] Paul wishing to show the difference be-
ween the New and Old [Covenant], scatters it
verywhere ; and shoots from afar, and noises it
broad, and prepares beforehand. For at once
ven from the introduction, he laid down this'
aymg, that "to them indeed He spake by
irophets, but to us by the Son" (c. i. i, 2)
nd to them "at sundry times and in d'ivers
lanners," but to us through the Son. After-
'ards, having discoursed concerning the Son
'ho He was and what He had wrought and
iven an exhortation to obey Him, lest we should
iffer the same things as the Jews ; and havin?
Iiid that He is " High Priest after the order of
lelchisedec" (c. vi. 20), and having often-
mes wished to enter into [the subject of] this
iffcrence, and having used much preparatory
lanagement ; and having rebuked them as weak,
id again soothed and restored them to confi-
ence ; then at last he introduces the discussion
n the difference [of the two dispensations] to
IK in their full vigor. For he who is depressed
1 spirits would not be a ready hearer. And
Kit you may understand this, hear the Scripture
lying, " They hearkened not to Moses for an-
iish of spirit."* (Ex. vi. 9.) Therefore hav-
g first cleared away their despondency by
any considerations, some fearful, some more
;ntle, he then from this point enters upon the
scussion of the difference [of the dispensa-
3ns].

[2.] And what does he say? " For this Mel-
|iisedec. King of Salem, Priest of the Most
ligh God." And, what is especially note-
iJrthy, he shows the difference to be great by

e Type itself. For as I said, he continually
tnfirms the truth from the Type, from things
]ist, on account of the weakness of the hearers
;For " (he says) " this Melchisedec, King of
•lern. Priest of the Most High God, who met
-praham returning from the slaughter of the
jngs, and blessed him, to whom also Abraham

' '"""'""'i". » iAiyoi(-vxcW, " faint-heartedncss."


I gave a tenth part of all." Having concisely set
down the whole narrative, he looked at ' it mys-
tically. •'

And first from the name. " First " (he says)
" being by interpretation King of righteousness " •
for Sedec means " righteousness " ; and Melchi,
" King" : Melchisedec, " Kin^ of righteousness."
Seest thou his exactness even in the names?
But who is " King of righteousness," save our
Lord Jesus Christ? "King of righteousness.
And after that also King of Salem," from his
city, "that is. King of Peace," which again is
[characteristic] of Christ. For He has made us
righteous, and has " made peace " for " things
in Heaven and things on earth." (Col. i. 20 )
What man is " King of Righteousness and of
Peace"? None, save only our Lord Jesus
Christ.

[3.] He then adds another distinction,
" Without father, without mother, without gene-
alogy, having neither beginning of days nor end
of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abid-
eth a Priest continually." Since then there lay
in his way [as an objection] the [words] " Thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchis-
edec," whereas he [Melchisedec] was dead, and
was not " Priest for ever," see how he explained
it mystically.

' And who can say this concerning a man ? '
I do not assert this in fact (he says) ; the mean-
ing is, we do not know when * [or] what father
he had, nor what mother, nor when he received
his beginning, nor when he died. And what of
this (one says) ? For does it follow, because we
do not know it, that he did not die, [or] had no
parents ? Thou sayest well : he both died and
had parents. How then [was he] "without
father, without mother " ? How " having neither
beginning of days nor end of life"? How?
[Why] from its not being expressed.' And what
of this ? That as this man is so, from his gene-
alogy not being given, so is Christ from the very
nature of the reality.

See the " without beginning " ; see the "with-
out end." As in case of this man, we know not
either " beginning of days," or " end of life,"
because they have not been written; so we
know [them] not in the case of Jesus, not be-
cause they have not been written, but because


' ittiip^trt, •' drew out the mystical senses."
,.'. ^^'■. ^'M reads iron, making a double question,
editions have wot*, " at all."


The other


AH


Works of st. chrvsostom.


[Homily X


they do not exist. For that indeed is a type,'
and therefore [we say] ' because it is not writ-
ten,' but this is the reahty,* and therefore [we
say] ' because it does not exist.' For as in re-
gard to the names also (for there " King of
Righteousness " and " of Peace " are appella-
tions, but here the reality) so these too are ap-
pellations in that case, in this the reality. How
then hath He a beginning? Thou seest that the
Son is " without beginning," ' not in respect of
His not having a cause ;* (for this is impossible :
for He has a Father, otherwise how is He Son ?)
but in respect of His " not having beginning or
end of life."

"But made lUce unto the Son of God."
Where is the likeness? That we know not of
the one or of the other either the end or the
beginning. Of the one because they are not
written ; of the other, because they do not ex-
ist. Here is the likeness. But if the likeness
were to exist in all respects, there would no
longer be type and reality ; but both would be
type. [Here] then just as in representations'
[by painting or drawing], there is somewhat that
is like and somewhat that is unlike. By means
of the lines indeed there is a likeness of fea-
tures,* but when the colors are put on, then the
difference is plainly shown, both the likeness
and the unlikeness.

[4.] Ver. 4. " Now consider " (saith he) " how
great this man is to whom even the Patriarch
Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils." ' Up to
this point he has been applying the type : hence-
forward he boldly shows him [Melchisedec] to
be more glorious than the Jewish realities. But
if he who bears a type of Christ is so much bet-
ter not merely than the priests, but even than
the forefather himself of the priests, what should
one say of the reality ? Thou seest how super-
abundantly he shows the superiority.

" Now consider " (he says) " how great this
man is to whom even the Patriarch Abraham
gave a tenth out of the choice portions." Spoils
taken in battle are called " choice portions." *
And it cannot be said that he gave them to him
as having a part in the war, because (he said) he
met him " returning from the slaughter of the
kings," for he had staid at home (he means), yet
[Abraham] gave him the first-fruits of his labors.

Ver. 5. ".And verily they that are of the sons
of Levi who receive the office of Priesthood,
nave a commandment to take tithes of the
people according to the law, that is, of their


* Tvwot, * ivapxov.

* tiK6ffiy. The companRon is not between the living object and
the picture, but between representations in drawine and in paintine;
the word t'lKuy^ as our " likeness," being applicable to both. The
passage is considerably altered in the common editions so as to avoid
an apparent difficulty.

* yapoKTijpwf. • oKpoBivta,
' " choice portions."


brethren, though they come out of the loins
Abraham." So great (he would say) is t
superiority of the priesthood, that they who fro
their ancestors are of the same dignity, and ha
the same forefather, are yet far better than ti
rest. At all events they " receive tithes " fro
them. When then one is found, who receiv
tithes from these very persons, are not they i
deed in the rank of laymen, and he among tl
Priests ?

And not only this ; but neither was he of i
same dignity with them, but of another race :
that he would not have given tithes to a Strang
unless his dignity had been great. Astonishin]
What has he accomplished ? He has made qui
clear a greater point than those relating to fai
which he treated in the Epistle to the Romai
For there indeed he declares Abraham to be t
forefather both of our polity and also of the Je
ish. But here he is exceeding bold agaii
him, and shows that the uncircumcised pers^
is far superior. How then did he show tl;
Levi paid tithes? Abraham (he says) pa
them. ' And how does this concern us ? '
especially concerns you : for you will not co
tend that the Levites are superior to Abrahai
(Ver. 6) " But he whose descent is not count
from them, received tithes of Abraham."

And after that he did not simply pass on, b
added, "and blessed him that had the proi
ises." Inasmuch as throughout, this was regardi
with reverence, he shows that [Melchisedec] w
to be reverenced more than Abraham, from t
common judgment of all men. (Ver. 7) "Ai
without all contradiction," he says, " the less
blessed of the better," i.e. in the opinion of
men it is the inferior that is blessed by the suj
rior. So then the type of Christ is superior ev
to " him that had the promises."

(Ver. 8) " And here men that die rece:
tithes : but there he of whom it is testified tl
he liveth." But lest we should say. Tell us, w
goest thou so far back ? He says, (ver. 9) " A
as I may so say" (and he did well in soften
it) " Levi also who receiveth tithes payed till
in Abraham." How? (Ver. 10) "For he'
yet in his loins when Melchisedec met him,"
Levi was in him, although he was not yet be
And he said not the Levites but Levi.

Hast thou seen the superiority? Hast tl
seen how great is the interval between Abrah
and Melchisedec, who bears the type of
High Priest ? And he shows that the superio
had been caused by authority, not necess
For the one paid the tithe, which indicates ■
priest : the other gave the blessing, which ii
cates the superior. This superiority passes
also to the descendants.

In a marvelous and triumphant way he
out the Jewish [system]. On this accouDl


OMIl.Y XII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


4^5


.id, "Ye are become dull," (c. v. 12), because
; wished to lay these foundations, that they
ight not start away. Such is the wisdom of
lul, first preparing them well, he so leads ' them
to what he wishes. For the human race is hard
I persuade, and needs much attention, even more
lan plants. Since in that case there is [only]
e nature of material bodies, and earth, which
elds to the hands of the husbandmen : but in
lis there is will, which is liable to many altera-
ans, and now prefers this, now that. For it
iickly turns to evil.

[5.] Wherefore we ought always to "guard"

jrselves, lest at any time we should fall asleep.

or " Lo " (it is said) "he that keepeth Israel

lall neither slumber nor sleep" (Ps. cxxi. 4),

id " Do not suffer^ thy foot to be moved."

?s. cxxi. 3.) He did not say, ' be not moved '

[it "do not thou suffer," &c. The suffering de-

•nds then on ourselves, and not on any other.

|)r if we will stand " steadfast and unmoveable "

Cor. XV. 58), we shall not be shaken.

What then ? Does nothing depend on God ?

indeed depends on dod, but not so that our

;e-will is hindered. ' If then it depend on

)d,'(one says), ' why does He blame us?' On

account I said, ' so that our free-will is not

idered.' It depends then on us, and on Him.

r we must first choose the good ; and then

leads us to His own.^ He does not antici-

:e our choice,* lest our free-will should be

raged. But when we have chosen, then

at is the assistance he brings to us.

How is it then that Paul says, " not of him

t willeth," if it depend on ourselves also

or of him that runneth, but of God that

iweth mercy." (Rom. ix. 16.)

n the first place, he did not introduce it as

own opinion, but inferred it from what was

)re him and from what had been put forward'

the discussion]. For after saying, " It is

ten, I will have mercy on whom I will have

•cy, and I will have compassion on whom I will

|e compassion " (Rom. ix. 15), he says, " It

ws then" that it is not of him that willeth,

of him that runneth, but of God that show-


, , AAei.

|ln Psalm cxxi. 3 (cxx. 3, LXX.) where we have " He shall not

," &c., the LXX. have, iirj iojTjy et? craAoi' TOf n-ofia aof, iJ.-r}Se

^n (Vat.) 6 <itvKa.aaiuv ui, " Lest thou suffer," &c.. and " lest

a ueepeth thee slumber." St. Chrys. substitutes *w« for 6<j7js,

the sense, " Do not suffer," &c., " and let not him that

I thee slumber." This he applies to the Christian keeping

J over him.sclf (his words are XPV navTore <f»uAaTT«ii' eauToi*?,

I* iwovviTTa(uitjLfi') : and so he seems to have understood ver.

Ihe Christian : that a watchman of Israel ought not to slumber

1^. The Alex. MS. has vuffrafei in the third verse.

^V«y«t Ta irap" tttvToij, His part.

■ovAifvcif, Those acts of the soul whereby we desire and aim

t ii gtxxl.

mtiiivQv . . . iipo0\7}divTo<;, The former word is used by

,». to express the portion of Scripture on which he is treat-

( latter is a received term in the dialectical method of the

lo express a proposition ptit forward to be argued from, to

lat consequences follow from it, with a view of showiii^ it to

■rue, or determining the sense in which it is true. St. Chrys.

n to say that this proposition was only thus argumentatively

i by St. Paul. « 'Apa ovf.


eth mercy." "Thou wilt say then unto me,
why doth He yet find fault?" (Rom. ix. i6,
19.)

And secondly the other explanation may be
given, that he speaks of all as His, whose the
greater part is. For it is ours to choose ' and
to wish ; but God's to complete and to bring to
an end. Since therefore the greater part is of
Him, he says all is of Him, speaking according
to the custom of men. For so we ourselves also
do. I mean for instance : we see a house well
built, and we say the whole is the Architect's
[doing], and yet certainly it is not all his, but
the workmen's also, and the owner's, who sup-
plies the materials, and many others', but never-
theless since he contributed the greatest share,
we call the whole his. So then [it is] in this
case also. Again, with respect to a number of
people, where the many are, we say All are :
where few, nobody. So also Paul says, " not
of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
of God that showeth mercy."

And herein he establishes two great truths :
one, that we should not be lifted up : ' even
shouldst thou run (he would say), even shouldst
thou be very earnest, do not consider that the well
doing' is thine own. For if thou obtain not the
impulse '" that is from above, all is to no purpose.
Nevertheless that thou wilt attain that which
thou earnestly strivest after is very evident ; so
long as thou runnest, so long as thou wiliest.

He did not then assert this, that we run in
vain, but that, if we think the whole to be our
own, if we do not assign the greater part to God,
we run in vain. For neither hath God willed
that the whole should be His, lest He should
appear to be crowning us without cause : nor
again our's, lest we should fall away to pride.
For if when we have the smaller [share], we
think much of ourselves, what should we do if
the whole depended on us ?

[6.] Indeed God hath done away many things
for the purpose of cutting away our boastfulness,
and still there is the" high hand. With how
many afflictions hath He encompassed us, so as
to cut away our proud spirit ! With how many
wild beasts hath He encircled us ! For indeed
when some say, ' why is this ? ' 'Of what use is
this ? ' They utter these things against the will of
God. He hath placed thee in the midst of so


' or, " purpose and will," iTpotX.ttr6<u koX fiov^rfSrivat,

" In the genuine text here as in some other places, there is no
mention of the second point. The longer text has " one that we
should not be lifted up by what we do well : the other that when we
d* well, we should attribute to God the cause of our well-doing.
Therefore," &c. Mr. Field thinks that either the thread of the (iis-
course is broken, and the second point not mentioned, or (which
seems more probable) that it is contained in the words " Neverthe-
less," &c.

* KaT6p0u}fi.a,

*" /SoTTTj: " The inclining of the balance"; or, *' the weight which
makes it turn."

1' Sav. and Ben. add ayroC, " His hand is high": but the refer-
ence is to our sinning " with a high hand," as appears from what
fallows in the next paragraph.


426


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV


great fear, and yet not even so art thou lowly-
minded ; but if thou ever attain a little success,
thou reachest to Heaven itself in pride.

For this cause [come] rapid changes and
reverses ; and yet not even so are we instructed.
For this cause are there continual and untimely
deaths, but are minded as if we were immortal,
as if we should never die. We plunder, we
over-reach, as though we were never to give
account. We build as if we were to abide here
always. And not even the word of God daily
sounded into our ears, nor the events themselves
instruct us. Not a day, not an hour can be
mentioned, in which we may not see continual
funerals. But all in vain : and nothing reaches
our hardness [uf heart] : nor are we even able
to become better by the calamities of others ; or
rather, we are not willing. Wlien we ourselves
only are afflicted, then we are subdued, and yet
if God take off His hand, we again lift up our
hand : no one considers what is proper for man,'
no one despises the things on earth ; no one
looks to Heaven. But as swine turn their heads
downwards, stooping towards their belly, wallow-
ing in the mire ; so too the great body of man-
kind defile themselves with the most intolerable
filth, without being conscious of it.

[7.] For better were it to be defiled with
unclean mud than with sins ; for he who is de-
filed with the one, washes it off in a little time,
and becomes like one who had never from the
first fallen into that slough ; but he who has
fallen into the deep pit of sin has contracted a
defilement that is not cleansed by water, but
needs long time, and strict repentance, and tears
and lamentations, and more wailing, and that
more fervent, than we show over the dearest
friends. For this defilement attaches to us from
without, wherefore we also speedily put it away ;
but the other is generated from within, wherefore
also we wash it off with difficulty, and cleanse
ourselves from it. " For from the heart " (it is
said) " proceed evil thoughts, fornications, adul-
teries, thefts, false witnesses." (Matt. xv. 19.)
Wherefore also the Prophet said, " Create in me
a clean heart, O God." (Ps. li. 10.) And
another, "Wash thine heart from wickedness.


^ ov£eif avBptiHTiva *l>poffi. This is the reading also of Savile
and Morell. It is supported by one MS. and the pr. m. of another:
which had been corrected to ov6. oupai'ia <f>., the reading of the
Verona edition. Mutianus has fie»w divina sapit ; and the later
translator ctxlestia. The other MSS. have ac0pu>7rii'a ireptt^poccr,
rairct^a ^povtlf Tantivoii)povti, Montfaucon tonjectured ra avta

^pOfCL.


O Jerusalem." (Jer. iv. 14.) (Thou 1
that it is both our [work] and God's.)
again, " Blessed are the pure in heart, for
shall see God." (Matt. v. 8.)

Let us become clean to the utmost of
power. Let us wipe away our sins. And he
wipe them away, the prophet teaches, sa
" Wash you, make you clean, put away
wickedness from your souls, before Mine e
(Isa. i. 16.) What is " before Mine eyes " ?
cause some seem to be free from wickedness
only to men, while to God they are manife
being " whited sepulchers." Therefore He
so put them away as I see. " Learn to do
seek judgment, do justice for the poor and lo'
" Come now, and let us reason together,
the Lord : and though your sins be as scar
will make you white as snow, and if they t
crimson, I will make you white as wool." (I
17, 18.) Thou seest that we must first ck
ourselves, and then God cleanses us. For h:
said first, "Wash you, make you clean," He
added " I will make you white."

Let no one then, [even] of those who
come to the extremest wickedness, despai
himself. For (He says) even if thou
passed into the habit, yea and almost into
nature of wickedness itself, be not al
Therefore taking [the instance of) colors
are not superficial but almost of the substan
the materials. He said that He would ]
them into the opposite state. For He die
simply say that He would " wash " us, but
He would " make " us " white, as snow ar
wool," in order to hold out good hopes b
us. Great then is the power of repentant
least if it makes us as snow, and whitens
wool, even if sin have first got possession
dyed our souls.

Let us labor earnestly then to become c
He has enjoined nothing burdensome. "J
the fatherless, and do justice for the wic
(Isa. i. 17.) Thou seest everywhere how
account God makes of mercy, and of sta:j
forward in behalf of those that are wro
These good deeds let us pursue after, an
shall be able also, by the grace of God, to
to the blessings to come : which may we
counted worthy of, in Christ Jesus our
with whom to the Father together with the
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and foi
and world without end. Amen.


loMlLY XIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


427


HOMILY XIII.


Hebrews vii.


11-14.


If therefore perfection were byl the Levitical priest-
hood; (for under it the people have received the
law^) what further need was there that another
priest should arise after the order of Melchisedec,
and not be called after the order of Aaron? For
the priesthood being changed, there is* made of
necessity a change also of the law. For He of
whom these things are spoken, pertained to another
tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
altar. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of
Tudah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concern-
ing priests."'

[i.] "If therefore" (he says) "perfection

rere by the Levitical priesthood." Having

poken concerning Melchisedec, and shown how

"auch superior he was to Abraham, and having

jet forth the great difference between them, he

• egins from this point forward to prove the wide
ifference as to the covenant itself, and how the
ne is imperfect and the other perfect. How-
\ cr he does not even yet enter on the matters
Kinselves, but first contends on the ground of
ic priesthood, and the tabernacle. For these
jiings would be more easily received by the
nbelieving, when the proof was derived from
flings already allowed, and believed.

; He had shown that Melchisedec was greatly
}i jperior both to Levi and to Abraham, being to
; pern in the rank of the priests. Again he argues

om a different point. What then is this?
; /hy (he says) did he not say, " after the order

f Aaron"? And observe, I pray you, the great
(, iperiority [of his argument] . For from the

• jry circumstance which naturally excluded His
iriesthood, viz. that He was not " after the

; pier of Aaron," from that he establishes Him,
- fid excludes the others. For this is the very
ling that I say (he declares) ; why has He
nijt been made after the order of Aaron " ?
And the [saying] " what further need " has
rich emphasis. For if Christ had been "after
ic order of Melchisedec " according to the
esh, and then afterwards the law had been in-
joduced, and all that pertained to Aaron, one
light reasonably say that the latter as being
lore perfect, annulled the former, seeing that
i had come in after it. But if Christ comes
Iter, and takes a different type, as that of His


' "by means of."
I ' MvOMoQe'TTjTai is the reading of the best MSS. of St. Chrys. here
id throughout the Homily. The common editions had yevo^oSe-
|to. So while the common editions [Tgjrtus Kec] of the N. T.
Ad vevotiodir^To, the critical editors have vft'o^lo9e■rrlTal.

* " takes place." * *' from."

• Uptatv. The editions had itputirvvris', so the common text of
6 New Test, read itpwavinf^f the critical editions have itpiav.


priesthood, it is evident that it is because those
were imperfect. For (he would say) let us sup-
pose for argument's sake, that all has been ful-
filled, and that there is nothing imperfect in the
priesthood. " What need " was there in that case
that He should be called " after the order of
Melchisedec and not after the order of Aaron " ?
Why did He set aside Aaron, and introduce a
different priesthood, that of Melchisedec ? " If
then perfection," that is the perfection of the
things themselves, of the doctrines, of life,' " had
been by the Levitical priesthood."

And observe how he goes forward on his path.
He had said that [He was] " after the order of
Melchisedec," implying that the [priesthood]
" after the order of Melchisedec " is superior :
for [he was] ' far superior. Afterwards he shows
this from the time also, in that He was after
Aaron ; evidently as being better.

[2.] And what is the meaning of what follows?
" For " (he says) " under [or " upon "] it the
people have received the Law [or " have been
legislated for "]." « What is " under it " [&x.] ?
Ordereth itself by it ; through it does all things.
You cannot say that it was given to others, " the
people under it have received the law," that is,
have used it, and did use it. You cannot say
indeed that it was perfect, it did not govern the
people ; " they have been legislated for upon
it," that is, they used it.

What need was there then of another priest-
hood ? " For the priesthood being changed,
there is of necessity a change of the law also."
But if there must be another priest, or rather
another priesthood, there must needs be also
another law. This is for those who say, What
need was there of a new Covenant? For he
could indeed have alleged a testimony from
prophecy also. " This is the covenant which I
made with your fethers" [&c.]. (c. viii. 10.)
But for the present he contends on the ground
of the priesthood. And observe, how he says
this from the first. He said, " According to the
order of Melchisedec." By this he excluded
the order of Aaron. For he would not have
said "After the order of Melchisedec," if the
other had been better. If therefore another
priesthood has been brought in, there must be

" et liiv oZv TfAetuxrty, Tovrttrri T^? riiiv npaytiiriav, r^? Twi»
ioyixariav ^ Tov fiiov ij TfAeiw<ri?. It is not clear, as Mr. Field re-
marks, to what the articles t^9, t^? are to be referred.

^ or ["it is"]. S. B. have eVeTro? in the text.

• [have been subjected to the law. — F G.]

• VTQ^J^tl,


428


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI]


also [another] Covenant ; for neither is it pos-
sible that there should be a priest, without a
covenant and laws and ordinances, nor that
having received a different priesthood He should
use the former [covenant].

In the next place, as to the ground of objec-
tion : " How could He be a priest if He were
not a Levite?" Having overthrown this by
what had been said above, he does not even
think it worth answering, but introduces it in
passing. I said (he means) that the priesthood
was changed, therefore also the Covenant is.
And it was changed not only in its character,'
or in its ordinances, but also in its tribe. For
of necessity [it must be changed] in its tribe also.
How ? " For the priesthood being changed [or
" transferred "]," from tribe to tribe, from the
sacerdotal to the regal [tribe], that the same
might be both regal and sacerdotal.

And observe the mystery. First it was royal,
and then it is become sacerdotal : so therefore
also in regard to Christ : for King indeed He
always was, but has become Priest from the
time that He assumed the Flesh, that He offered
the sacrifice. Thou seest the change, and the
very things which were ground of objection these
he introduces, as though the natural order of
things required them. " For " (he says) " He
of whom these things are spoken pertained to
another tribe." I myself also say it, I know
that this tribe [of Judah] had nothing of priest-
hood. For there is a transferring.

[3.] Yea and I am showing another difference
also (he would say) : not only from the tribe,
nor yet only from the Person, nor from the char-
acter [of the Priesthood], nor from the cove-
nant, but also from the type itself. (Ver. 16)
"Who was made ["became" so], not accord-
ing to the law of a carnal commandment, but ac-
cording to the power of an endless life. He be-
came " (he says) " a priest not according to the
law of a carnal commandment " : for that law
was in many respects unlawful.^

What is, " of a carnal commandment " ? Cir-
cumcise the flesh, it says ; anoint the flesh ;
wash the flesh ; purify the flesh ; shave the
flesh ; bind upon the flesh ;* cherish the flesh ;
rest as to the flesh. And again its blessings,
what are they ? Long life for the flesh ; milk
and honey for the flesh ; peace for the flesh ;
luxury for the flesh. From this law Aaron re-
ceived the priesthood ; Melchisedec however
not so.

Ver. 15. "And it is yet far more evident, if
after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth
another priest." What is evident ? The interval
between the two priesthoods, the difference ;
how much superior He is " who was made not


^ TOOiru.
* SeeDeut.


Ti.8.


* avofioi.


according to the law of a carnal commandment
(Who? Melchisedec? Nay; but Christ.) "B
according to the power of an endless * lii
For He testifieth. Thou art a Priest for ever aft
the order of Melchisedec " ; that is, not for
time, nor having any limit, " but according
the power of an endless life," that is, by mea
of power, by means of " endless life."

And yet this does not follow after, " who w
made not according to the law of a carnal coi
mandment " : for what would follow would
to say, " but according to that of a spiritv
one." However by " carnal," he implied tei
porary. As he says also in another plat
carnal ordinances imposed until the time
reformation." (c. ix. 10.)

" According to the power of life," that is, t
cause He lives by His own power.

[4.] He had said, that there is also a chan
of law, and up to this point he has shown :
henceforward he enquires into the cause, tl
which above all gives full assurance to mei
minds, [I mean] the knowing the cause the
oughly ; and it leads us more to faith ' when 1
have learned also the cause, and the princij
according to which [the thing] comes to pa

Ver. 18. " For there is verily" (he says) '
disannulling of the commandment going befo:
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereo
Here the Heretics' press on. But listen atte
tively. He did not say " for the evil," nor, " )
the viciousness," but " for the weakness and v
profitableness [thereof]," yea and in other plat
also he shows the weakness ; as when he s;
" In that it was weak through the flesh." (Ro
viii. 3.) [The law] itself then is not weak, 1
we.

Ver. 19. "For the Law made nothing p
feet." What is, " make nothing perfect " ? Ma
no man perfect, being disobeyed. And besid
even if it had been listened to, it would not hi
made one perfect and virtuous. But as yet
does not say this here, but that it had
strength : and with good reason. For writ'
precepts were there set down. Do this and
not that, being enjoined only, and not giv
power within.' But " the Hope " is not such

What is " a disannulling " ? A casting out.
" disannulling " is a disannulling of things wh
are of force. So that he implied, that it [ohm
was of force, but henceforward was of no accov
since it accomplished nothing. Was the I
then of no use ? It was indeed of use ; and
great use : but to make men perfect it was
no use. For in this respect he says, " The I
made nothing perfect." All were figures,
shadows ; circumcision, sacrifice, sabbath. Thi


* aKaTaAvTou, " indestructible." " or, ** conviction."

8 The early Heretics denied the divine character of the M(
dispensation. ' iiniOima,


lOMILY XIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


429


ore they could not reach through the soul, where-
ore they pass away and gradually withdraw.
' But the bringing in of a better hope did, by
irhich we draw nigh unto God."

[5.] (Ver. 20) "And forasmuch as not with-
lut the taking of an oath." ' Thou seest that the
natter of the oath becomes necessary for him
lere. Accordingly for this reason he previously
reated much [hereon] , how that God sware ;
nd sware for the sake of [our] fuller assurance.
" But the bringing in of a better hope." For
jiat system also had a hope, but not such as
lis. For they hoped that, if they were well
leasing [to God], they should possess the land,
lat they should suffer nothing fearful. But in
lis [dispensation] we hope that, if we are well
(leasing [to God], we shall possess not earth, but
eaven ; or rather (which is far better than this)
ie hope to stand near to God, to come unto the
,!;ry throne of the Father, to minister unto Him
ijith the Angels. And see how he introduces
iiese things by little and little. For above he
I lys " which entereth into that within the veil "
:. vi. 19), but here, " by which we draw nigh
nto God."

"And inasmuch as not without an oath."
hat is " And inasmuch as not without an oath " ?
hat is. Behold another difference also. And
lese things were not merely promised (he says).
For those priests were made without an oath,"
'er. 21, 22) " but This with an oath, by Him that
id unto Him, The Lord sware and will not re-
;nt. Thou art Priest for ever after the order of
elchisedec.^ By so much was Jesus made a
rety of a better covenant." ' He lays down
•0 points of difference, that it hath no end as
e [covenant] of the Law had ; ■• and this he
oves from [its being] Christ who exercises
^ he priesthood] ; for he says " according to the
\ iwer of an endless life." And he proves it

i.io from the oath, because "He sware," &c.,
: d from the fact ; for if the other was cast out,
i cause it was weak, this stands firm, because it
i: powerful. He proves it also from the priest,
i Dw? Because He is One [only] ; and there
I' mid not have been One [only], unless He had
lien immortal. For as there were many priests,
}1 cause they were mortal, so [here is] The One,
Jl cause He is immortal. " By so much was
t;5us made a surety of a better covenant," inas-
aich as He sware to Him that He should


.^- ^

■ [The words ** after the order of Mclchisedec " are in the text of
Cnrys. and in the Tcxtus Rec, They are omitted in recent
ical editions, but are implied in the context. — F. G.]
' The common editions add here ver. 33, 24, " and they truly
e many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by

_-T\.on of death; but this [manl because he continueth ever, hath

.^■unchangeable priesthood." St. Chrys. alludes to these words in
Ma follows; but without citing them.

' 2 "^^ common texts add here " and that it is with oath-taking " ;

' ™ is probably to be understood : as if he had said, He lays down

, ^Icond point of difference that, &c.


always be [Priest] ; which He would not have
done, if He were not living.

[6. J (Ver. 25) " Wherefore He is able also to
save them to the uttermost, that come unto God
by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make interces-
sion for them." Thou seest that he says this in
respect of that which is according to the flesh.
For when He [appears] as Priest, then He also
intercedes. Wherefore also when Paul says,
"who also maketh intercession for us" (Rom.
viii. 34), he hints the same thing; the High
Priest maketh intercession. For He " that rais-
eth the dead as He will, and quickeneth them,"
(John V. 21), and that "even as the Father"
[doth], how [is it that] when there is need to
save. He "maketh intercession"? (John v. 22.)
He that hath " all judgment," how [is it that]
He " maketh intercession " ? He that " sendeth
His angels" (Matt. xiii. 41, 42), that they may
" cast " some into " the furnace," and save others,
how [is it that] He " maketh intercession " ?
Wherefore (he says) " He is able also to save."
For this cause then He saves, because He dies
not. Inasmuch as " He ever liveth," He hath
(he means) no successor : And if He have no
successor. He is able to aid all men. For there
[under the Law] indeed, the High Priest although
he were worthy of admiration during the time in
which he was [High Priest] (as Samuel for in-
stance, and any other such), but, after this, no
longer ; for they were dead. But here it is not
so, but "He " saves " to the uttermost.""

What is " to the uttermost " ? He hints at
some mystery. Not here" only (he says) but
there ' also He saves them that " come unto God
by Him." How does He save ? " In that He ever
liveth " (he says) " to make intercession for them."
Thou seest the humiliation? Thou seest the
manhood ? For he says not, that He obtained
this, by making intercession once for all, but
continually, and whensoever it may be needful
to intercede for them.

"To the uttermost." What is it? Not for a
time only, but there also in the future life.
' Does He then always need to pray ? Yet how
can [this] be reasonable ? Even righteous men
have oftentimes accomplished all by one en-
treaty, and is He always praying? Why then is
He throned with [the Father] ? ' Thou seest
that it is a condescension. The meaning is : Be
not afraid, nor say, Yea, He loves us indeed, and
He has confidence towards the Father, but He
cannot live always. For He doth live alway.

[7.] (Ver. 26) " For such an High Priest
also' became us, who is holy, harmless, unde-


^ *ts TO ira.vTtKi^. ** in this world.

' in the other world.

* In Mr. Field's ed. itat is read here, and where the words ar*
cited afterwards, in the common texts it is omitted. So critical
editors consider that the sacred text is TotoOrof ydp ^juii'ical iirptit*¥
K. A. [The critical editors are not agreed; some insert the Kct,
others place it in brackets. — F. G.]


430


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI


filed, separate from the sinners." Thou seest
that the whole is said with reference to the
manhood. (But when I say ' the manhood,' I
mean [the manhood] having Godhead ; not
dividing [one from the other], but leaving
[you] to suppose ' what is suitable.) Didst
thou mark the difference of the High Priest?
He has summed up what was said before, "in
all points tempted like as we are yet without
sin." (c. iv. 15.) "For" (he says) "such an
High Priest also became us, who is holy, harm-
less." " Harmless " : what is it ? Without wicked-
ness : that which another ^ Prophet says : " guile
was not found in His mouth" (Isa. liii. 9), that
is, [He is] not crafty. Could any one say this
concerning God? And is one not ashamed to
say that God is not crafty, nor deceitful ? Con-
cerning Him, however, in respect of the Flesh,
it might be reasonable [to say it] . " Holy,
undefiled." This too would any one say con-
cerning God? For has He a nature capable of
defilement? "Separate from sinners."

[8.] Does then this alone show the difference,
or does the sacrifice itself also? How? (Ver.
27) " He needeth not " (he says) " daily, as the
High Priest,' to offer up sacrifices for his sins,
for this He did once for all, when He offered
up Himself " "This," what? Here what follows
sounds a prelude concerning the exceeding great-
ness of the spiritual sacrifice and the interval
[between them]. He has mentioned the point
of the priest ; he has mentioned that of the
faith ; he has mentioned that of the Covenant ;
not entirely indeed, still he has mentioned it.
In this place what follows is a prelude concern-
ing the sacrifice itself Do not then, having
heard that He is a priest, suppose that He is
always executing the priest's office. For He
executed it once, and thenceforward " sat down."
(c. X. 12.) Lest thou suppose that He is stand-
ing on high, and is a minister, he shows that the


* VnOTTTtVtlV.

' As this passage is cited by Facundus Hermianensis, an African
Bishop, writing about the year 547, it may be wcU to give his
words and also the two Greek texts corresponding to them, as an
evidence that the text which he had was of the short and simple
form now restored in Mr. Field's edition.

'* In interpretatione qnoque Epistolae ad Hebra:os, Sermone xiv,
de CO quod scriptumest, Stent consuinmatio per L,cviticHm sacer~
doiium erat^ ita locutus est: Dicit alter prophets, Dolus non est
inventus in ore ejus, hoc est nulla caltiditas. Hoc forsitan quis-

3uam de Deo dicat, et non erubescit dicens, quia Deus non est calli-
us, neque dolosus, De eo vero qui secundum carnem est, habebit
forsitan rationem." (pro def. trium capp. lib. xi. c. 5, p. 488, ed.
Sirm.) \Gall. Bibl. Pair. xi. 789.J

Mr. Field's text is, b (o om. MS. R.) Ae'yet Irtftot irpo<^^T*)s •
£oAoc Qv\ evpeBjj iv T(j> (TTo^aTi avTov (TOUTeffTif, oux iJwovAo? •
TouTo av Ti? izfp't. ©eoG etiroi ; koX ovk aitr\vv€Tai Xeywc, on 6 (?e6«
OVK etrriv uttovAoc, oufii ioAepos ; ntp't. jxevTOt Tou Kara <rdKpa e^oi
av \6yov.

The text of Savile and the Benedictines ovy vitovAos ' koI oti
Toioi;TO«, axoui Toil irpot^^rou Aeyoi'Tij? • 0v6e evpeffri SdAof iv TcjJ
arOfiaTL avroO, touto ovv av Tts jrepl @eoii elwoi ,- o 5e oiiK al<rxvvt-
Tai Ac-ywf, OTi 6 0<bs OUK effrtv vjrouAoy, ouSi fioAepbf ; irtpX fiev ovv
Tov Kara aapKa exoi av Abyof .

3 This is the reading adopted by Mr. Field. The common texts
give the passage as it stands in the text of the Epistle [where there
a no var. iect. of importance. — F. G.]. Indeed wl^t is omitted
Wiut plainly be intended to be supplied.


matter is [part] of a dispensation [or economj
For as He became a servant, so also [He 1
came] a Priest and a Minister. But as af(
becoming a servant. He did not continue a s(
vant, so also, having become a Minister, He c
not continue a Minister. For it belongs not
a minister to sit, but to stand.

This then he hints at here, and also the gre
ness of the sacrifice, if being [but] one, and hi
ing been offered up once only, it affected tl
which all [the rest] were unable to do. But
does not yet [treat] of these points.

" For this He did," he says. " This " ; wh:
" For " (he says) " it is of necessity that t
[Man] have somewhat also to offer " (c. v
3) ; not for Himself; for how did He of
Himself? But for the people. What say
thou? And is He able to do this? Yea (
says) . " For the Law maketh men high prie;
which have infirmity." (c. vii. 28.) And d(
He not need to offer for Himself? No, he sa
For, that you may not suppose that the [wor
" this "] " He did once for all," are said respe
ing Himself also, hear what he says : " For
law maketh men high ])riests, which have
firmity." On this account they both offer c(
tinually, and for themselves. He however whc
mighty. He that hath no sin, why should
offer for Himself, or oftentimes for others?

" But the word of the oath which was sii
the Law [maketh] the Son who has been o
secrated for evermore." " Consecrated " : ■* w
is that? Paul does not set down the comn
terms of contradistinction ; ° for after say
"having Infirmity," he did not say "the Sc
who is mighty, but " consecrated " : * i.e. migl
as one might say. Thou seest that the na
Son is used in contradistinction to that of
vant. And by " infirmity " he means either-
or death.

What is, " for evermore " ? Not now c
without sin but always. If then He is perf
if He never sins, if He lives always, why s
He offer many sacrifices for us? But for
present he does not insist strongly on this po:
but what he does strongly insist upon is, His
offering on His own behalf

[9.] Since then we have such an High Pri
let us imitate Him ; let us walk in His footst'
There is no other sacrifice : one alone
cleansed us, and after this, fire and hell,
indeed on this account he repeats it over
over, saying, " one Priest," " one Sacrifice,"
any one supposing that there are many [s&
fices] should sin without fear. Let us ther
many as have been counted worthy of The S

* rTeT«A«iwjLt€Vo»'. This is the common Lcvitical_ tern
priestly consecration. It is also used in the Classics in a <
spending sense of initiation into the mysteries. The Englisi
tion takes it in the common sense a{ perfected. — F. G.]

* Tay ai'TiStao'ToAd? Kvpias. " i.e. Baptism.


liOMILY XIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


431


IS many as have enjoyed The Sacrifice, as many
.s have partaken of the immortal Table, con-
inue to guard our noble birth and our dignity :
or falling away is not without danger.

And as many as have not yet been counted

irorthy these [privileges], let not these either be

onfident on that account. For when a person

;oes on in sin, with the view of receiving holy

aptism at the last gasp, oftentimes he will not

btain it. And, believe me, it is not to terrify

ou that I say what I am going to say. I have

lyself known many persons, to whom this has

appened, who in expectation indeed of the

nlightening ' sinned much, and on the day of

leir death went away empty. For God gave us

aiitism for this cause, that He might do away

ur sins, not that He might increase our sins.

v'hereas if any man have employed it as a secur-

)• for sinning more, it becomes a cause of neg-

gence. For if there had been no Washing,

le)- would have lived more warily, as not having

the means of] forgiveness. Thou seest that we

re the ones who cause it to be said " Let us do

.il, that good may come." (Rom. iii. 8.)

Wherefore, I exhort you also who are uniniti-

:ca\, be sober. Let no man follow after virtue as

1 Iiireling, no man as a senseless ^ person, no man

|) after a heavy and burdensome thing. Let us

ursue it then with a ready mind, and with joy.

or if there were no reward laid up, ought we

)t to be good? But however, at least with a

i fward, let us become good. And how is this

: |iything else than a disgrace and a very great

pndemnation? Unless thou give me a reward

, ssays one), I do not become self-controlled.

; |hen am I bold to say something : thou wilt

ever be self-controlled, no not even when thou

ost with self-control, if thou dost it for a re-

ard. Thou esteemest not virtue at all, if thou

«t not love it. But on account of our great

jcakness, God was willing that for a time it

- iiould be practiced even for reward, yet not

i cen so do we pursue it.

■ I But let us suppose, if you will, that a man dies,

■<- having done innumerable evil things, having

been counted worthy of baptism (which

Avcver I think does not readily happen), tell

c, how will he depart thither? Not indeed

!lcd to account for the deeds he had done,

)t yet without confidence;^ as is reasonable.

)r when after living a hundred years, he has

. J good work to show,* but only that he has not

jined, or rather not even this, but that he was

ved by grace ^ only, and when he sees others

owned, in splendor, and highly approved : even


' Baptism. ' ayvto^nav, ' aTrappTjtnttaTO?.

* [St. Cyril Alex, speaks too of those who put off baptism till
y are old and receive forgiveness through it, but have nought to
n;: to their Master. Glaph. 273.]
ic mercy [xaptri, the common word for " grace." — F. G.]


if he fall not into hell, tell me, will he endure
his despondency ?

[10.] But to make the matter clear by an
example. Suppose there are two soldiers, and
that one of them steals, injures, overreaches, and
that the other does none of these things, but
acts the part of a brave man, does important
things well, sets up trophies in war, stains his
right hand with blood ; then when the time
arrives, suppose that (from the same rank in
which the thief also was) he is at once con-
ducted to the imperial throne and the purple ;
but suppose that the other remains there where
he was, and merely of the royal kindness does
not pay the penalty of his deeds, let him how-
ever be in the last place, and let him be sta-
tioned under the King. Tell me, will he be able
to endure his despair when he sees him who was
[ranked] with himself ascended even to the very
highest dignities, and made thus glorious, and
master of the world, while he himself still re-
mains below, and has not even been freed from
punishment with honor, but through the grace
and kindness of the King ? For even should the
King forgive him, and release him from the
charges against him, still he will live in shame ;
for surely not even will others admire him :
since in such forgiveness, we admire not those
who receive the gifts, but those who bestow them.
And as much as the gifts are greater, so much
the more are they ashamed who receive them,
when their transgressions are great.

With what eyes then will such an one be able
to look on those who are in the King's courts,
when they exhibit their sweatings out of number
and their wounds, whilst he has nothing to show,
but has his salvation itself of the mere loving-
kindness of God ? For as if one were to beg off
a murderer, a thief, an adulterer, when he was
going to be arrested, and were to command him
to stay at the porch of the King's palace, he will
not afterwards be able to look any man in the
face, although he has been set free from punish-
ment : so too surely is this man's case.

For do not, I beseech you, suppose that be-
cause it is called a palace,* therefore all attain
the same things. For if here in Kings' courts
there is the Prefect, and all who are about the
King, and also those who are in very inferior
stations, and occupy the place of what are called
Decani ' (though the interval be so great between
the Prefect and the Decanus) much more shall
this be so in the royal court above.


" $a(ri\eLa, but Sav. fiaaiXfia, a kingdom.

' *' The A«Kai'oi at Constantinople were lictors, and had the
charge of burying the dead: they are otherwise called /unerunt
etatores, tecticarii, vespilloHes^ libitinarii^ KOTriarat. Corippus,
jib. iii., says

Jamque ordine certo
Turba decanoruntt cursorum, in rebus agentum,
Cumque palatinis stans Candida turba tribunis,**
Suiccr, Thes* Eccies, p. 835, cited by Mr, Field.


I


432


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIII


And this I say not of myself. For Paul layeth
down another difference greater even than these.
For (he says) as many differences as there are
between the sun and the moon and the stars,
and the very smallest star, so many also between
those in the kingdom [of Heaven]. And that
the difference between the sun and the smallest
star is far greater than that between the Decanus
(as he is called) and the Prefect, is evident to
all. For while the sun shines upon all the world
at once, and makes it bright, and hides the moon
and the stars, the other often does not appear,
not even in the dark. For there are many of
the stars which we do not see. When then we
see others become suns, and we have the rank
of the very smallest stars, which are not even
visible, what comfort shall we have ?

Let us not, I beseech you, let us not be so
slothful, not so inert, let us not barter away the
salvation of God for an easy life, but let us make
merchandise of it, and increase it. For even if
one be a Catechumen, still he knows Christ,
still he understands the Faith, still he is a hearer
of the divine oracles, still he is not far from the
knowledge ; he knows the will of his Lord.
Wherefore does he procrastinate? wherefore
does he delay and postpone ? Nothing is better
than a good life whether here or there, whether
in case of the Enlightened or of the Catechu-
mens.

[ii.] For tell me what burdensome command
have we enjoined? Have a wife (it is said) and
be chaste. Is this difficult? How? when many,
not Christians only but heathens also, live
chastely without a wife. That which the heathen
surpasses ' for vainglory, thou dost not even keep
for the fear of God.

Give (He says) to the poor out of what thou
hast. Is this burdensome? But in this case
also heathen condemn us who for vainglory only
have emptied out their whole possessions.

Use not filthy communication. Is this diffi-
cult ? For if it had not been enjoined, ought we
not to have done right in this, to avoid appear-
ing degraded ? For that the contrary conduct
is troublesome, I mean the using filthy commu-
nication, is manifest from the fact that the soul

^ vircp^oiMt.


is ashamed and blushes if it have been led t(
say any such thing and would not unless per
haps it were drunk. For when sitting in a pub
lie place, even if thou doest it at home, why dos
thou not do it there ? Because of those that ar
present. Why dost thou not readily do th^
same thing before thy wife? That thou may
est not insult her. So then thou dost it nol
lest thou shouldest insult thy wife ; and dos
thou not blush at insulting God ? For He i
everywhere present, and heareth all things.

Be not drunken, He says. For this very thin]
of itself, is it not a chastisement? He did no
say. Put thy body on the rack, but what? D'
not give it free rein ^ so as to take away the au
thority of the mind : on the contrary " make nc
provision for the lusts thereof." (Rom. xii
14.)

Do not (He says) seize by violence what i
not thine own ; do not overreach ; do not foi
swear thyself. What labors do these things r(
quire ! what sweatings !

Speak evil of no man (He says) nor accus
falsely. The contrary indeed is a labor. Fc
when thou hast spoken ill of another, immedi
ately thou art in danger, in suspicion, [saying
Did he of whdm I spake, hear? whether he b
great or small. For should he be a great mar
immediately thou wilt be indeed in danger ; bt
if small, he will requite thee with as much, c
rather with what is far more grievous ; for he wi
say evil of thee in a greater degree. We are er
joined nothing difficult, nothing burdensome,
we have the will. And if we have not the wil
even the easiest things will appear burdensom
to us. What is easier than eating? but froi
great effeminacy many feel disgust even at thi
and I hear many say, that it is weariness eve
to eat. None of these things is wearisome
thou hast but the will. For everything depenc
on the will after the grace from above. Let \
will good things that we may attain also to th
good things eternal, in Christ Jesus our Lon
whom to the Father together with the Holy Gho: '
be glory, might, honor, now and for ever, an
world without end. Amen.


* «KTpttxi;^iffn5.


lOMILY XIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


433


HOMILY XIV.


Hebrews viii. i, 2.


Now of the things which we have spoken this is the
sum: We have such an High Priest; who is set
down on the right hand of the throne of the majesty
in the heavens : a minister of the sanctuary and of
the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not
man."

[i .] P.WL mixes the lowly things with the lofty,
rer imitating his Master, so that the lowly be-
3me the path to the lofty, and through the for-
ler we are led to the latter, and when we are
nid the great things we leain that these [lowly
les] were a condescension. This accordingly
i does here also. After declaring that " He
Tared up Himself," and showing Him to be a
High Priest," what does he say? "Now of
le things which we have spoken this is the sum :
e have such an High Priest who is set down on
le right hand of the throne of the majesty."
nd yet this is not [the office] of a Priest, but
Him whom the Priest should serve.
" A minister of the sanctuary," not simply a
inister, but " a minister of the sanctuary. And
the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched
id not man." Thou seest the condescension.
id he not a Uttle before make a separation,'
)ang : " Are they not all ministering spirits? "
upra, i. 14) and therefore (he says) it is not
id to them, "Sit thou on my right hand,"
upra, i. 13) for He that sitteth is not a minis-
How is it then that it is here said, " a min-
;er," and " a minister of the Sanctuary " ? for
: means here the Tabernacle.
See how he raised up the minds of the believ-
3; Jews. For as they would be apt to imagine
It we have no such tabernacle [as they had],
i here (he says) is the Priest, Great, yea, much
eater than the other, and who has offered a
3re wonderful sacrifice. But is not all this mere
k? is it not a boast, and merely said to win
er our minds ? on this account he established
first from the oath, and afterwards also from
he tabernacle." For this difference too was
^mifest : but the Apostle thinks of another also,
'vhich " (he says) " the Lord pitched [or " made
1 11 "] and not man." Where are they who say
tu the heaven whirls around?' where are
ty who declare that it is spherical? for both of
t <(' notions are overthrown here.


cc Horn. iii.
ou'enrdat. The common editions read Kivtiir&ai. Snvile ob-
W'Cs that it was the opinion of St. Chrys. that the heaven was
liionary, and that the sun, moon and stars moved through it.
[jch may have been St. Chrysostom's opinion, but it does not
wear in this passage. — F. G. J


"Now" (he says) "of the things which we
have spoken this is the sum." By " the sum "
is always meant what is most important. Again
he brings down his discourse ; having said what
is lofty, henceforward he speaks fearlessly.

[2.] In the next place that thou mayest un-
derstand that he used the word " minister " of
the manhood, observe how he again indicates
it : " For " (ver. 3) (he says) " every high priest
is ordained to offer both gifts and sacrifices,
wherefore it is of necessity that this man have
somewhat also to offer."

Do not now, because thou hearest that He
sitteth, suppose that His being called High
Priest is mere idle talk.^ For the former, viz.
His sitting, belongs to the dignity of the God-
head,* but this to His great lovingkindness, and
His tender care for us. On this account he
repeatedly urges' this very thing, and dwells
more upon it : for he feared lest the other
[truth] should overthrow it.' Therefore he again
brings down his discourse to this : since some
were enquiring why He died. He was a Priest.
But there is no Priest without a sacrifice. It
is necessary then that He also should have a
sacrifice.

And in another way ; Having said that He is
on high, he affirms and proves that He is a
Priest from every consideration, from Melchise-
dec, from the oath, from offering sacrifice. From
this he also frames another and necessary syllo-
gism. "For if" (he says) "He had been on
earth, He would not be a Priest, seeing that
there are priests who offer the gifts according to
the Law." If then He is a Priest (as He really
is), we must seek some other place for Him.
" For if He were " indeed " on earth, He should
not be a priest." For how [could He be] ?
He offered no sacrifice, He ministered not in
the Priest's office. And with good reason, for
there were the priests. Moreover he shows, that
it was impossible that [He] should be a priest
upon earth. For how [could He be] ? There
was no rising up against [the appointed Priests],
he means.

[3.] Here we must apply our minds atten-
tively, and consider the Apostolic wisdom ; for
again he shows the difference of the Priesthood.


* vBXov.

* TTJs a^iav ToD ©eoO.

* Ainaivet,

« That is, lest the belief of His Godhead should undermine our
belief in His true manhood.


434


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI\


" ^Vho " (he says) " serve unto the example ^
and shadow of heavenly things."

What are the heavenly things he speaks of
here? The spiritual things. For although they
are done on earth, yet nevertheless they are
worthy of the Heavens. For when our Lord
Jesus Christ lies slain ^ [as a sacrifice], when the
Spirit is with us,' when He who sitteth on the
right hand of the Father is here,'' when sons are
made by the Washing, when they are fellow-
citizens of those in Heaven, when we have a
country, and a city, and citizenship there, when
we are strangers to things here, how can all
these be other than "heavenly things"? But
what ! Are not our Hymns heavenly ? Do not
we also who are below utter in concert with them
the same things which the divine choirs of bodi-
less powers sing above? Is not the altar also
heavenly? How? It hath nothing carnal, all
spiritual things become the offerings.' The
sacrifice does not disperse into ashes, or into
smoke, or into steamy savor, it makes the things
placed there bright and splendid. How again
can the rites which we celebrate be other than
heavenly ? For when He says, " Whose soever
sins ye retain they are retained, whose soever sins
ye remit, they are remitted " (John xx. 23) :
when they have the keys of heaven, how can all
be other than heavenly?

"Who" (he says) "serve unto the example
and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was
admonished of God,° when he was about to
make the tabernacle, for see, saith He, that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed
to thee in the mount." Inasmuch as our hear-
ing is less ready of apprehension than our sight
(for the things which we hear we do not in such
wise lay up in our soul, as those which we see
with our very eyes). He showed him all. Either
then he means this by " the example and
shadow," or else he [speaks] of the Temple.
For, he went on to say, " See " (His words are),
that " thou make all things according to the
pattern' showed to thee in the mount." Was it
then only what concerned the furniture of the
temple that he saw, or was it also what related
to the sacrifices, and all the rest? Nay, one
would not be wrong in saying even this ; for
The Church is heavenly, and is nothing else
than Heaven.

[4.] (Ver. 6) " But now hath He obtained a


1 ujroSeiYfiaTi . . . \arptvoviTi. i.e. " do service to and minister
in that system which is a sample and shadow."

s iaijiaytLfvoif see Rev. v, 6, g, 12; xiii. 8.

* irapayiVijTat. * ivTavda jj.

■ Ta irpoKeitj.tva. The Sacred Elements there set before God.
[The English edition has here missed the sense of irai/Ta rrvevnariKd
yCvtrat Ta npottfintva, irpoKtifteva is predicate rather than subject,
and ndvra is to be taken with irffvtJiariKd, not with npoKeifi-fva.
The idea is (as shown by the context) that our spiritual things
(hymns, praises, &c.) answer to the parts of the victim laid upon
tile carnal altar of old. — F. G.]

" [KtvpufiaTiarat — a word always used of Divine •ommunica-
tions. — F. G.J ' Twiroi'.


more excellent ministry,' by how much also H
is the Mediator of a better covenant." The
seest (he means) how much better is the on
ministration than the other, if one be an exampl
and type, and the other truth [reality]. But th
did not profit the hearers, nor cheer then
Therefore he says what especially cheered them
" Which was established upon better promises.
Having raised them up by speaking of the placi
and the priest, and the sacrifice, he then sel
forth also the wide difference of the covenan
having also said before that it was " weak an
unprofitable." (See Heb. vii. i8.)

And observe what safeguards he lays dowi
when intending to find fault with it. For in tl
former place after saying, "according to t?
power of an endless life " (Heb. vii. i6), he the
said that " there is a disannulling of the con
mandment going before" (Heb. vii. i8) ; an
then after that, he set forth something grea
saying, " by which we draw nigh unto God
(Heb. vii. 19.) And in this place, after leadir
us up into Heaven, and showing that instead c
the temple, we have Heaven, and that tho;
things were types of ours, and having by thes
means exalted the Ministration [of the Ne
Covenant], he then proceeds suitably to exa
the priesthood.

But (as I said) he sets down that which esp'
cially cheers them, in the words, " Which w,
established upon better promises." Whent
does appear ? In that this the one was cast 01
and the other introduced in its place : for it
therefore of force because it is better. For
he says, "If perfection were by" it, "what fii
ther need was there, that another priest shou
rise, after the order of Melchisedec ? " (Heb. v
11) ; so also here he used the same syllogisi
saying (ver. 7) " For if that first covenant h.-
been faultless, then should no place have be^
sought for the second " ; that is, if it made m
" faultless." For it is because he is speaking
this that he did not say, " But finding fault witl
it, but (ver. 8, 9) "But finding fault with the
He saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Loi
when I will make a new covenant with the hot
of Israel and with the house of Judah : r
according to the covenant that I made with th
fathers in the day when I took them by the ha
to lead them out of the land of Egypt : becai
they continued not in My covenant, and I :
garded them not, saith the Lord."

Yea, verily. And whence does it appear tl
[the first Covenant] came to an end? ]
showed it indeed also frorn the Priest, but n
he shows more clearly by express words that
has been cast out.

But how is it "upon better promises"? i

• AetToupv^M, " service as priest."


Homily XIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


435


liow, tell me, can earth and heaven be equal?
But do thou consider,' how he speaks of prom-
ses there [in that other covenant] also, that thou
mayest not bring this charge against it. For
;here also, he says " a better hope, by which we
draw nigh unto God" (Heb. vii. 19), showing
that a Hope was there also ; and in this place
'better promises," hinting that there also He
dad made promises.

But inasmuch as they were forever making
objections, he says, " Behold ! the days come,
laith the Ix)rd, when I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel and with the house of
udah." He is not speaking of any old Cove-
lant : for, that they might not assert this, he
determined the time also. Thus he did not say
limply, " according to the covenant which I
made with their fathers," lest thou shouldest say
"it was] the one made with Abraham, or that
ivith Noah : but he declares what [covenant it
ivas], " not according to the covenant which I
made with their fathers " in the Exodus. Where-
fore he added also, " in the day that I took them
by the hand, to lead them out of the land of
Egypt ; because they continued not in My cove-
lant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord."
rhou seest that the evils begin first from our-
lelves (" they " themselves first, saith he, " con-
inued not in [the " covenant "] ") and the neg-
ligence is from ourselves, but the good things
'rom Him ; I mean the [acts] of bounty. He
lere introduces, as it were, an apology showing
he cause why He forsakes them.

[5.] (Ver. 10) "For this," he says, "is the
lovenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days, saith the Lord ; I will
)ut^ My laws into their mind, and write them in
heir hearts, and I will be to them a God, and
hey shall be to Me a people." Thus He says
his concerning the New [covenant] because His
rords are " not according to the covenant which
'. covenanted."

But what other difference is there beside this ?'
»Iow if any person should say that " the differ-
:nce is not in this respect, but in respect to its
)eing put into their hearts ; He makes no men-
ion of any difference of ordinances, but points
rat the mode of its being given : for no longer "
[he says) "shall the covenant be in writings, but
n hearts ; " let the Jew in that case show that
his was ever carried into effect ; but he could
JOt, for it was made a second time in writings
ifter the return from Babylon. But I show that


1 Bfutatt used of contemplating and discerning the mystical sense
if the Old Testament.

* *' give."

• That is, besides the covenant being in itself a new one, difier-
Qt from the Mosaic, there is also, he says, the difference in the
lode of giving it, the one being written, the other put into the heart.
The Jew is supposed to allege that this second is the only difference,
nd that the promise in the Prophecy is that the Mosaic law shall be
^vcn into the heartj and that this was fulfilled by the reformation
f the people; as for instance after the Captivity.


the Apostles received nothing in writing, but re-
ceived [it] in their hearts through the Holy
Ghost. Wherefore also Christ said, " When He
cometh. He will bring all things to your remem-
brance, and He shall teach you." (John xiv. 26. )

[6.] (Ver. II, 12) "And they shall not
teach " (he says) " every man his neighbor,* and
every man his brother, saying. Know the Lord :
for all shall know Me from the least to the
greatest. For I will be merciful to their un-
righteousness, and their sins and their iniquities
will I remember no more." Behold also another
sign. " From the least even to the greatest of
them " (he says) "they shall know Me, and they
shall not say. Know the Lord." When hath
this been fulfilled save now? For our [religion] '
is manifest : but theirs [i.e. the Jews'] was not
manifest, but had been shut up in a corner.

[A covenant] is then said to be " new," when
it is different and shows some advantage over the
old. " Nay surely," says one," " it is new also
when part of it has been taken away, and part
not. For instance, when an old house is ready
to fall down, if a person leaving the whole, has
patched up the foundation, straightway we say,
he has made it new, when he has taken some
parts away, and brought others into their place.
For even the heaven also is thus called ' new,' '
when it is no longer ' of brass,' but gives rain ; '
and the earth likewise is new when it is not un-


* TToAiTTjc. The common editions have TrAijfftoi', as has the com-
mon text of the New Testament, but there also Scholz, Lachmann,
Tischendorf [Tregelles, W, and H.l read TroAiTTjF, which is the
word used in Jeremiah, according to the Vatican MS. It is used by
the LXX. to translate the Hebrew for " neighbor."

^ TO rfH€7fpOV,

*• 'I5oi>, 'i>r](T\, Kai aiiTT) Kaivt] Tvy;(of€i. This is the argument
of an objector, who alleges that the promise of a New Covenant was
fulfilled by the modification and renewed efficacy of the Mosaic sys-
tem, such as occurred after the Captivity. He alleges two senses in
which the word "New" might be applied without implying the
substitution of another system in place of the old, (i) as a repaired
house is said to be new, and (ii) according to his interpretation, as
the Heavens are new, when after long drought they again give rain.
St. Chrys. replies, i. That after the Captivity the Covenant was
still, as of old, unfruitful, ii. That this interpretation of the " new
heaven " is incorrect, iii. That the Prophecy distinctly foretells a
substitution. The common editions have changed the character of
the passage by substituting aAAoj? 6e KaLvi\ for Kat.vT\ two lines above,
and Katvr) S« Kal avrrf T. for 'ISou . . . KaivTi T. in this place; by
omitting t^Ticrl at the end of the objection; and substituting tya
Self >j for eav ovv ieifdj,

^ See Isa. Ixv. 17; Deut. xxviii. 23.

8 The Verona edition, one Catena, the MSS. which Mr. Field
usually follows, and the Latin versions of Mutianus and the later
translator, all give the text which is here translated; orof /ii)j(cti
Xa\Kovi 17, aAA verbi/ 5t6«i * OTav fj-r) axapiro^, ovx OTav t^fra^ \r,6^,
oiix OTav ra /iet* auToii (^aiptSfi, Ta S« fiiy^l. Mr. Field says that he
has nolens volens admitted into the text the " amended ' readings
of the common editions, brae fx»)«€'Tt x. ^. a. u. 5iicp, Ka\ ri yi] omoiiuc
Kaivi}, OTav jjirj a. 17, ov^ OTav ^eTa/3A,}0j}, Ka'i otxoc oi;Tu> Katvbi oTav
Ta fi.€v K. A. " when it is no longer of brass, but gives rain: [and
the earth in like manner is new,] when it is not unfruitful, not when
it has been changed: [and in this sense the house is new], when
portions of it have been," &c. There does not however appear to
be any need for this: on the contrary, while the old text is simple
and intelligible, the additions bring in matters which are out of
place. [The otlier Catena, however, that of Niketas, Archbishop of
Heraklea, one of Mr. Field's valuable authorities, has the bracketed
bits.]

The words oTai- ixri df apTro? apply naturally to the heaven, when
it does not supply tlie moisture necessary for produrinc^ fruit. This
argument from the " new heaven " is alleged by the objector as dis-
tinct from that of the "new house": it is an instance, he would
say, of the word " new " being applied, when there was neither
change nor substitution, as St. Chrys. interprets the prophecy: nor
even partial alteration as in the analogy of the " new house '; but


436


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV


fruitful, not when it has been changed ; and the
house is likewise new, when portions of it have
been taken away, and portions remain. And
thus, he says,' he hath well termed it 'a New
Covenant.' "

If then I show that that covenant had become
"Old" in this respect, that it yielded no fruit?
And that thou mayest know this exactly, read
what Haggai says, what Zechariah, what the
Messenger,^ when the return from the Captivity
had not yet fully taken place ; and what Esdras
charges. How then did [the people] receive
him ? ' And how no man enquired of the Lord,
inasmuch as they [the priests] themselves also
transgressed, and knew it not even themselves ? *
Dost thou see how thy [interpretation] is broken
down,' whilst I maintain my own : that this [cove-
nant] must be called " New " in the proper sense
of the word ?

And besides, I do not concede that the words
"the heaven shall be new" (Isa. Ixv. 17), were
spoken concerning this. For why, when saying
in Deuteronomy " the heaven shall be of brass,"
did he not set down this in the contrasted pas-
sage," " but if ye hearken, it shall be new."

And further on this account He says that He
will give " another Covenant, because they did
not continue in the first." This I show by what
he says (" For what the law could not do in that
it was weak through the flesh," Rom. viii. 3 ;
and again, " Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the disciples, which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear?" Acts
XV. 10.) But "they did not continue therein,"
he says.

Here he shows that [God] counts us worthy
of greater and of spiritual [privileges] : for it is
said "their sound went out into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world."
(Ps. xix. 5 ; Horn. x. 18.) That is [the meaning
of] " they shall not say each man to his neigh-
bor. Know the Lord." And again, " the earth


only a renewal of fertilizing action which had been previously sus-
pended.

On the other hand the introduction of " the new earth " by the
interpolator is out of place: inasmuch as unfruitful ground would
represent the people not the Law; neither docs St. Chrys. in the
refutation which follows refer at all to this point of " new earth."
The introduction of the " house " is simply needless repetition.
[It has seemed better to follow in the translation Field's text than to
follow the alterations of the English edition — both because the pas-
sage is thus much clearer, and because this is professedly a transla-
tion of Field's text, and his critical sagacity must be considered on
such a point of higher value. — F. C]

* wtrrc, 0ij7i. Sav. &c. om. </>7j(rt.

* 6 'AyyeAo? Malachi.

* WW? ovv i\a^ev avrov ; The Catena has irws trvveXaffov aiiTOv ;
which Mutianus read, translating it, ** Quomodo corripuerunteum? "
Mr. Field thinks that neither reading gives a suitable meaning. If
the reading adopted by Mr. F. and followed in the translation be the
true one, it must be supposed that St. Chrys. had in mind the condi-
tion in which Ezra, or perhaps Nehemiah, found the Jews. The
words Ti Si 'EtrSpaf eyicaAet ; seem more appropriate to Nehemiah
than to Ezra : and the reception of Nehemiah on his second visit to
Jerusalem may have been the circumstance of which the orator was
thinking.

* See Mai. i. 6, and c. ii., iii.

* ^c^ituTTai TO aov ; or, " how forced it is."

* iv 70 iiaa79Ky> See Deut. xxviii. la.


shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lore
as much water to cover the seas." (Isa. xi. 9.]

[7.] " In calling it new " (he says), " He hatl
made the first old : but that which decayeth ant
waxeth old is ready to vanish away." See wha
was hidden, how he hath laid open the very mint
of the prophet ! He honored the law, and wa
not willing to call it " old " in express terms
but nevertheless, this he did call it. For if th
former had been new, he would not have callet
this which came afterwards " new " also. S
that by granting something more and differeni
he declares that " it was waxen old." Therefor
it is done away and is perishing, and no longe
exists.

Having taken boldness from the prophet, h
attacks it more suitably,^ showing that our [dis
pensation] is now flourishing. That is, h
showed that [the other] was old : then takin
up the word " old," and adding of himse:
another [circumstance], the [characteristic] 0
old age, he took up what was omitted by th
others, and says " ready to vanish away."

The New then has not simply caused the ol
to cease, but because it had become aged, as
was not [any longer] useful. On this accoun
he said, " for the weakness and unprofitablenes
thereof" (Heb. vii. 18), and, "the law mad
nothing perfect " (Heb. vii. 19) ; and that " if th
first had been faultless, then should no plac
have been sought for the second." (Heb. viii. 7.
And " faultless " ; that is, useful ; not as thoug
it [the old Covenant] was obnoxious to an
charges, but as not being sufficient. He use
a familiar form of speech. As if one shoul
say, the house is not faultless, that is, it h;
some defect, it is decayed : the garment is n<
faultless, that is, it is coming to pieces. H
does not therefore here speak of it as evil, bi
only as having some fault and deficiency.

[8.] So then we also are new, or rather a
were made new, but now are become old ; ther
fore we are " near to vanishing away,' ' and 1
destruction. Let us scrape off' this old ag
It is indeed no longer possible to do it 1
Washing, but by repentance it is possible he
[in this life].' If there be in us anything ol
let us cast it off; if any "wrinkle," if any stai
if any " spot," let us wash it away and becon
fair (Eph. v. 27) : that "the King may desi
our beauty." (Ps. xlv. 11.)

It is possible even for him who has fallen in
the extremest deformity'" to recover that beau
of which David says that the King shall desi


' tiaWov auToO KaBalTTerai (rv/A(^epoi^w?.
^ aTTo^utrw^er : alluding to the poetic phrase ^uaai anby^
oAoidi'. ^ ivTav9a,

10 [There was one who sold his patrimony,

A dear-bought dower
That had come down from high
In a golden shower,


XIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


437


iv beauty. "Hearken, O daughter, and con-
In ; forget also thine own people and thy
tinr's house: so shall the King greatly de-
rc thy beauty." (Ps. xlv. lo, ii.) And yet
reciting doth not produce beauty. Yea, beauty
of the soul. What sort of forgetting? That
■ sins. For he is speaking about the Church
Jill among the Gentiles, exhorting her not to
mber the things of her fathers, that is [of]
that sacrificed to idols ; for from such was
j^.uhered.

And he said not, "Go not after them," but
nat is more, Do not admit them into thy
ind ; which he says also in another place,
I will not mention their names through my
)s." (Ps. xvi. 4.) And again, "That my
outh may not talk of the deeds of men."
's. xvii. 3, 4.) As yet is this no great virtue ;
ly. rather, it is indeed great, but not such as
i< r which is here spoken of]. For what does
\- there ? He says not ; " Talk not of the
1I14S of men, neither speak of the things of
y lathers " ; but, neither remember them, nor
fmit them into thy mind. Thou seest to how
cat a distance he would have us keep away
)iii wickedness. For he that remembers not
: matter] will not think of it, and he that does
)t think, will not speak of it : and he that does
)t speak of it, will not do it. Seest thou from
)w many paths he hath walled us off ? by what
cat intervals he hath removed us, even to a
ry great [distance] ?

[9.] Let us then also "hearken and forget"
ir own evils. I do not say our sins, for (He
\s) "Remember thou first, and I will not
member." (Isa. xliii. 26, 25, LXX.) I mean
r instance, Let us no longer remember rapacity,
It even restore the former [plunder]. This is
forget wickedness, and to cast out the thought
rajjacity, and never at any time to admit it,
It to wipe away also the things already done
liss.

Whence may the forgetfulness of wickedness
line to us? From the remembrance of good
ings, from the remembrance of God. If we
ntinually remember God, we cannot remem-


It was a loss that gold could never mend»

The heart-blood of a Friend,
From out the world's dark den he came aside,

A monster for the sun to see,
All hideous soiled with foulest leprosy,
And he sat down upon the grass and cried.

Is there no fountain that can wash again?

There is a fount where holy men do say

He that doth look for aye
He shall become like that he doth behold.
Borrowing a light more pure than gold.
There is a glass whereon he that doth bend

Shall see portrayed the Heaven,
Till he forget what earth hath best to lend
In the sweet hope that he may be forgiven.

Rev. Isaac Williams, Thoughts in Past Years, " The Peni-
," p. 151, ed. 2, 1842.]


ber those things also. For (he says) "When
I remembered Thee upon ray bed, I thought
upon Thee in the morning dawn." (Ps. Ixiii. 6.)
We ought then to have God always in remem-
brance, but then especially, when thought is undis-
turbed, when by means of that remembrance
[a man] is able to condemn himself, when he
can retain [things] in memory. For in the
daytime indeed, if we do remember, other cares
and troubles entering in, drive the thought out
again : but in the night it is possible to remem-
ber continually, when the soul is calm and at
rest ; when it is in the haven, and under a serene
sky. " The things which you say in your hearts
be ye grieved for on your beds," he says.
(Ps. iv. 4, LXX.) For it were indeed right to
retain this remembrance through the day also.
But inasmuch as you are always full of cares,
and distracted amidst the things of this life, at
least then remember God on your bed ; at the
morning dawn meditate upon Him.

If at the morning dawn we meditate on these
things, we shall go forth to our business with
much security. If we have first made God
propitious by prayer' and supplication, going
forth thus we shall have no enemy. Or if thou
shouldest, thou wilt laugh him to scorn, having
God propitious. There is war in the market
place ; the affairs of every day are a fight, they
are a tempest and a storm. We therefore need
arms : and prayer is a great weapon. We need
favorable winds ; we need to learn everything,
so as to go through the length of the day with-
out shipwrecks and without wounds. For every
single day the rocks are many, and oftentimes
the boat strikes and is sunk. Therefore have
we especially need of prayer early and by night.

[10.] Many of you have often beheld the
Olympic games : and not only have beheld but
have been zealous partisans and admirers of the
combatants, one of this [combatant], one of that.
You know then that both during the days of the
contests, and during those nights, all night long
the herald ^ thinks of nothing else, has no other
anxiety, than that the combatant should not dis-
grace himself when he goes forth. For those who
sit by the trumpeter admonish him not to speak
to any one, that he may not spend his breath
and get laughed at. If therefore he who is
about to strive before men, uses such fore-
thought, much more will it befit us to be con-
tinually thoughtful, and careful, since our whole
life is a contest. Let every night then be a
vigil,' and let us be careful that when we go out
in the day we do not make ourselves ridiculous.
And would it were only making ourselves ridicu-
lous. But now the Judge of the contest is


s navvvx*-^. The term applied by Christians to whole nights
spent in Psalmody and Prayer: " vigils."


438


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILV X\


seated on the right hand of the Father, hearken-
ing diligently that we utter not any false note,
anything out of tune. For He is not the Judge
of actions only, but of words also. IvCt us keep
our vigil,' beloved ; we also have those that are
eager for our success, if we will. Near each one
of us Angels are sitting ; and yet we snore
through the whole night. And would it were only
this. Hut many do even many licentious things,
some indeed going to the very brothels,' and
others making their own houses places of whore-
dom by taking courtesans thither. Yes most
certainly. For is it not so ? They care well for
their contest. Others are drunken and speak
amiss ;° others make an uproar. Others keep


evil vigil through the night weaving, and wors
than those who sleep, schemes of deceit ; othei
by calculating usury ; others by bruising thcrr
selves with cares, and doing anything rathe
than what is suited to the contest. Wherefon
I exhort you, let us lay aside all [other] thing
and look to one only, how we may obtain th
prize, [how we may] be crowned with the Chaj
let ; let us do all l)y which we shall be able t
attain to the promised blessings. Which ma
we all attain in Christ Jesus our I,ord, wit
whom to the Father and also to the Holy Gho:
be glory, might, honor, now and for ever an
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XV.

Hebrews ix. 1-5.


' The


:n verily the first [covenant] had ali
ilivinc service, and a* worldly Sanct


also ordinances of
tuary. For there
was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the
Candlestick, and the Table, and the Shew-bread,
which is called the Sanctuary. And after the sec-
ond veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of
all; which had the golden censer and the Ark of the
Covenant overlaid round about with gold : wherein
was the golden pot that had' manna, and Aaron's
rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant : and
over it the Cherubim of glory, shadowing the Mercy-
■eat : of which we cannot now speak particularly."


[i.] He has shown from the Priest, from the
Priesthood, from the Covenant, that that [dis-
pensation] was to have an end. From this ])oint
he shows it from the fashion of the tabernacle
itself. How ? This, he says, [was] the " Holy " «
and the " Holy of Holies."' The holy place then
is a symbol of the former period (for there all
things are done by means of sacrifices) ; but the
Holy of Holies of this that is now present.

And by the Holy of Holies he means Heaven;
and by the veil, Heaven, and the Flesh' "enter-
eth' into that within the veil " : that is to say,
" through the veil of His flesh." {Supra, vi. 19 ;
Heb. X, 20.)


• Ihe.
> held tha.

" fayia, " the unctuary."]
'theholie«lof all. ]


' Unut Christits t. v. i. 761 c d.l

KtigUsh edition] as^ if the


■ itavvvxioufitv,
1 ;(afiaiTvir«(a.

7 [ayia taiv ayiiitVt "

• tCf. St. Cyr. Quod

" Thii pamage u tranxlatcd [in tlic K _ ...

wai a point between TT)»' aapica and ff((rapx"M*|^1''> "i?^ ^* if i" tb*^
next clauHe rovtiarK wai a part of the citation, being put by St.
Chryt. before the wordi Aid roO xaTairaT'iaMarof, inKtcad of after
them, ai in Hel>. x. ao. St. Chry«. sayi that " the veil " represents
both Heaven and *' the FIei*h" of ovir Lord; and citcH the two nlaces
where it it ao interpreted by the ApoNtle, vi. 19, x. ao. See below
[4], p. 440. [The Rimple traniilatlon of the Oreek (ns inycn in the
text) teem* far better than thift curioiix modification. The claufle
7r\v trapita tiatpxaniunv lif to iautr. T. fraratrfT. in cloKety connected
together, and it ia hardly tolerable to acparale aaptta from the parti-
ciple agreeing with it. Iliere i> no " which " in the Greek. — F. C]


And it were well to speak of this passngi
taking it up from the beginning. What tht
does he say ? " Then verily the first had also
(the first what? "The Covenant"). "Ordinal
ces of Divine service." What are " ordinances '
symbols or rights. Then ; '" as (he means) it h;
not now. He shows that it had already givt
])lace, for (he says) it had at that time ; so th
now, although it stood, it is not.

"And the worldly Sanctuary." He calls
" worldly," inasmuch as it was permitted to i
to tread it, and in the same house the place w
manifest where the priests stood, where the Jew
the Proselytes, the Crecians, the Nazarites. Sim
therefore even Gentiles were permitted to tre;
it, he calls it " worldly." For surely the Jei
were not " the world."

"For" (he says) "there was a tabemac
made ; the first, which is called holy, wherein w
the Candlestick, and the Table, and the She
bread." These things are symbols of the wori

" And after the second veil " (There w
then not one veil [only], but there was a v
without also) " the tabernacle, which is calli
holy of holies." Observe how everywhere
calls it a tabernacle in regard of [God's] e
camping there."

"Which had " (he says) " a golden Censer, ai
the ark of the Covenant overlaid round abc
with gold : wherein was the golden pot that he
the manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, ai

"* TOTt. Mr. Field seems to think that the Expositor read rirt
the sacred text; though, as he observes, he presently has t^
Perhaps the difficulty is avoided by supposing that the word_ «1
" had," with which the clause bej^ins, was emphasized in delivei
the explanation of the word " ordinances " being parenthetical, i I
the 167* being implied in the past tense <Ix<.

1' irapd Ti> aKi\vi)\iv ifcct.


loMILY XV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


439


le tables of the covenant." All these things
rere venerable and conspicuous memorials of
le Jewish obstinacy ; " and the tables of the
ovenant " (for they brake tiiem) "And the
lanna" (for they murmured; and therefore
anding on the memory thereof to posterity,
le commanded it to be laid up in a golden
ot). "And Aaron's rod that budded. And
ver it, the Cherubim of glory." What is,

the C,"herubim of glory"? He either means
the glorious," or those which are under God.'
Shadowing the mercy-seat."

But in another point of view also he extols
lese things in his discourse, in order to show
hat those which come after them are greater.

Of which " (he says) " we cannot now sjjcak
articularly." In these words he hints that these
'ere not merely what was seen, but were a sort
f enigmas." " Of which " (he says) "we can-
ot now speak particularly," perhaps because

sy needed a long discourse.

[2. J Ver. 6. " Now when these things were
hus ordained, the priests went always into the
rst tabernacle accomiilishing the service [of
rod]." That is, these things indeed were
there], but the Jews did not enjoy them :
hey saw them not. So that they were no more
heirs than [ours] for whom they prophesied.'

(Ver. 7) " But into the second the High
riest went alone once* every year, not with-
ut blood, which he offered for himself, and for
be errors of the people." " Thou seest that the
ypes were already laid down beforehand? for,
5st they should say, " how is there [but] one
acrifice ? " he shows that this was so from the
eginning, since at least the more holy and the
wful [sacrifice] was [but] one. And how did
be High Priest offer once for all? Thus were
bey wont [to do] from the beginning, for then
Iso (he says) " the High Priest" offered " once
jr all."

And well said he, "not without blood." (Not
ideed without blood, yet not this blood, for the
usiness was not so great.) He signifies that
fiere shall be a sacrifice, not consumed by fire,
ut rather distinguished by blood. For inas-
luch as he called the Cross a sacrifice, though
; had neither fire, nor logs, nor was offered
lany times, but ha<l been offered in blood once
)r all ; he shows that the ancient sacrifice also
'as of this kind, was offered " once for all " in
lood.

"Which he offers for himself;" again, "for


' tA viroKilTw TOu dtov. ' aiviyiiara.

• ^ oI« npottttriTtv^To, or, " for whom they were forenhown," &c. :
r this the common editions have npoMrvnouro, " the foreshadowing

in a type." * aiTa(, *' once for all."

^* {One is disposed to think that in this and the following para-
Vphs there must he some serious corruption of the text. As it
Bflda there is a confusion between the words of the Kpistle relating
I tht Jewish High Priest and tliosc that refer to Christ. It is only
Mtible. however, to translate the text as it has come down to us. —
.0.]


himself; and for the errors of the people." He
said not "sins" ; but "errors," that they might
not be high-minded. For even if thou hast not
sinned intentionally, yet unintentionally thou
hast erred," and from this no man is pure.

And everywhere [he adds] the " for himself,"
showing that Christ is much greater. For if He
be separated from our sins, how did He " offer
for Himself"? Why then saidst thou these
things (one says) ? Because this is [a mark] of
One that is superior.

[3.] Thus far there is no speculation.' But
from this point he philosophizes" and says,
(ver. 8) "The Holy Ohost this signifying, that the
way into the Holiest of all was not yet made man-
ifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet stand-
ing." For this cause (he says) have these things
been thus " ordained," that we might learn that
" the Holy of Holies," that is, Heaven, is as yet
inaccessible. Let us not then think (he says)
that because we do not enter them, they have no
existence : inasmuch as neither did we enter the
Most Holy [place].

Ver. 9. " Which " (he says) " was established'
as a figure for the time then present." '" What
does he mean by " the time present " ? That
before the coming of Christ : For after the com-
ing of Christ, it is no longer a time present :
For how [could it be], having arrived, and be-
ing endecf ?

There is too something else which he indi-
cates, when he says this, " which [was] a figure
for the time then present," that is, became the
Type. " In which" were offered both gifts and
sacrifices, that could not make him that did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience."
Thou seest now what is [the meaning of] " The
Law made nothing perfect," (Heb. vii. 19,) and
" If that first [covenant] had been faultless."
(Heb. viii. 7.) How? "As pertaining to the
conscience." For the sacrifices did not put
away " the defilement from the soul, but still
were concerned with the body : " after the law
of a carnal commandment." (Heb. vii. 16.)
For certainly they could not put away " adultery,
nor murder, nor sacrilege. Seest thou ? Thou
hast eaten this, Thou hast not eaten that, which
are matters of indifference. ["Which stood]
only in meats and drinks, and divers washings,
"Thou hast drunk this," he says ; and yet noth-
ing has been ordained concerning drink, but he
said this, treating them as trifles."

Ver. 10. "And [in] divers washings, and
carnal ordinances imposed on them until the

* mv6iivat, u iv*9ntit6ra, or ** cloM at hand.*'
' Btiapla. *t ira0^ fti' [KaifAv'\.

* 0tuptt. " n^iareiyf or " forgive."

* KaBJtrrriitt. " ii^iJvai.

** iftvrt\i(uv. As if they were so immaterial that he did not
think It worth white to be accurate, and mentioned " drinks," about
which there were no precepts. St. Chryt. had perhaps overlooked
the Uw of the Nauritcs, Numb. vi. j.


440


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV


time of reformation." ' For this is the right-
eousness of the flesh. Here he depreciates
the sacrifices, showing that they had no efficacy,
and that they existed " till the time of reforma-
tion," that is, they waited for the time that
reformeth all things.

[4.] Ver. II. "But Christ being come an
High Priest of good things that are come ^ by a
greater and more perfect tabernacle not made
with hands." Here he means the flesh. And
well did he say, "greater and more perfect,"
since God The Word and all the power of The
Spirit dwells therein ; " For God giveth not the
Spirit by measure [unto Him]." (John iii. 34.)
And "more perfect," as being both unblamable,
and setting right greater things.

" That is, not of this creation." See how [it
was] "greater." For it would not have been
"of the Spirit" (Matt. i. 20), if man had con-
structed it. Nor yet is it " of this creation " ;
that is, not of these created things, but spiritual,
oP the Holy Ghost.

Seest thou how he calls the body tabernacle
and veil and heaven.* "By a greater and more
perfect tabernacle. Through the veil, that is,
His flesh." (Heb. x. 20.) And again, "into
that within the veil." (Heb. vi. 19.) And
again, "entering into* the Holy of Holies, to
appear before the face of God." (Heb. ix.
24.) Why then doth he this? According as
one thing or a different one is signified. I mean
for instance, the Heaven is a veil, for as a veil
it walls off the Holy of Holies ; the flesh [is a
veil] hiding the Godhead ;° and the tabernacle
likewise holding the Godhead. Again, Heaven
[is] a tabernacle : for the Priest is there within.

" But Christ " (he says) " being come an
High Priest": he did not say, "become," but
"being come," that is, having come for this very
purpose, not having been successor to another.
He did not come first and then become [High


^ £topdw(reb>(, " setting right."

' y(vofx€vuty: Here and afterwards iieWovTuv has been substi-
tuted in the modern editions of St. Chrys. yfyofntvatv is considered
by Lachmann to be the true reading in the Epistle.

' '*•

* A slight alteration of Mr. Field's text seems needed here. The
text of the Homily which he gives in accordance with all the au-
thorities is: opii ira»? »cttl aKrjv'xiv Kat jcaraircTatr^a Kai. ovpavbv to
viift.a KaXcL, But there is no appearance that the Apostle called
Christ's body heaven, nor do any of the texts cited show it. If, how-
ever, we introduce Kai before to trCttia, or substitute it for to, we
have a good sense, in accordance with the four texts cited by St.
Chrys. and the explanations which he afterwards gives. [The criti-
cism of the English editor is not without some force; yet it seems
best to adhere to the text of St. Chrys., as is here done. The pro-
posed alteration does not remove the difficulty, which is merely neg-
ative. The rendering in the English edition is " he calls heaven
and the body both tabernacle and veil." But to crw^ia should be the
subject and (Tity)vr\tf koX KaTaniTaafia Koi ovpafou predicates. — F. G.l

^ fiatpxofiii'rii'; probably used by St. Chrys. as if Tijf trdpKa had
preceded.

» The pointing has been changed in this place. In Mr. Field's
edition the passage stands thus; KarantTatrfjia 6 ovpavo^ • uiantp
yap ajTOTiixi^et Ta ayia KaTaireToafj-a, 17 trapf Kpvmovaa T>)|' Beo-
T»)Ta. The translation is made as if the pointing was Ta a-yia •
KaraniToaiia 7j ffapf , icpuTrrovira Tiji' 0. Otherwise we must supply
il ffapf before uo-itf p. [The pointing is better as it stands ; at most,
it is only necessary to understand KarairfTaafia after aap^t which
the contrast plainly suggests. — F. G.]


Priest], but came and became at the same time.
And he did not say " being come an High Priest
of things which are sacrificed, but " of good thing
that are come," as if his discourse had not powe
to put the whole before us.

Ver. 12. "Neither by the blood," he says, "o
goats and calves" (All things are changed) "butb;
His own Blood " (he says) " He entered in ona
for all' into the Holy Place." See thus he callet
Heaven. " Once for all " (he says) " He enterei
into the Holy Place, having obtained eternr
redemption." And this [expression] " havin
obtained," was [expressive] of things very diff
cult, and that are beyond expectation, how b
one entering in. He "obtained everlasting n
demption."

[5.] Next [comes] that which is calculate
to persuade.

Ver. 13, 14. " For if the blood of bulls and <
goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling th
unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh
how much more shall the Blood of Christ, wh
through the Holy^ Spirit offered Himself will
out spot to God, purge your conscience froi
dead works, to serve the living God."

For (he says) if "the blood of bulls" is abl
to purify the flesh, much rather shall the Bloc
of Christ wipe away the defilement of the sou
For that thou mayest not suppose when the
hearest [the word] " sanctifieth," that it is sorr
great thing, he marks out '" and shows the diffe
ence between each of these purifyings, and how th
one of them is high and the other low. And sa;
it is [so] with good reason, since that is " tf
blood of bulls," and this " the Blood of Christ.'

Nor was he content with the name, but he se
forth also the manner of the offering. " Who
(he says) " through the Holy " Spirit offered Hin
self without spot to God," that is, the victim w;
without blemish, pure from sins. For this
[the meaning of] "through the Holy Spirit
not through fire, nor through any other things.

"Shall purge your conscience" (he say;
"from dead works." And well said he "froi
dead works" ; if any man touched a dead bod
he was polluted ; and here, if any man touch
" dead work," he is defiled through his coi
science. "To serve" (he says) "the Livir
and true God." Here he declares that it is nt
[possible] while one has " dead works to serve ti
Living and true God," for they are both dea
and false ; and with good reason [he says this^

[6.] Let no man then enter in here with " dea
works." For if it was not fit that one shou)
enter in who had touched a dead body, muc


' a\\' afia JiK0t, or, "but [became so] as soon as He came."
8 <<fra7raf. * ayi'ou; so also Sav. and Ben. ^^ eirtirriixaiveTai
" Here and agam below the Catena and Mutianus read '* ett
nal," and so one MS. a priori manu. [The reading a^taviov of ti
Textus Receptus is far better supported, and is retained by t
critical editors. It is also the reading of one of Field's MSS., i
though with ayiou written above it. — r . G.]


OMILY XV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


441


lore one that hath " dead works " : for this is
le most grievous pollution. And " dead works "
e, all which have not life, which breathe forth
ill odor. For as a dead body is useful to
jne of the senses, but is even annoying to those
ho come near it, so sin also at once strikes the
lasoning faculty,' and does not allow the under-
anding itself to be calm, but disturbs and troub-
it.

And it is said too that a plague at its very com-
encement corrupts^ the living bodies; such
so is sin. It differs in nothing from a plague,
)t [indeed] corrupting the air first, and then
e bodies, but darting at once into the soul.
est thou not how persons affected with the
ague, are inflamed : how they writhe about,
)w they are full of an ill scent, how disfigured
e their countenances : how wholly unclean
ey are ? Such are they also that sin, though
ey see it not. For, tell me, is not he who is
)ssessed by the desire of riches or carnal lust,
)rse than any one that is in a fever? Is he not
ore unclean than all these, when he does and
bmits to all shameless things ?
[7.] For what is baser than a man who is in
ire with money? Whatever things women that

harlots or on the stage refuse not to do,
ither does he [refuse]. Rather it is likely
It they would refuse [to do] a thing, rather
m he. He even submits to do things fit for
.ves, flattering those whom he ought not ;
ain he is overbearing where he ought not to

being inconsistent in every respect. He
11 sit by flattering wicked people, and often-
aes depraved old men, that are of much poorer
d meaner condition than himself; and will be
iolent and overbearing to others that are good
d in all respects virtuous. Thou seest in both
spects the baseness, the shamelessness : he is
th humble beyond measure, and boastful.
Harlots however stand in front of their house,
d the charge against them is that they sell
;ir body for money : yet, one may say, pov-
;y and hunger compel them (although at the
)st this is no sufficient excuse : for they might
m a livelihood by work). But the covetous
in stands, not before his house, but before the
dst of the city, making over to the devil not
1 body but his soul ; so that he [the devil] is
his company, and goes in unto him, as verily
a harlot : and having satisfied all his lusts,
parts ; and all the city sees it, not two or three
jifsons only.

And this again is the peculiarity of harlots,

tit they are his who gives the gold. Even if

: a slave or a gladiator,' or any person what-


I' ^toyo^^.d)^os. The reading of the common editions is [kSlv iov-
^fj] Kav tXeiiScpos, itay fioya^o';. The Wfird fioyaxoi had been at
a-ry early period written by some copyists for ^oi-oMaJto^ (Mutia-
I K;is monachus)t and the interpolator misapprehending the drift


ever, yet if he offers their hire, they receive him.
But the free, even should they be more noble
than all, they do not accept without the money.
These men also do the same. They turn away
right thoughts when they bring no money ; but
they associate with the abominable, and actually
with those that fight with wild beasts,* for the
sake of the gold, and associate with them shame-
lessly and destroy the beauty of the soul. For
as those women are naturally of odious appear-
ance' and black, and awkward and gross, and
formless and ill-shaped, and in all respects dis-
gusting, such do the souls of these men become,
not able to conceal their deformity by their
outward paintings." For when the ill look' is
extreme, whatever they may devise, they cannot
succeed in their feigning.

For that shamelessness makes harlots, hear the
prophet saying, " Thou wert shameless towards
all ; thou hadst a harlot's countenance." (Jer.
iii. 3.) This may be said to the covetous also :
" Thou wert shameless towards all," not towards
these or those, but "towards all." How? Such
an one respects neither father, nor son, nor wife,
nor friend, nor brother, nor benefactor, nor ab-
solutely any one. And why do I say friend, and
brother, and father? He respects not God Him-
self, but all [we believe] seems to him a fable ;
and he laughs, intoxicated by his great lust, and
not even admitting into his ears any of the things
which might profit him.

But O ! their absurdity ! and then what things
they say ! " Woe to thee, O Mammon, and to
him that has thee not." At this I am torn to
pieces with indignation : for woe to those who
say these things, though they say them in jest.
For tell me, has not God uttered such a threat
as this, saying, " Ye cannot serve two masters " ?
(Matt. vi. 24.) And dost thou set at nought'
the threat ? Does not Paul say that it is Idol-
atry, and does he not call " the covetous man an
Idolater"? (Eph. v. 5.)

[8.] And thou standest laughing, raising a
laugh after the manner of women of the world
who are on the stage. This has overthrown, this
has cast down everything. Our affairs,' both our
business'" and our politeness, are turned into
laughing ; there is nothing steady, nothing grave.
I say not these things to men of the world only ;
but I know those whom I am hinting at. For the
Church has been filled with laughter. What-
ever clever thing one may say, immediately there


of the passage had inserted Kav cA€i!fl«poy. Mr. Field many years
ago in earlier volumes of his edition, suggested the true reading
here, as also the word ^ijpio^avoi? {bcstialious Mut.) just below, for
which Seo/Aoxoi? had been substituted in the common texts. Both
conjectures are now confirmed by MS. authority. The gladiators,
especially the brstiarii, who fought with wild beasts, were regarded
as a most degraded class.

* dTjptor^axoif. * t^vtrei eiSexOeis.

* entrpifjitiairi, what they rub on.

7 SvaetSia, Mut. and one MS. have jucrwSia, " ill savor."

* cicAvctt. ■ Ta ijfifTtpa, ^^ iroAirio'f&oc.


442


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily 3


is laughter among those present : and the mar-
velous thing is that many do not leave off laugh-
ing even during the very time of the prayer.

Everywhere the devil leads the dance,' he has
entered into all, is master of all. Christ is dis-
honored, is thrust aside ; the Church is made
no account of. Do ye not hear Paul saying, Let
"filthiness and foolish talking and jesting" (Eph.
v. 4) be put away from you? He places "jest-
ing " along with " filthiness," and dost thou laugh ?
What is " foolish talking " ? that which has noth-
ing profitable. And dost thou, a solitary, laugh
at all and relax thy countenance ? thou that art
crucified ? thou that art a mourner ? tell me, dost
thou laugh? Where dost thou hear of Christ
doing this? Nowhere: but that He was sad
indeed oftentimes. For even when He looked
on Jerusalem, He wept ; and when He thought
on the Traitor He was troubled ; and when He
was about to raise Lazarus, He wept ; and dost
thou laugh? If he who grieves not over the
sins of others deserves to be accused, of what
consideration will he be worthy, who is without
sorrow for his own sins, yea laughs at them?
This is the season of grief and tribulation, of
bruising and bringing under [the body], of
conflicts and sweatings, and dost thou laugh?
Dost not thou see how Sarah was rebuked?
dost thou not hear Christ saying, " Woe to
them that laugh, for they shall weep"? (Luke
vi. 25.) Thou chantest these things every day,
for, tell me, what dost thou say? "I have
laughed?" By no means; but what? "I la-
bored in my groaning." (Ps. vi. 6.)

But perchance there are some persons so dis-
solute and silly as even during this very rebuke
to laugh, because forsooth we thus discourse
about laughter. For indeed such is their de-
rangement, such their madness, that it does not
feel the rebuke.

The Priest of God is standing, offering up the
prayer of all : and art thou laughing, having no
fears? And while he is offering up the prayers
in trembling for thee, dost thou despise all?
Hearest thou not the Scripture saying, " Woe, ye
despisers ! " (cf. Acts xiii. 41 from Hab. i. 5);
dost thou not shudder? dost thou not humble
thyself ? Even when thou enterest a royal
palace, thou orderest thyself in dress, and look,
and gait, and all other respects : and here where
there is the true Palace, and things like those
of heaven, dost thou laugh? Thou indeed, I
know, seest [them] not, but hear thou that there
are angels present everywhere, and in the house
of God especially they stand by the King, and
all is filled by those incorporeal Powers.

This my discourse is addressed to women
also, who in the presence of their husbands in-


' Xofxvfft.


deed do not dare readily to do this, and e\
if they do it, it is not at all times, but during
season of relaxation, but here they do it alwa
Tell me, O woman, dost thou cover thine h(
and laugh, sitting in the Church? Didst tl
come in here to make confession of sins, to
down before God, to entreat and to supplic
for the transgressions thou hast wretchedly cc
mitted, and dost thou do this with laught
How then wilt thou be able to propitiate Hire

[9.] But (one says) what harm is there
laughter? There is no harm in laughter;
harm is when it is beyond measure, and out
season. Laughter has been implanted in
that when we see our friends after a long tii
we may laugh ; that when we see any pers
downcast and fearful, we may relieve them
our smile ; not that we should burst out ^
lently ^ and be always laughing. Laughter
been implanted in our soul, that the soul r
sometimes be refreshed, not that it may be qi
relaxed. For carnal desire also is implanted
us, and yet it is not by any means necess
that because it is implanted in us, therefore
should use it, or use it immoderately : but
should hold it in subjection, and not say, .
cause it is implanted in us, let us use it.

Serve God with tears, that thou mayest
able to wash away your sins. I know that m
mock us,^ saying, "Tears directly." Therel
it is a time for tears. I know also that they
disgusted, who say, " Let us eat and drink,
to-morrow we die." (i Cor. xv. 32.) "Va
of vanities, all is vanity." (Eccles. i. 2.) j
not I that say it, but he who had had the ej
rience of all things saith thus : " I builded
me houses, I planted vineyards, I made
pools of water, [I had] men servants and woi
servants." (Eccles. ii. 4, 6, 7.) And what t
after all these things? "Vanity of vanities
is vanity." (Eccles. xii. 8.)

Let us mourn therefore, beloved, let us mi
in order that we may laugh indeed, that we
rejoice indeed in the time of unmixed joy.
with this joy [here] grief is altogether ming
and never is it possible to find it pure,
that is simple and undeceiving joy : it has n
ing treacherous, nor any admixture. In
joy let us delight ourselves ; that let us pu
after. And it is not possible to obtain thi
any other way, than by choosing here not "
is pleasant, but what is profitable, and I
willing to be afflicted a little, and bearinj
things with thanksgiving. For thus we shal
able to attain even to the Kingdom of Has
of which may we all be counted worthy, in C
Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Fathe
glory, together with the Holy Ghost, now-
for ever and world without end. Amen.


ayaKay\a^it>IJiSV,


* iianvKuvrai,


: V XVI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


443


HOMILY XVI.

Hebrews ix. 15-18.


Aii'i for this cause He is the Mediator of the New
restament, that by means of death for the redemp-
tion of the transgressions that were under the first
IV'Stament, they which are called might receive the
|iromise of an eternal inheritance. For where a
testament is, there must also of necessity be the
death of the testator.' For a testament is of force
after men are dead,^ otherwise it is of no strength
at all while the testator liveth. Whereupon " neither
the first [testament] was dedicated* without blood."

[i.] It was probable that many of those who
:rt" more weakly would especially distrust the
Dinises of Christ because He had died. Paul
( ordingly out of a superabundance introduced
is illustration,' deriving it from common cus-
m. Of what kind is it? He says, " indeed,
1 this very account we ought to be of good
mrage." On what account? Because testa-
cnts are established and obtain their force
len those who have made them are not living,
It (lead. " And for this cause," he says, " He
tiie Mediator of the New Testament." A
<tament is made towards the last day, [the
i\ ] of death.

And a testament is of this character : It makes

me heirs, and some disinherited. So in this

also : " I will that where I am," Christ

''they also may be." (John xvii. 24.)

I i again of the disinherited, hear Him saying,

I pray not for" all, "but for them that believe

I Me through their word." (John xvii. 20.)

; tin, a testament has relation both to the testa-

r, and to the legatees ; so that they have some

ings to receive, and some to do. So also in

l^ case. For after having made promises

nimerable, He demands also something from

■ni, saying, " a new commandment I give unto

■'.." (Johaxiii. 34.) Again, a testament ought

have witnesses. Hear Him again saying, " I

1 (^ne that bear witness of Myself, and He that

lit Me beareth witness of Me." (John viii. 18.)

Ill again, " He shall testify of Me " (John xv.

> , speaking of the Comforter. The twelve

les too He sent, saying, " Bear ye witness

cGod."«


' of him that maHe it."

' in the case of the dead." ' ** whence."

Inaugurated." [fyxeKaivurTat. It cannot be denied that
i in the classics bears both the closely related meanings of
rai/^ and consecrate. The English editor has adopted the
liroughout this homily; but as the common meaning in the
^ consecrate, and as the common name of the festival of the
1 in of the restored temple was kyKo.ivt.a., it seems better to
the word adopted both by the A. V. and the Revision. —

I 'lis is not a citation of any words of our Lord: but probably
XV. 27, which i:> subsuntially equivalent, was the passage in-


[2.] " And for this cause " (he says) " He is
the Mediator of the New Testament." What is
a " Mediator " ? A mediator is not lord of the
thing of which he is mediator, but the thing
belongs to one person, and the mediator is
another : as for instance, the mediator of a
marriage is not the bridegroom, but one who
aids him who is about to be married. So then
also here : The Son became Mediator between
the Father and us. The Father willed not to
leave us this inheritance, but was wroth against
us, and was displeased [with us] as being es-
tranged [from Him] ; He accordingly became
Mediator between us and Him, and prevailed
with Him.

And what then ? How did He become Media-
tor ? He brought words from [Him] and brought
[them to us], conveying over' what came from
the Father to us, and adding His own death
thereto. We had offended : we ought to have
died : He died for us and made us worthy of
the Testament. By this is the Testament secure,
in that henceforward it is not made for the un-
worthy. At the beginning indeed, He made
His dispositions as a father for sons ; but after
we had become unworthy, there was no longer
need of a testament, but of punishment.

Why then (he would say) dost thou think
upon the law? For it placed us in a condition
of so great sin, that we could never have been
saved, if our Lord had not died for us ; ' the
law would not have had power, for it is weak.

[3.] And he established this no longer from
common custom only, but also from what hap-
pened under the old [Testament] : which es-
pecially influenced them. There was no one
who died there : how then could that [Testa-
ment] be firm? In the same way (he says).
How? For blood was there also, as there is
blood here. And if it was not the blood of
the Christ, do not be surprised ; for it was a
type. " Whereupon," he says, " neither was the
first [Testament] dedicated without blood."

What is " was dedicated " ? was confirmed,


tended; the words are those of i Tim. v. 21 [I charge thee before
God, Aia^apTiipoftat efi^iriof Tov 0eoi*] thrown into the imperative
form.

' [5tairopflM«v<»»»'. see above, p. 379, note i.]

"* Mr. Field points the passage thus; "we could never have
been saved ; if our Lord had not died for us, the Law would not
have had power," &c. The translation follows the Bened. pointing,
as giving the meaning most in accordance with St. Chrys.'s teaching.

Ki'his pointing of the English edition is allowed to stand as making
e sense more obvious to the English reader; but Mr. Field's point-
ing gives essentially the same sense and is more in St. Chrysostom's
style. — F.G.]


444


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X


was ratified. The word " whereupon " ' means
" for this cause." It was needful that the sym-
bol of the Testament should be also that of
death.

For why (tell me) is the book of the testa-
ment sprinkled ? (Ver. 19, 20) " For " (he says)
" when Moses had spoken every precept to all
the people according to the law, he took the
blood of calves, with water, and scarlet wool,
and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself
and all the people, saying. This is the blood of
the testament, which God hath enjoined unto
you." Tell me then why is the book of the
testament sprinkled, and also the people, except
on account of the precious blood, figured from
the first? Why "with hyssop"? It is close
and retentive.^ And why the " water " ? It
shows forth also the cleansing by water. And
why the "wool"? this also [was used], that
the blood might be retained. In this place
blood and water show forth the same thing,'
for baptism is His passion.*

[4.] V^r. 21, 22. "Moreover he sprinkled
with blood both the tabernacle and all the ves-
sels of the ministry. And almost' all things
are by the law purged with blood, and without
shedding of blood is no remission." Why the
"almost"? why did he qualify it? Because
those [ordinances] were not a perfect purifica-
tion, nor a perfect remission, but half-complete
and in a very small degree. But in this case
He says, " This is the blood ^ of the New Testa-
ment, which is shed for you, for the remission
of sins." (Matt. xxvi. 28.)

Where then is " the book " ? He purified
their minds. They themselves then were the
books of the New Testament. But where are
" the vessels of the ministry " ? They are them-
selves. And where is " the tabernacle " ? Again,
they are ; for " I will dwell in them," He says,
"and walk in them." (2 Cor. vi. 16.)

[5.] But they were not sprinkled with "scar-
let wool," nor yet " with hyssop." Why was
this? Because the cleansing was not bodily but
spiritual, and the blood was spiritual. How?
It flowed not from the body of irrational ani-
mals, but from the Body prepared by the Spirit.
With this blood not Moses but Christ sprinkled
us, through the word which was spoken ; " This
is the blood of the New Testament, for the
remission of sins." This word, instead of hys-
sop, having been dipped in the blood, sprinkles


* o6tv. so Horn. V. 5, p. 69 on c. iii. i.

' Kpar'qriKov. The common text, besides other additions, adds
the explanatory words toO ai^aro?, " of the blood."

^ The common editions add ov, determining the meaning to be
** he [or it] shows that blood and water are the same thing."

* See above on ch. vi. 6.

'' or, '* and we may almost say that accordine," &c.

* Or as the position of <fr7)<rt after aVa would seem to imply was
the interpretation of St. Chrys. : "This blood is that of the New
Testament," &c.


all. And there indeed the body was clean
outwardly, for the purifying was bodily ;
here, since the purifying is spiritual, it enter
into the soul, and cleanseth it, not being sirr
sprinkled over, but gushing forth in our so
The initiated understand what is said. And
their case indeed one sprinkled just the surfa
but he who was sprinkled washed it off again ;
surely he did not go about continually stai
with blood. But in the case of the soul it is
so, but the blood is mixed with its very s
stance, making it vigorous and pure, and 1(
ing it to the very unapproachable beauty.

[6.] Henceforward then he shows that
death is the cause not only of confirmation,
also of purification. For inasmuch as d'
was thought to be an odious thing, and e
dally that of the cross, he says that it puri
even a precious purification, and in regan
greater things. Therefore the sacrifices
ceded, because of this blood. Therefore
lambs ; everything was for this cause.

Ver. 23. " It was therefore necessary that
Patterns"' (he says) "of the things in
heavens should be purified with these, but
heavenly things themselves with better sacril
than these."

And how are they " patterns ' of things in
heavens " ? And what does he mean now
" the things in the heavens " ? Is it Hea\
Or is it the Angels ? None of these, but \
is ours.' It follows then that our things ar
Heaven, and heavenly things are ours, (
though they be accomplished on earth ; s
although angels are on earth, yet they are a
Heavenly. And the Cherubim appeared
earth, but yet are heavenly. And why do ]
"appeared"? nay rather they dwell on e;
as indeed in Paradise : but this is nothing :
they are heavenly.'" And, " Our conversati(
in Heaven " (Phil. iii. 20), and yet we live 1

" But these are the heavenly things," tha
the philosophy which exists amongst us ; t
who have been called thereto."

" With better sacrifices than these." V
is " better " is better than something [else]
is good. Therefore " the patterns also of th
in the heavens " have become good ; for
even the patterns were evil : else the th
whereof they are patterns would also have 1
evil.


' vnoSeCyfiara.

' or, *' samples," *' means of showing."
8 The Greek is ra r)nfTepa, including all our sacrament!
vices, relations, life and conversation. See Horn. xiv. [3], [S. (
there describes the heavenly things as *' spiritual," and here,
cordance with the whole context, he must refer more to the sp
than to the outward and ceremonial side of our religion. — ■ F. <
"* [There is a paronomasia here which is difficult of expr
in English ; lit. " our citizenship is in heaven, yet we live as ci
here."— F. G.]

'• [This passage is obscure; but the meaning seems to be, *
teaching, given above, is the philosophy of those Christians w]
called to such studies." — F. G.]


Homily XVI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


445


[7.] If then we are heavenly, and have
jbtained such a sacrifice,' let us fear. Let us
10 longer continue on the earth ; for even now
t is possible for him that wishes it, not to be on
he earth. For to be and not to be on the
:arth is the effect of moral disposition and
;hoice. For instance ; God is said to be in
jleaven. Wherefore? not because He is con-
ined by space,^ far from it, nor as having left
he earth destitute of His presence, but by His
•elation to and intimacy with ^ the Angels. If
hen we also are near to God, we are in Heaven,
^or what care I about Heaven when I see the
lx)rd of Heaven, when I myself am become a
Heaven? "For," He says, "We will come," I
Lnd the Father, " and will make our abode with
lim." (John xiv. 23.)

Let us then make our soul a Heaven. The
leaven is naturally bright ; for not even in a
term does it become black, for it does not it-
elf change its appearance, but the clouds run
ogether and cover it. Heaven has the Sun ;
re also have the Sun of Righteousness. I said
t is possible to become a Heaven ; and I see
hat it is possible to become even better than
ieaven. How ? when we have the Lord of the
iun. Heaven is throughout pure and without
pot ; it changes not either in a storm or in the
light. Neither let us then be so influenced,
ither by tribulations or by " the wiles of the
.evil " (Eph. vi. 11), but let us continue spotless
nd pure. Heaven is high and far from the
arth. Let us also effect this [as regards our-
elves] ; let us withdraw ourselves from the
arth, and exalt ourselves to that height, and
emove ourselves far from the earth. Heaven
i higher than the rains and the storms, and is
sached by none of them. This we also can do,
'we will.

It does appear to be, but is not really so
ffected. Neither then let us be affected, even
' we appear to be so. For as in a storm, most
len know not the beauty of [heaven,] but think
lat it is changed, while philosophers know that

is not affected at all, so with regard to our-
;lves also in afflictions ; most men think that

e are changed with them, and that affliction
as touched our very heart, but philosophers
now that it has not touched us.

[8.] Let us then become heaven, let us mount

]p to that height, and so we shall see men dif-

!ring nothing from ants. I do not speak of the

oor only, nor the many, but even if there be

general there, even if the emperor be there.


rw. Mr. Field adopts the reading of the later MSS. (and
1 editions) ouo-ias, *' substance," or '* possession." But the


mmon editions) oiyaia^, " substance," or " po:
ree MSS. which he usually follows and the old translation read
{riot, which has been followed in the translation. [There are,
'Wever, as many MSS. on the other side, and whether oucria? be
mslated " possession " or ** reality," it would give an excellent
nsc and one well in accordance with the context. — F.p.]^


we shall not distinguish the emperor, nor the
private person. We shall not know what is gold,
or what is silver, or what is silken or purple
raiment : we shall see all things as if they were
flies, if we be seated in that height. There is no
tumult there, no disturbance, nor clamor.

And how is it possible (one says) for him
who walks on the earth, to be raiserl up to that
height? I do not tell it thee in words, but I
show thee in fact those who have attained to
that height. Who then are they ?

I mean such as Paul, who being on earth,
spent their lives in heaven. But why do I say " in
heaven"? They were higher than the Heaven,
yea than the other heaven, and mounted up to
God Himself. For, " who " (he says) " shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribu-
lation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?" (Rom. viii. 35.)
And again, " while we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen." (2 Cor. iv. 18.) Seest thou that he did
not even see the things here ? But to show thee
that he was higher than the heavens, hear him
saying himself, " For I am persuaded that
neither death, or Hfe, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of Christ." (Rom. viii. 38, 39.)

Seest thou how thought, hurrying past all
things, made him higher not than this creation
only, not than these heavens, but even [than
any other also] if any other there were ? Hast
thou seen the elevation of his mind? Hast
thou seen what the tent-maker became, because
he had the will, he who had spent his whole life
in the market-place ?

[9.] For there is no hindrance, no not any,
but that we may rise above all men, if we have
the will. For if we ^re so successful in arts that
are beyond the reach of the generality, much
more in that which does not require so great
labor.

For, tell me, what is more difficult than to
walk along a tight rope, as if on level ground,
and when walking on high to dress and imdress,
as if sitting on a couch? Does not the per-
formance seem to us to be so frightful, that we
are not even willing to look at it, but are terri-
fied and tremble at the very sight? And tell
me, what is more difficult than to hold a pole
upon your face, and when you have put up a
child upon it, to perform innumerable feats and
delight the spectators ? And what is more diffi-
cult than to play at ball* with swords? And
tell me what is harder than thoroughly to search
out the bottom of the sea? And one might
mention innumerable other arts.


* <r<^aipt^cti/.


446


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV:


But easier than all these, if we have the will,
is virtue, and the going up into Heaven. For
here it is only necessary to have the will, and all
[the rest] follows. For we may not say, I am
unable, neither accuse the Creator. For if He
made us unable, and then commands, it is an
accusation against Himself.

[lo.] How is it then (some one says) that
many are not able ? How is it then that many
are not willing? For, if they be willing, all will
be able. Therefore also Paul says, " I would
that all men were even as I myself" (i Cor. vii.
7), since he knew that all were able to be as
himself. For he would not have said this, if it
had been impossible. Dost thou wish to become
[such] ? only lay hold on the beginning.

Tell me now, in the case of any arts, when we
wish to attain them, are we content with wishing,
or do we also engage with the things them-
selves ? ' As for instance, one wishes to become
a pilot ; he does not say, I wish, and content
himself with that, but he also puts his hand to
the work. He wishes to become a merchant ;
he does not merely say, I wish, but he also puts
his hand to the work. Again he wishes to travel
abroad, and he does not say, I wish, but he puts


his hand to the work. In everything then, wis
ing alone is not sufficient, but work must also
added ; and when thou wishest to mount up
heaven, dost thou merely say, " I wish "?

How then (he says) saidst thou that willing
sufficient? [I meant] willing joined with dee(
the laying hold on the thing itself, the laborit
For we have God working with us, and acti
with us. Only let us make our choice, only
us apply ourselves to the matter as to work, 01
let us think earnestly about it, only let us lay
to heart, and all follows. But if we sleep c
and as we snore expect to enter into heav<
how shall we be able to obtain the heavenly i
heritance ?

Let us therefore be willing, I exhort you,
us be willing. Why do we carry on all c
traffic with reference to the present life, whi
to-morrow we shall leave ? Let us choose th
that Virtue which will suffice us through
eternity : wherein we shall be continually, a
shall enjoy the everlasting good things ; whi
may we all attain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, w:
whom to the Father together with the H(
Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and for ev
and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XVII.

Hebrews ix. 24-26.


"For Christ is not entered into the holy places made
with hands, which are the figures ^ of the true, but
into Heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. Nor yet that He should offer Himself
often, as the High Priest entereth into the Holy
Place every year with blood of others, for then must
He often have suffered since the foundation of the
world. But now, once,' in the end of the world,
hath He appeared to put away * sin by the sacri-
fice of Himself."

[i.] The Jews greatly prided themselves on
the temple and the tabernacle. Wherefore they
said, " The temple of the Lord, The temple of
the Lord, The temple of the Lord." (Jer. vii.
4.) For nowhere else in the earth was such a
temple constructed as this, either for costliness,
or beauty, or anything else. For God who or-
dained it, commanded that it should be made
with great magnificence, because they also were


^ anrOfLttta tmv npayfiaTtov. The expression (tou npay/iaTo^
t^iTTCTat) is repeated in each of the three instances that follow : in
the translation it is varied.

' avTiTviTa.

* citra^, " once for all." [The English editor seems to have re-
garded aiTa( as the equivalent for the more emphatic e^aira^ of vii.
27, ix. 13. X. 10, both here and throughout this Homily. It seems
better to retain the distinction of the Greek words. — F. G.]

♦or. "annul."


more attracted and urged on by material thin
For it had bricks of gold in the walls ; and a
one who wishes may learn this in the seco
[book] of Kings, and in Ezekiel, and how me
talents of gold were then expended.

But the second [temple] was a more glorit
building, both on account of its beauty, and
all other respects. Nor was it reverenced
this reason only, but also from its being 0
For they were wont to resort thither from
uttermost parts of the earth, whether from Ba
Ion or from Ethiopia. And Luke shows 1
when he says in the Acts : " There were dw-
ing " there " Parthians, and Medes, and Elami
and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, in Judea
Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia
Pamphylia, in Egypt and in the parts of Li
about Cyrene." (Acts ii. 5, 9, 10.) They tl'
who lived in all parts of the world assemt
there, and the fame of the temple was great.

What then does Paul do? What [he did;
regard to the sacrifices, that also he does hi
For as there he set against [them] the death
Christ, so here also he sets the whpl^ hCW
against the temple.


iOMILY XVII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


447


[2.] And not by this alone did he point out
he difference, but also by adding that The
^riest is nearer to God : for he says, " to appear
n the presence' of God." So that he made
he matter august, not only by the [considera-
ion of] heaven, but also by [that of Christ's]
;ntering in [there]. For not merely through
ynibols as here, but He sees God Himself
here.

Seest thou that condescension through the

owly things have been said throughout? Why

'lost thou then any longer wonder that He inter-

edes there, where He places Himself as a High

'riest ? " Nor yet, that He should offer Him-

lelf often, as the High Priest."

f "For Christ is not entered into the Holy

'laces made with hands " (he says) " which are

he figures ' of the True." (These then are true ;

nd those are figures,' for the temple too has

een so arranged,'' as the Heaven of Heavens.)

What sayest thou? He who is everywhere

resent, and who fiUeth all things, doth not He

appear "' unless He enter into Heaven? Thou

■est that all these things pertain to the flesh.

" I'o appear," he says, " in the presence of

oti for us." What is " for us " ? He went up

he means) with a sacrifice which had power to

ropitiate the Father. Wherefore (tell me) ?

as He an enemy ? The angels were enemies,

[e was not an enemy. For that the Angels were

lemies, hear what he says, " He made peace as

) things on earth and things in Heaven." ° (Col.

20.) So that He also "entered into Heaven,

)\v to appear in the presence of God for us."

e " now appeareth," but " for us."

[3.] " Nor yet that He should offer Himself

ten, as the High Priest entereth into the Holy

are every year with blood of others." Seest

hoii how many are the differences? The "often"

r the " once " ; " the blood of others," for " His

vti."' Great is the distance. He is Himself

cii both victim and Priest and sacrifice. For

it had not been so, and it had been necessary

offer many sacrifices. He must have been

any times crucified. " For then," he says, " He

Mst often have suffered since the foundation of

e world."

In this place he has also veiled over' some-

ing. " But now once more in the end of

<" world." Why " at the end of the world "?

r the many sins. If therefore, it had taken


TuJ npoaiuiriu, *' before the Face." ' tuttoi.

(ii-TiTVTra. * KaTeai€«vaaTat,

tfj-it/ayi^iTat, "He makes Himself visible," "apparent": so
'^nts Himself," or "appears in presence": in His Human

~t. Chrys. understands this passage as meaning that peace was
between things on earth and those in Heaven, between us and
.jcls. See his Homily on Col. i. 20 [pp. 2ia sqq. O. T.]. By
:cing this subject of the Father not belntj inimical to us, he
to guard against any misinterpretation of what he had said,
XVI. [2].

^oe ver. 12.

I he Apostle has here stated something covertly. What this is
Jirys. proceeds to explain.


place at the beginning, then no one would have
believed ; and He must not die a second time,
all would have been useless. But since later,
there were many transgressions, with reason He
then appeared : which he expresses in another
place also, " Where sin abounded, grace did
much more abotmd. But now once in the end
of the world, hath He appeared to put away sin
by the sacrifice of Himself" (Rom. v. 20.)

[4.] (Ver. 27) "And as it is appointed ° unto
men once to die, but after this, the Judgment."
He next says also why He died once [only] :
because He became a ransom by one death.
" It had been appointed " (he says) " unto men
once to die." This then is [the meaning of]
" He died once,"'" for all.'^ (What then? Do
we no longer die that death ? We do indeed die,
but we do not continue in it : which is not to
die at all. For the tyranny of death, and death
indeed, is when he who dies is never more
allowed to return to life. But when after dying
is living, and that a better life, this is not death,
but sleep.) Since then death was to have pos-
session of all, therefore He died that He might
deliver us.

Ver. 28. "So Christ was once"" offered." By
whom offered? evidently by Himself Here he
says that He is not Priest only, but Victim also,
and what is sacrificed." On this account are [the
words] " was offered." " Was once offered " (he
says) "to bear'* the sins of many." Why "of
many," and not " of all " ? Because not all
believed. For He died indeed for all, that is
His part : for that death was a counterbalance '*
against the destruction of all men. But He did
not bear the sins of all men, because they were
not willing.

And what is [the meaning of] " He bare the
sins"? Just as in the Oblation we bear up our
sins and say, " Whether we have sinned volun-
tarily or involuntarily, do Thou forgive," " that
is, we make mention of them first, and then ask
for their forgiveness. So also was it done here.
Where has Christ done this ? Hear Himself say-
ing, "And for their sakes I sanctify" Myself"
(John xvii. 19.) Lo ! He bore the sins. He
took them from men, and bore them to the
Father ; not that He might determine anything


* ajTOKfiTat, ** laid up."

'" oiraf. " airof.

11 virip anavTuv. ^ 0vpLai KaX ItptloVt

1* aveveyKtlv. Lit. to bring or bear up: hence to refer to or
bring before a person, to present. The word is used in the Epistle
to the Hebrews for "offer" as a sacrifice ; vii. 27; xiii. 15. [This
secondary meaning is brought out in i Pet. ii. 24, 6? attapria^ r]fj.utv
ayTos avrfveyKev iv Tul trw^ari avroii €iri to ^vKov, " Who bore up
our sins in His body upon the cross," viz. to expiate them. It is a
common word in the LXX. for offering sacrifice, both its primary
and secondary meanings corresponding to those of the Hebrew word
which it translates. — F. G.] ''^' nvrippono^,

1^ [This occurs, not absolutely verbally in the " prayer of Trisa-
gion, in St. Chrys. 's liturgy. See Dr. Neale's Liturgies 0/ Mark,
&c.. p. 121, Hayes, 1859.]

t'f ayia^io, " devote as a Sacrifice." See St. Chrys. Homily on
the words, John xvii. 19.


448


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X\


against them [mankind], but that He might for-
give them.

" Unto them that look for Him shall He ap-
pear " (he says) " the second time without sin
unto salvation." What is "without sin"? it is
as much as to say, He sinneth not. For neither
did He die as owing the debt of death, nor yet
because of sin. But how " shall He appear " ?
To punish, you say. He did not however say
this, but what was cheering ; " shall He appear
unto them that look for Him, without sin unto
salvation." So that for the time to come they
no longer need sacrifices to save themselves, but
to do this by deeds.

[5.] (Chap. X. I.) " For " (he says) " the Law
having a shadow of the good things to come,
not the very image of the things " ; i.e. not the
very reality. For as in painting, so long as one
[only] draws the outlines, it is a sort of" shadow " :
but when one has added the bright paints and
laid in the colors, then it becomes " an image."
Something of this kind also was the Law.

" For " (he says) " the Law having a shadow
of the good things to come, not the very image
of the things," i.e. of the sacrifice, of the remis-
sion : " can never by those sacrifices ' with ' which
they offered continually make the comers there-
unto perfect." (Ver. 2-9) " For then would they
not have ceased to be offered ? because that the
worshipers once purged, should have had no
more conscience of sins? But in those sacri-
fices there is a remembrance again made of sins
every year. For it is not possible that the blood
of bulls and of goats should take away sins.
Wherefore when He cometh into the world. He
saith. Sacrifice and offering Thou wouldest not,
but a body hast Thou prepared Me. In burnt-
offerings and sacrifices for sin Thou hast had no
pleasure. Then said I, Lo ! I come, in the vol-
ume of the book it is written of Me, to do Thy
will, O God. Above when He said. Sacrifice,
and offering, and burnt-offerings, and [offering]
for sin Thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure
therein, which are offered by the Law, then He
said, Lo ! I come to do Thy will, O God ! He
taketh away the first that He may establish the
second."

Thou seest again the superabundance [of his
proofs] ? This sacrifice (he says) is one ; where-
as the others were many : therefore they had
no strength, becaiise they were many. For, tell
me, what need of many, if one had been suf-
ficient? so that their being many, and offered
" continually," proves that they [the worship-
ers] were never made clean. For as a medi-
cine, when it is poweful and productive of health.


> The common editions have Kar f i'iovtoi', " year by year," be-
fore rate aiiraU Bvtriat^, as has the old translation of Mutian.; but
it is omitted in the best MSS.

* aUt &c, "which," Ben. Sav»


and able to remove the disease entirely, effe
all after one application ; as, therefore, if be
once applied it accomplishes the whole, it pro
its own strength in being no more applied, £
this is its business, to be no more applie
whereas if it is applied continually, this ii
plain proof of its not having strength. For i
the excellence of a medicine to be applied on
and not often. So is it in this case also. M
forsooth are they continually cured with
" same sacrifices " ? For if they were set f
from all their sins, the sacrifices would not h
gone on being offered every day. For they 1
been appointed to be continually offered
behalf of the whole people, both in the ever
and in the day. So that there was an arra;
ment of sins, and not a release from sins ;
arraignment of weakness, not an exhibitior
strength. For because the first had no stren;
another also was offered : and since this effec
nothing, again another ; so that it was an
dence of sins. The "offering" indeed tl
was an evidence of sins, the " continually,"
evidence of weakness. But with regard
Christ, it was the contrary : He was " o
offered." The types ' therefore contain the
ure only, not the power ; just as in images,
image has the figure of the man, not the poi
So that the reality and the type have [somewl
in common with one another. For the fij
exists equally in both, but not the power,
too also is it in respect of Heaven and of
tabernacle, for the figure was equal : for tl
was the Holy of Holies, but the power and
other things were not the same.

What is, " He hath appeared to put away
by the sacrifice of Himself"?* What is
" putting away " ? it is making contempt'
For sin has no longer any boldness ; for
made of no effect in that when it ought to 1
demanded' punishment, it did not demand
that is, it suffered violence : when it expecte
destroy all men, then it was itself destroyed.

" He hath appeared by the sacrifice of F
self" (he says), that is, "He hath appear
unto God, and drawn near [unto Him],
do not [think] because the High Priest
wont to do this oftentimes in the year . .
So that henceforward this is done in vain, althc


" avTtTvna,

* St. Chrys. here reverts to ch. ix, z6, to supply an expla
of the words tis a9€TYi<Ttv t^s a^apria? Sia. TTJs Bvtria^ avrov it
pujTtti, which he had omitted before; d0<TTj<ns is properly [" :
aside." — F.G.I "annulling," " rendering invalid and of no e
thence it is used for " despising," " treating as nothing worlh

^ o(bei\ov(ra aiToXa^ftv.

" This is an imperfect sentence: the interpolator substitu
the lacuna and the next sentence the following: " that it wa
simply and not because of weakness. For if it were not do
cause of weakness, why was it done at all? For if there J
wounds, neither is there afterwards need of medicines for 1
tient." Mr. Field prefers leaving it as it stands without con
ing what is omitted: only observing that the words " thisis t
refer to the Levitical sacrifices contmued after the completion >
on the Crou.


Homily XVII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


449


it is done ; for what need is there of medicines
where there are no wounds? On this account
He ordained offerings " continually," because of
their want of power, and that a remembrance of
sins might be made.

[6.] What then? do not we offer every day?
We offer indeed, but making a remembrance of
His death, and this ' [remembrance] is one and
act many. How is it one, and not many? In-
ismuch as that^ [Sacrifice] was once for all
jffered, [and] carried into the Holy of Holies.
This is a figure of that [sacrifice] and this re-
membrance of that." For we always offer the
same,* not one sheep now and to-morrow an-
Dther, but always the same thing : ' so that the
sacrifice is one. And yet by this reasoning,
iince the offering is made in many places, are
Jiere many Christs? but Christ is one every-
where, being complete here and complete there
dso, one Body. As then while offered in many
jlaces, He is one body and not many bodies ;
to also [He is] one sacrifice. He is our High
Priest, who offered the sacrifice that cleanses us.
rhat we offer now also, which was then offered,
rhich cannot be exhausted. This is done in
emembrance of what was then done. For
saith He) " do this in remembrance of Me."
Luke xxii. ig.) It is not another sacrifice, as
he High Priest, but we offer ^ always the same,
ir rather we perform a remembrance of a Sac-
ifice.

[7.] But since I have mentioned this sacri-
ice, I wish to say a little in reference to you
rho have been initiated ; little in quantity, but
lossessing great force and profit, for it is not
ur own, but the words of Divine Spirit. What
lien is it ? Many partake of this sacrifice once
1 the whole year, others twice ; others many
imes. Our word then is to all ; not to those
nly who are here, but to those also who are
ettied in the desert.' For they partake once
1 the year, and often indeed at intervals of two
ears.
What then? which shall we approve? those
who receive] once [in the year] ? those who
receive] many times ? those who [receive] few
raes? Neither those [who receive] once, nor
lose [who receive] often, nor those [who re-
5ive] seldom, but those [who come] with a
ure conscience, from a pure heart, with an irre-
roachable life. Let such draw near continually ;
It those who are not such, not even once,
'hy, you will ask? Because they receive to
lemselves judgment, yea and condemnation,
id punishment, and vengeance. And do not
• onder. For as food, nourishing by nature, if
ceived by a person without appetite, ruins and


^ avrif.


* rov aUTOi'.

" TO OUTO.

<* iroiou^ev, or " make."

' The Eremites.


corrupts all [the system] , and becomes an occa-
sion of disease, so surely is it also with respect
to the awful mysteries. Dost thou feasr at a
spiritual table, a royal table, and again pollute
thy mouth with mire ? Dost thou anoint thyself
with sweet ointment, and again fill thyseif with
ill savors?

Tell me, I beseech thee, when after a year
thou partakest of the Communion, dost thou
think that the Forty Days ' are sufficient for thee
for the purifying of the sins of all that time ?
And again, when a week has passed, dost thou
give thyself up to the former things ? Tell me
now, if when thou hast been well for forty days
after a long illness, thou shouldest again give
thyself up to the food which caused the sick-
ness, hast thou not lost thy former labor too?
For if natural things are changed, much more
those which depend on choice. As for instance,
by nature we see, and naturally we have healthy
eyes ; but oftentimes from a bad habit [of body]
our power of vision is injured. If then natural
things are changed, much more those of choice.
Thou assignest forty days for the health of the
soul, or perhaps not even forty, and dost thou
expect to propitiate God ? Tell me, art thou in
sport?

These things I say, not as forbidding you the
one and annual coming, but as wishing you to
draw near continually.

[8.] These things have been given to the
holy. This the Deacon also proclaims when he
calls on the holy ; ' even by this call searching
the faults of all. For as in a flock, where many
sheep indeed are in good health, but many are
full of the scab, it is needful that these should
be separated from the healthy ; so also in the
Church : since some sheep are healthy, and
some diseased, by this voice he separates the
one from the other, the priest [I mean] going
round on all sides by this most awful cry, and
calling and drawing on '" the holy. For it is not
possible that a man should know the things of
his neighbor, (for " what man," he says, " know-
eth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him ? " — i Cor. ii. 11): he utters this
voice after the whole sacrifice has been com-
pleted, that no person should come to the spir-
itual fountain carelessly and in a chance way.
For in the case of the flock also (for nothing
prevents us from again using the same example),
the sickly ones we shut up within, and keep them
in the dark, and give them different food, not
permitting them to partake either of pure air, or
of simple grass, or of the fountain without [the
fold]. In this case then also this voice is instead
of fetters.


' Lent; devoted to preparation for the Easter Communion.

• After the Ohlation was made and before the Communion the
deacon proclaimed ri ayia. roli ayioif , " The Holy things for the
holy." " ^^twfi


450


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV


Thou canst not say, ' I did not know, I was
not aware that danger attends the matter.' Nay
surely Paul too especially testified this. But wilt
thou say, ' I never read it ' ? This is not an
a]>oiogy, but even an accusation. Dost thou
come into the Church every day and yet art
ignorant of this?

However, that thou mayest not have even this
excuse to offer, for this cause, with a loud voice,
with an awful cry, like some herald lifting up his
hand on high, standing aloft, conspicuous to all,
and after that awful silence crying out aloud, he
invites some, and some he forbids, not doing
this with his hand, but with his tongue more dis-
tinctly than with his hand. For that voice, fall-
ing on our ears, just like a hand, thrusts away
and casts out some, and introduces and presents
others.

Tell me then, I beseech [you], in the Olym-
pic games does not the herald stand, calling out
with loud and uplifted voice, saying, " Does any
one accuse this man ? Is he a slave ? Is he a
thief? Is he one of wicked manners?" And
yet, those contests for prizes are not of the soul,
nor yet of good morals, but of strength and the
body. If then where there is exercise of bodies,
much examination is made about character, how
much rather here, where the soul is alone the
combatant. Our herald then even now stands,
not holding each person by the head, and draw-
ing him forward, but holding all together by the
head within ; he does not set against them other
accusers, but themselves against themselves. For
he says not, " Does any one accuse this man ? "
but what? " If any man accuse himself." For
when he says. The Holy things for the holy, he
means this : " If any is not holy, let him not draw
near."

He does not simply say, "free from sins,"
but, " holy." For it is not merely freedom from
sins which makes a man holy, but also the pres-
ence of the Spirit, and the wealth of good works.
I do not merely wish (he says) that you should
be delivered from the mire, but also that you
should be bright and beautiful. For if the
Babylonian King, when he made choice of the
youths from the captives, chose out those who
were beautiful in form, and of fair countenance :
much more is it needful that we, when we stand
by the royal table, should be beautiful in form,
[I mean] that of the soul, having adornment of
gold, our robe pure, our shoes royal, the face of
our soul well-formed, the golden ornament put
around it, even the girdle of truth. Let such an
one as this draw near, and touch the royal cups.

But if any man clothed in rags, filthy, squalid.


wish to enter in to the royal table, consider h
much he will suffer, the forty days not being su
cient to wash away the offenses which have be
committed in all the time. For if hell is i
sufficient, although it be eternal (for therefc
also it is eternal), much more this short tin
For we have not shown a strong repentance, 1
a weak.

[9.] Eunuchs especially ought to stand
the King : by eunuchs, I mean those who i
clear in their mind, having no wrinkle nor sp
lofty in mind, having the eye of the soul ger
and quick-sighted, active and sharp, not slet
nor supine ; full of much freedom, and yet
from impudence and overboldness, wake:
healthful, neither very gloomy and downcast, i
yet dissolute and soft.

This eye we have it in our own power to crea
and to make it quicksighted and beautiful. 1
when we direct it, not to the smoke nor to ■
dust (for such are all human things), but to ■
delicate breeze, to the light air, to things he
enly and high, and full of much calmn
and purity, and of much delight, we si
speedily restore it, and shall invigorate it, as
luxuriates in such contemplation. Hast tl
seen covetousness and great wealth ? do not tl
lift up thine eye thereto. The thing is mire
is smoke, an evil vapor, darkness, and great c
tress and suffocating cares. Hast thou seei
man cultivating righteousness, content with
own, and having abundant space for recreati
having anxieties, not fixing his thoughts on thii
here ? Set [thine eye] there, and lift [it] up
high ; and thou wilt make it far the most beai
ful, and more splendid, feasting it not with
flowers of the earth, but with those of virt
with temperance, moderation, and all the r
For nothing so troubles the eye as an evil c
science (" Mine eye," it is said, " was trout
by reason of anger" — Ps. vi. 7) ; nothing
darkens it. Set it free from this injury, :
thou wilt make it vigorous and strong, t'
nourished with good hopes.

And may we all make both it and also
other energies of the soul, such as Christ desi
that being made worthy of the Head who is
over us, we may depart thither where He wisl
For He saith, " I will that where I am,
also may be with Me, that they may behold
glory." (John xvii. 24.) Which may we
enjoy in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to
Father together with the Holy Ghost be gl
might, honor, now and for ever and world w-
out end. Amen.


Homily XVIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


451


HOMILY XVIII,

Hebrews x. 8-13.


"Above when He said, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt-
offerings, and [offering] for sin. Thou wouldest not,
neither hadst pleasure [therein], which are offered
by ' the Law, then said He, Lo ! I come to do Thy
will, O God. He taketh away the first, that He may
establish the second. By the which will we are '^
sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ,
once for all.'' And every Priest standeth daily min-
istering, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices,
which can never take away sins. But this [man]
after He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever,
sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth
expecting till His enemies be made His footstool."*

[i.] In what has gone before he had shown
that the sacrifices were unavailing for perfect puri-
fication, and were a type, and greatly defective.
Since then there was this objection to his argu-
ment, If they are types, how is it that, after the
truth is come, they have not ceased, nor given
place, but are still performed ? he here accord-

Jngly' labors at this very point, showing that they
ire no longer performed, even as a figure, for
jod does not accept them. And this again he
ihows not from the New [Testament], but from
he prophets, bringing forward from times of old
he strongest testimony, that it [the old system]
lomes to an end, and ceases, and that they do all
n vain, " alway resisting the Holy Ghost." (Acts
ii.5i.)

And he shows over and above that they cease

lOt now [only], but at the very coming of the

lessiah, nay rather, even before His coming :

nd how it was that Christ did not abolish them

t the last, but they were abolished first, and then

[e came ; first they were made to cease, and

len He appeared. That they might not say,

Iven without this sacrifice, and by means of

lose, we could have been well pleasing unto

les od, He waited for these sacrifices to be con-

I is cted [of weakness], and then He appeared ;

n ir (He says) " sacrifice and offering Thou would-

j it not." Hereby He took all away ; and having

,;,) )oken generally. He says also particularly, " In

mt-offerings and [sacrifice] for sin Thou hadst

"easure." But " the offering " was every-

ng except the sacrifice. " Then said I, Lo ! I

ne." Of whom was this spoken? of none

•r than the Christ.

lere he does not blame those who offer, show-
that it is not because of their wickednesses
t He does not accept them, as He says else-


fmt-(
pie
ng e


' "according to.*
- "have been."


8 et^airaf.

* " a footstool for His feet.'


where, but because the thing itself has been con-
victed for the future and shown to have no
strength, nor any suitableness to the times.'
What then has this to do with the " sacrifices "
being offered "oftentimes"? Not only from
their being " oftentimes " [offered] (he means)
is it manifest that they are weak, and that they
effected nothing ; but also from God's not ac-
cepting them, as being unprofitable and useless.
And in another place it is said, " If Thou hadst
desired sacrifice I would have given it." (Ps. li.
16.) Therefore by this also he makes it plain
that He does not desire it. Therefore sacrifices
are not God's will, but the abolition of sacrifices.
Wherefore they sacrifice contrary to His will.

What is "To do Thy will"? To give up
Myself, He means : This is the will of God.
" By which Will we are sanctified." Or he even
means something still further, that the sacrifices
do not make men clean, but the Will of God.
Therefore to offer sacrifice is not the will of
God.

[2.] And why dost thou wonder that it is not
the will of God now, when it was not His will
even from the beginning ? For " who," saith He,
" hath required this at your hands ? " (Isa.
i. 12.)

How then did He Himself enjoin it ? In con-
descension. For as Paul says, " I would ' that
all men were even as I myself" (i Cor. vii.
7), in respect of continence, and again says, " I
will' that the younger women marry, bear chil-
dren " (i Tim. V. 14) ; and lays down two wills,
yet the two are not his own, although he com-
mands ; but the one indeed is his own, and
therefore he lays it down without reasons ; while
the other is not his own, though he wishes it,
and therefore it is added with a reason. For
having previously accused them, because "they
had waxed wanton against Christ" (i Tim. v.
n), he then says, "I will that the younger
women marry, bear children." (i Tim. v. 14.)
So in this place also it was not His leading will
that the sacrifices should be offered. P"or, as He
says, " I wish not the death of the sinner, as that
he should turn unto [Me] and live " (Ezek.
xxxiii. 11) : and in another place He says that
He not only wished, but even desired * this : and
yet these are contrary to each other : for intense

" irpov^KOvra Katphv, * BiXia. ^ fiovKofiai,

• St. Chrys. seems to refer to some place where it is said that
God desired {€nfevfi.r)tT() the death of the wicked. It docs not ap-
pear what passage he had in view.


452


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII


wishing is desire. How then dost Thou "not
wish"? how dost Thou in another place "de-
sire," which is a sign of vehement wishing?
So is it in this case also.

" By the which will we are sanctified," he
says. How sanctified ? " by the offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all."

[3.] " And every priest standeth daily min-
istering and offering oftentimes the same sacri-
fice." (To stand therefore is a sign of minis-
tering; accordingly to sit, is a sign of being
ministered unto.) " But this [man] after He
had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat
down on the right hand of God, from henceforth
expecting till His enemies be made His foot-
stool." (Ver. 14, 15) " For by one offering He
hath perfected forever them that are sanctified.
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to
us." He had said that those [sacrifices] are not
offered ; he reasoned from what is written, [and]
from what is not written ; ' moreover also he put
forward the prophetic word which says, " sacri-
fice and offering Thou wouldest not." He had
said that He had forgiven their sins. Again this
also He proves from the testimony of what is
written, for "the Holy Ghost" (he says) "is a wit-
ness to us : for after that He had said," (ver.
16-18) "This is the covenant, that I will make
with them, after those days, saith the Lord : I
will put My laws into their hearts, and in their
minds will I write them, and their sins and in-
iquities will I remember no more. Now where
remission of these is there is no more offering
for sin." So then He forgave their sins, when
He gave the Covenant, and He gave the Cove-
nant by sacrifice. If therefore He forgave the
sins through the one sacrifice, there is no longer
need of a second.

" He sat down on the right hand of God,
from henceforth expecting." Why the delay?
"that His enemies be put under His feet. For
by one offering He hath perfected for ever them
that are sanctified." But perhaps some one
might say ; Wherefore did He not put them
under at once? For the sake of the faithful
who should afterwards be brought forth and
born. Whence then [does it appear] that they
shall be put under? By the saying "He sat
down." He called to mind again that testimony
which saith, " until I put the enemies under His
feet." (See above, i. 13.) But His enemies
are the Jews. Then since he had said, "Till
His enemies be put under His feet," and they
[these enemies ^] were vehemently urgent, there-
fore he introduces all his discourse concerning


' That is from other arguments than the words of the Old Testa-
ment.

' [The English editor supplies this ellipsis with the words " to
whom he wrote." The reference seems rather to be to '• the ene-
mies," and such was apparently the understanding of Mutianus and
of the Benedictine editor. — F. G.J


faith after this. But who are the enemies? J'
unbelievers ; the daemons. And intimating tl
greatness of their subjection, he said not "a
subjected," but "are put under His feet."

[4.] Let us not therefore be of [the nur
ber of] His enemies. For not they alone a
enemies, the unbelievers and Jews, but tho
also who are full of unclean living. " For tl
carnal mind is enmity against God : for it is n
subject to the law of God, for neither can it be
(Rom. viii. 7.) What then (you say)? this
not a ground of blame. Nay rather, it is ve
much a ground of blame. For the wicked m
as long as he is wicked, cannot be subject [
God's law] ; he can however change and becoi
good.

Let us then cast out carnal minds. But wl
are carnal ? Whatever makes the body flour)
and do well, but injures the soul : as for instam
wealth, luxury, glory (all these things are of t
flesh), carnal love. Let us not then love ga
but ever follow after poverty : for this is a grt
good.

But (you say) it makes one humble and
little account. [True :] for we have need
this, for it benefits us much. "Poverty" (it
said) "humbles a man." (Prov. x. 4, LXJ
And again Christ [says], "Blessed are the pc
in spirit." (Matt. v. 3.) Dost thou then grie
because thou art upon a path leading to virtu
Dost thou not know that this gives us grt
confidence ?

But, one says, "the wisdom of the poor m
is despised." (Eccles. ix. 16.) And ag:
another says, "Give me neither riches nor pc
erty" (Prov. xxx. 8), and, "Deliver me fn
the furnace of poverty."'' (See Isa. xlviii. 1
And again, if riches and poverty are from 1
Lord, how can either poverty or riches be
evil? Why then were these things said? Tl
were said under'' the Old [Covenant], whi
there was much account made of wealth, whi
there was great contempt of poverty, where I
one was a curse and the other a blessing. 1 1
now it is no longer so.

But wilt thou hear the praises of poveri
Christ sought after it, and saith, "But the S
of Man hath not where to lay His head." (M:
viii. 20.) And again He said to His discip'
"Provide" neither gold, nor silver, nor t
coats." (Matt. x. 9, 10.) And Paul in w
ing said, " As having nothing and yet possess
all things." (2 Cor. vi. 10.) And Peter s
to him who was lame from his birth, " Silver £
gold have I none." (Acts iii. 6.) Yea
under the Old [Covenant] itself, where we£
was held in admiration, who were the admin


s The words of the LXX. are " He took me out of the fur
of poverty."

* or " in," iv. ° or " get."


flOMILY XVIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


453


Wa.s not Elijah, who had nothing save the sheep-
ikin? Was not Elisha? Was not John?

Let no man then be humihated on account of
■lis poverty : It is not poverty which humiUates,
3Ut wealth, which compels us to have need of
nany, and forces us to be under obligations to
nany ?

And what could be poorer than Jacob (tell
me), who said, "If the Lord give me bread to
;at, and raiment to put on"? (Gen. xxviii. 20.)
iVere Elijah and John then wanting in boldness ?'
Did not the one reprove Ahab, and the other
Herod ? The latter said, " It is not lawful for
Jiee to have thy brother Philip's wife." (Mark
n. 18.) And Elias said to Ahab with boldness,
' It is not I that trouble Israel, but thou and
liy father's house." (i Kings xviii. 18.) Thou
ieest that this especially produces boldness, pov-
;rty [I mean] ? For while the rich man is a
slave, being subject to loss, and in the power of
;very one wishing to do him hurt, he who has
lothing, fears not confiscation, nor fine. So, if
soverty had made men wanting in boldness
hrist would not have sent His disciples with
Doverty to a work requiring great boldness.
For the poor man is very strong, and has noth-
ng wherefrom he may be wronged or evil
untreated. But the rich man is assailable on
;very side : just in the same way as one would
easily catch a man who was dragging many long
■opes after him, whereas one could not readily
ay hold on a naked man. So here also it falls
)ut in the case of the rich man : slaves, gold,
ands, affairs innumerable, innumerable cares,
iifficult circumstances, necessities, make him
m easy prey to all.

[5.] Let no man then henceforth esteem pov-

;rty a cause of disgrace. For if virtue be there,

ill the wealth of the world is neither clay, nor

ven a mote in comparison of it. This then

■ et us follow after, if we would enter into the

jcingdom of heaven. For, He saith, " Sell that

fhou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt

pave treasure in Heaven." (Matt. xix. 21.)

\nd again, " It is hard for a rich man to enter

, |nto the Kingdom of Heaven." (Matt. xix. 23.)

, post thou see that even if we have it not, we

""rht to draw it to us? So great a good is

crty. For it guides us by the hand, as it

\ ere, on the path which leads to Heaven, it is an

. pointing for the combat, an exercise great and

, jidmirable, a tranquil haven.

; I But (you say) I have need of many [things],

. pd am unwilling to receive a favor from any.

pfevertheless, even in this respect the rich man

, |s inferior to thee ; for thou perhaps askest the

!a-/or for thy support, but he shamelessly [asks]

or ten thousand things for covetousness' sake.


■


airappTjaiao'Toi.


So that it is the rich that are in need of many
[persons], yea oftentimes those who are un-
worthy of them. For instance, they often stand
in need of those who are in the rank of soldiers,
or of slaves : but the poor man has no need
even of the Emperor himself, and if he should
need him, he is admired because he has brought
himself down to this, when he might have been
rich.

Let no man then accuse poverty as being the
cause of innumerable evils, nor let him contra-
dict Christ, who declared it to be the perfection
of virtue, saying, " If thou wilt be perfect."
(Matt. xix. 21.) For this He both uttered in
His words, and showed by His acts, and taught
by His disciples. Let us therefore follow after
poverty, it is the greatest good to the sober-
minded.

Perhaps some of those who hear me, avoid it
as a thing of ill omen. I do not doubt it.' For this
disease is great among most men, and such is the
tyranny of wealth, that they cannot even as far
as words endure the renunciation of it, but avoid
it as of ill omen. Far be this from the Chris-
tian's soul : for nothing is richer than he who
chooses poverty of his own accord, and with a
ready mind.

[6.] How? I will tell you, and if you please,
I will prove that he who chooses poverty of his
own accord is richer even than the king himself.
For he indeed needs many [things], and is in
anxiety, and fears lest the supplies for the army
should fail him ; but the other has enough of
everything, ancj fears about nothing, and if he
fears, it is not about so great matters. Who
then, tell me, is the rich man ? he who is daily
asking, and earnestly laboring to gather much
together, and fears lest at any time he should
fall short, or he who gathers nothing together,
and is in great abundance and hath need of no
one ? For it is virtue and the fear of God, and
not possessions which give confidence. For
these even enslave. For it is said, "Gifts and
presents blind the eyes of the wise, and like a
muzzle on the mouth turn away reproofs."
(Ecclus. XX. 29.)

Consider how the poor man Peter chastised
the rich .\nanias. Was not the one rich and the
other poor ? But behold the one speaking with
authority and saying, "Tell me whether ye sold
the land for so much " (Acts v. 8), and the other
saying with submission, "Yea, for so much."
And who (you say) will grant to me to be as
Peter? It is open to thee to be as Peter if thou
wilt; cast away what thou hast. "Disperse,
give to the poor" (Ps. cxii. 9), follow Christ,
and thou shalt be such as he. How ? he (you
say) wrought miracles. Is it this then, tell me.


' ovK air«rT«>*


454


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X


which made Peter an object of admiration, or
the boldness which arose from his manner of
life ? Dost thou not hear Christ saying, " Rejoice
not because the devils are subject unto you ; If
thou wilt be perfect [&c]." (Luke x. 20.)
Hear what Peter says : "Silver and gold have I
none, but what I have I give thee." (Acts iii.
6.) If any man have silver and gold, he hath
not those other gifts.

Why is it then, you say, that many have
neither the one nor the other? Because they
are not voluntarily poor : since they who are
voluntarily poor have all good things. For al-
though they do not raise up the dead nor the
lame, yet, what is greater than all ; they have
confidence towards God. They will hear in that
day that blessed voice, " Come, ye blessed of My


Father," (what can be better than this?) "
herit the kingdom prepared for you from 1
foundation of the world : for I was an hungei
and ye gave Me meat : I was thirsty and ye gt
Me drink : I was a stranger and ye took Me i
I was naked and ye clothed Me : I was sick a
in prison and ye visited Me. Inherit the kii
dom prepared for you from the foundation
the world." (Matt. xxv. 34-36.) Let us th
flee from covetousness, that we may attain
the kingdom [of Heaven]. Let us feed 1
poor, that we may feed Christ : that we may I
come fellow-heirs with Him in Christ Jesus 1
Lord, with whom to the Father together v
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, r
and for ever and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XIX.

Hebrews x. 19-23.


" Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way which He hath consecrated ' for us, through the
Veil, that is to say. His flesh, and having an High
Priest ^ over the house of God, let us draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our
bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast
the profession ' of our hope without wavering."


[i.] " Having therefore, brethren, boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by
a new and living way which He hath consecrated
for us." Having shown the difference of the
High Priest, and of the sacrifices, and of the
tabernacle, and of the Covenant, and of the prom-
ise, and that the difference is great, since those
are temporal, but these eternal, those " near to
vanishing away," these permanent, those power-
less, these perfect, those figures, these reality,
for (he says) " not according to the law of a car-
nal commandment, but according to the power
of an endless life." (c. vii. 16.) And "Thou
art a Priest for ever." (c. v. 6.) Behold the
continuance of the Priest. And concerning the
Covenant, That (he says) is old (for "that which
decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish
away" — c. viii. 13), but this is new; and has
remission of sins, while that [has] nothing of
the kind : for (he says) " the Law made nothing
perfect." (c. vii. 19.) And again, "sacrifice
and offering Thou wouldest not." (c. x. 5.) That


' " new made " or " inaugurated.'
* ** a great Priest."


• " confession."


is made with hands, while this is " not made w
hands" (c. ix. 11) : that "has the blood
goats " (c. ix. 12), this of the Lord ; that has
Priest " standing," this " sitting." Since th<
fore all those are inferior and these grea
therefore he says, " Having therefore, brethi
boldness."

[2.] "Boldness": from whence? As 1
(he means) produce shame, so the having
things forgiven us, and being made fellow-he
and enjoying so great Love, [produces] be
ness.

"For the entrance into the holiest." W
does he mean here by "entrance"? Hea\
and the access to spiritual things.

"Which he hath inaugurated," * that is, w?'
He prepared, and which He began ; for the
ginning of using is thenceforth called the inau
rating ; which He prepared (he means) and
which He Himself passed.

" A new and living way." Here He expre;
" the full assurance of hope." "New," he says,
is anxious to show that we have all things great
since now the gates of Heaven have been oper
which was not done even for Abraham. " A 1
and living way," he says, for the first wa
way of death, leading to Hades, but this of
And yet he did not say, " of life," but calle
" living," (the ordinances, that is,) that wl
abideth."


* ei-eKaiVKrf, *' consecrated."

" aAAa ^unrav avrrfv fKaKifft ' rovrtrm. To. wfio<rraytLaTa,\
tLtyovfrav. This is the reading of all the best MSS., the Caten:
ancieat Translation* The later editions omit revrcoTt, rd irpoc


IIOMILY XIX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


455


, " Through the veil " (he says) " of His flesh."
|f'"or this flesh first cut that way, by this He in-
liugurated it [the way] by which He walked.
Hnd with good reason did he call [the flesh] " a
J-eil." ' For when it was lifted up on high, then
*he things in heaven appeared.
;' "Let us draw near" (he says) "with a true
heart." To what should we " draw near " ? To
he holy things, the faith, the spiritual service.
' With a true heart, in full assurance of faith,"
, ince nothing is seen ; neither the priest hence-
" orvvard, nor the sacrifice, nor the altar. And
•et neither was that priest visible, but stood
Vithin, and they all without, the whole people.
' Jut here not only has this taken place, that the
)riest has entered into the holy of hoUes, but
hat we also enter in. Therefore he says, " in full
.ssurance of faith." For it is possible for the
loubter to believe in one way, as there are even
low many who say, that of some there is a resur-
rection and of others not. But this is not faith.
I' In full assurance of faith " (he says) ; for we
lUght to believe as concerning things that we see,
lay, even much more ; for " here " it is possible
|o be deceived in the things that are seen, but
here not : " here " we trust to the senses, but
here to the Spirit.

" Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
onscience." He shows that not faith only, but
virtuous hfe also is required, and the conscious-
ess to ourselves of nothing evil. Since the holy
f holies does not receive " with full assurance "
Kose who are not thus disposed. For they are
oly, and the holy of holies ; but here no profane
erson enters. They were sprinkled as to the
ody, we as to the conscience, so that we may
ven now be sprinkled over with virtue itself.
."Vnd having our body washed with pure
'ater." Here he speaks of the Washing, which
0 longer cleanses the bodies, but the soul.
" For He is faithful that promised." " That
Iromised " what? That we are to depart thither
rajnd enter into the kingdom. Be then in nothing
f;jver-curious, nor demand reasonings. Our [re-
;r|gion] ' needs faith.

'I [3-] (Ver. 24, 25) "And" (he says) "let us

ionsider one another to provoke unto love and

:gp good works. Not forsaking the assembling of

. |urselves together, as the manner of some is,

:2|ut exhorting^ one another and so much the

a (lore as ye see the day approaching." And

i;|gain in other places, "The Lord is at hand;

jiie careful for nothing." (Phil. iv. 5, 6.) " For

ow is our salvation nearer : Henceforth the

me is short." (Rom. xiii. 11.)


iTa and add oiirw SrjXuiv. Mr. Field thinks the passage may be
•rrtifit ; the parenthetic words seem added to explain that it is the
Jiristian ordinances, which he understands by the " way that
"^ )ideth,"

* [See above, p. 438 and St. Cyril Alex, ^uod Units Christus,

a I ' Ta i]>itTepa. s or, " encouraging."


What is, " not forsaking the assembling of our-
selves together"? (i Cor. vii. 29.) He knew
that much strength arises from being together
and assembling together. " For where two or
three " (it is said) " are gathered together in
My name, there am I in the midst of them "
(Matt, xviii. 20) ; and again, " That they may be
One, as we " also are (John xvii. 11); and,
" They had all one heart and [one] soul." (Acts
iv. 32.) And not this only, but also because
love is increased by the gathering [of ourselves]
together ; and love being increased, of necessity
the things of Ciod must follow also. " And earn-
est prayer " (it is said) was " made by " the peo-
ple. (Acts xii. 5.) " As the manner of some is."
Here he not only exhorted, but also blamed
[them].

" And let us consider one another," he says,
"to provoke unto* love and to good works."
He knew that this also arises from " gathering
together." For as " iron sharpeneth iron "
(Prov. xvii. 17), so also association increases
love. For if a stone rubbed against a stone
sends forth fire, how much more soul mingled
with soul ! But not unto emulation (he says)
but "unto the sharpening of love." What is
" unto the sharpening of love " ? Unto the loving
and being loved more. " And of good works " ;
that so they might acquire zeal. For if doing
has greater force for instmction than speaking,
ye also have in your number many teachers, who
effect this by their deeds.

What is " let us draw near with a true heart " ?
That is, without hypocrisy ; for " woe be to a
fearful heart, and faint hands " (Ecclus. ii. 12) :
let there be (he means) no falsehood among us ;
let us not say one thing and think another ; for
this is falsehood ; neither let us be fainthearted,
for this is not [a mark] of a " true heart."
Faintheartedness comes from not believing.
But how shall this be ? If we fully assure our-
selves through faith.

" Having our hearts sprinkled " : why did he
not say " having been purified " ? [Because] he
wished to point out the difference of the sprin-
klings : the one he says is of God, the other our
own. For the washing and sprinkling the con-
science is of God ; but " the drawing near with "
truth and " in full assurance of faith " is our
own. Then he also gives strength to their faith
from the truth of Him that promised.

What is " and having our bodies washed with
pure water"? With water which makes pure;
or which has no blood.

Then he adds the perfect thing, love. " Not for-
sakingthe assembling of ourselves together," which
some (he says) do, and divide the assemblies.'

* f(c irapofua^oi', " to the sharpening" or " exciting of."
■'' [The English edition here inserts. " This he forbids them [lo
do]," from TovTo avro'i anayoptvtt of the Benedictine text, sup-
ported by some MS5., but omitted by Mr. Field. — F, C]


456


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X


For " a brother helped by a brother is as a strong
city." (Prov. xviii. 19, LXX.)

" But let us consider one another to provoke
unto love." What is, " let us consider one
another " ? For instance if any be virtuous, let
us imitate him, let us look on him so as to love
and to be loved. For from Love good works
proceed. For the assembling is a great good :
since it makes love more warm ; and out of love
all good things arise. For nothing is good which
is not done through love.

[4.] This then let us " confirm " ' towards
each other. " For love is the fulfilling of the
law." (Rom. xiii. 10.) We have no need of
labors or of sweatings if we love one another.
It is a pathway leading of itself towards virtue.
For as on the highway, if any man find the
beginning, he is guided by it, and has no need
of one to take him by the hand ; so is it also in
regard to Love : only lay hold on the beginning,
and at once thou art guided and directed by it.
" Love worketh no ill to his neighbor " (Rom.
xiii. 10) ; " thinketh no evil." (i Cor. xiii. 5.)
Let each man consider with himself, how he is
disposed toward himself. He does not envy
himself; he wishes all good things for himself;
he prefers himself before all ; he is willing to do
all things for himself. If then we were so dis-
posed towards others also, all grievous things
are brought to an end ; there is no enmity ; there
is no covetousness : for who would choose to
overreach himself? No man ; but on the con-
trary we shall possess all things in common, and
shall not cease assembling ourselves together.
And if we do this, the remembrance of injuries
would have no place : for who would choose to
remember injuries against himself? Who would
choose to be angry with himself? Do we not
make allowances for ourselves most of all ? If
we were thus disposed towards our neighbors
also, there will never be any remembrance of
injuries.

And how is it possible (you say) that one
should so love his neighbor as himself? If
others had not done this, you might well think
it impossible : but if they have done it, it is
plain that from indolence it is not done by our-
selves.

And besides, Christ enjoins nothing impossi-
ble, seeing that many have even gone beyond
His commands. Who has done this? Paul,
Peter, all the company of the Saints. Nay,
indeed if I say that they loved their neighbors,
I say no great matter : they so loved their
enemies as no man would love those who were
likeminded with himself. For who would choose
for the sake of those likeminded, to go away
into Hell, when he was about to depart unto a


1 S«c 3 Cor. ii. 8.


kingdom? No man. But Paul chose this
the sake of his enemies, for those who stoi
him, those who scourged him. What pare
then will there be for us, what excuse, if
shall not show towards our friends even the v
smallest portion of that love which Paul shov
towards his enemies?

And before him too, the blessed Moses '
willing to be blotted out of God's book
the sake of his enemies who had stoned h
David also when he saw those who had stood
against him slain, saith, " I, the shepherd, h
sinned, but these, what have they done ? " (
2 Sam. xxiv. 17.) And when he had Saul in
hands, he would not slay him, but saved him ;
this when he himself would be in danger,
if these things were done under the Old [Cc
nant] what excuse shall we have who live un
the New, and do not attain even to the s;
measure with them ? For if, " unless our ri|
eousness exceed that of the Scribes and Ph
sees, we shall not enter into the kingdom
Heaven" (Matt. v. 20), how shall we entei
when we have even less than they?

[5.] "Love your enemies," He says. (M
v. 44.) Love thou therefore thy enemy :
thou art doing good not to him, but to thy:
How? Thou art becoming like God. He, il
be beloved of thee, hath no great gain, foi
is beloved by a fellow-slave ; but thou, if t
love thy fellow-slave, hast gained much, for t
art becoming like God. Seest thou that thoi
doing a kindness not to him but to thyself?
He appoints the prize not for him, but
thee.

What then if he be evil (you say) ? So n
the greater is the reward. Even for his wicl
ness thou oughtest to feel grateful to him : i
should he be evil after receiving ten thou;
kindnesses. For if he were not exceedingly
thy reward would not have been exceedingl;
creased ; so that the reason [thou assignest'
not loving him, the saying that he is evil, is
very reason for loving him. Take away the
testant and thou takest away the opportunit;
the crowns. Seest thou not the athletes,
they exercise when they have filled the bags
sand ? But there is no need for thee to pra'
this. Life is full of things that exercise thee,
make thee strong. Seest thou not the trees
the more they are shaken by the winds, so r;
the more do they become stronger and fin
We then, if we be long-suffering, shall als(
come strong. For it is said, " a man who is I
suffering abounds in wisdom, but he that Is-
little soul is strongly foolish." (Prov. xiv.
Seest thou how great is his commendation o
one, seest thou how great his censure oi
other? "Strongly foolish," i.e. very [fool


tuMlI-Y XX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


457


jCt us not then be faint-hearted ' one towards
mother : for this does not rise from enmity, but
rom having a small soul. As if the soul be
trong, it will endure all things easily, and noth-
ng will be able to sink it, but will lead it into


tranquil havens. To which may we all attain, by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father together with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now
and for ever and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XX.

Hebrews x. 26, 27.


For if we sin willfully, after we have received the knowl-
edge of the truth, there remaineth no more^ sacri-
fice for sins, but a certain fearful looliing for of judg-
ment, and fiery indignation^ which shall devour the
adversaries."

[i.] Trees which have been planted, and

lave had the advantage of all other care, and the

ands and the labors of the cultivator, and yet

ield no return for the labors, are pulled up by

,[,pe roots, and handed over to the fire. So some-

I rhat of this kind takes place also in the case of

,.^ur Illumination.* For when Christ has planted

■ s, and we have enjoyed the watering of the

, pirit, and then show no fruit ; fire, even that of

jiell, awaits us, and flame unquenchable.

j Paul therefore having exhorted them to love,

(jnd to bringing forth the fruit of good works,

j nd having urged them from the kindlier [con-

ti [derations] (What are these? That we have

n entrance into the holy of holies, " the new

^ 'ay which He hath inaugurated for us." — c. x.

•J 0), does the same again from the more gloomy

, nes, speaking thus. For having said, " not for-

; iking the assembling of ourselves together, as

(, le manner of some is, but exhorting * one an-

:. ther, and so much the more, as ye see the day

approaching" (c. x. 25), this being sufficient

j' >r consolation, he added, " For if we sin will-

..jiUy after we have received the knowledge of

- le truth." There is need, he means, of good

orks, yea, very great need, " For if we sin will-

,1 illy after we have received the knowledge of

,. le truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for

, ns." Thou wast cleansed ; thou wast set free

„ era the charges against thee, thou hast become

. j son. If then thou return to thy former vomit,

, |iere awaits thee on the other hand excomrauni-

ation and fire and whatever such things there

re. For there is no second sacrifice.

[2.] At this place we are again assailed by
lose who take away repentance," and by those


* liiKpotl^vxCififv. * i.e. Baptism.

* oufteTt. 5 «t encouraging."
' lit. " indignation of fire."

* The Novatians. who refused to admit to Penitence and the
icraments those who had fallen into deadly sin after Baptism.


who delay to come to baptism. The one say-
ing, that it is not safe for them to come to bap-
tism, since there is no second remission : And
the other asserting that it is not safe to impart
the mysteries' to those who have sinned, if there
is no second remission.

What shall we say then to them both ? That
he does not take away repentance, nor the pro-
pitiation through repentance, nor does he thrust
away and cast down with despair the fallen.
He is not thus an enemy of our salvation ; but
what ? He takes away the second Washing. For
he did not say, no more' is there repentance, or
no more is there remission, but " no more " is
there a " sacrifice," that is, there is no more a
second Cross.' For this is what he means by
sacrifice. " For by one sacrifice," he says, " He
hath perfected forever them that are sanctified "
(c. X. 14) ; not like the Jewish [rites]. For
this reason he has treated so much throughout
concerning the Sacrifice, that it is one, even one ;
not wishing to show this only, that herein it dif-
fered from the Jewish [rites], but also to make
[men] more steadfast, so that they might no
longer expect another sacrifice according to the
Jewish law.

" For," saithhe, "if we sin willfully." See how
he is disposed to pardon. He says, " if we sin
willfully," so that there is pardon for those [who
sin] not willfully. " After the knowledge of the
truth " : He either means, of Christ, or of all
doctrines. " There remaineth no more sacri-
fice for sins," but what ? " A certain fearfiil look-
ing for of judgment and fiery indignation which
shall devour the adversaries." By " Adversaries "
he means not the unbelievers, but those also who
do what is against virtue ; or [else he means]
that the same fire shall receive them of the house-
hold also, which [receives] " the adversaries."
Then expressing its devouring nature, he says,
as if giving it Hfe, " fiery indignation which shall
devour the adversaries." For as a wild beast
when irritated and very fierce and savage, would


■ The Holy Eucharist.

' Compare Horn. ix. [5], p. 410.


I


458


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X


not rest till it could lay hold on some one and
eat him up ; so also that fire, like one goaded by
indignation, whatever it can lay hold of does not
let go, but devours and tears it to pieces.

[3.] Next he adds also the reason of the
threat, that it is on good grounds, that it is just ;
for this contributes to confidence, when we show
that it is just.

For, he says, (ver. 28) " He that hath de-
spised Moses' law dies without mercy, under
two or three witnesses." " Without mercy," he
says ; so that there is no pardon, no pity there ;
although the law is of Moses ; for he ordained
the most of it.

What is " under two or three " ? If two or
three bore witness, he means, they immediately
suffered punishment.

If then under the Old [Covenant], when the
law of Moses is set at nought, there is so great
punishment, (ver. 29) " Of how much sorer pun-
ishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who hath trodden under foot the Son of God,
and hath counted the blood of the covenant an
unholy [a common] thing, and hath done despite
unto the Spirit of grace ? "

And how does a man " tread under foot the
Son of God " ? When partaking of Him in the
mysteries (he would say) he has wrought sin,
has he not trodden Him under foot? Has he
not despised Him? For just as we make no
account of those who are trodden under foot,
so also, they who sin have made no account of
Christ; and so they have sinned. Thou art'
become the Body of Christ, and givest thou
thyself to the devil, so that he treads thee under
foot.

" And accounted the blood a common thing,"
he says. What is " common " ? It is " unclean,"
or the having nothing beyond other things.

" And done despite unto the Spirit of grace."
For he that accepts not a benefit, does despite
to the benefactor. He made thee a son : and
thou wishest to become a slave. He came to
dwell with thee, and thou bringest in wicked
imaginations to Him. Christ wished to stay
with thee ; and thou treadest Him down by
surfeiting, by drunkenness.

Let us listen, whoever partake of the mysteries
unworthily : let us listen, whoever approach that
Table unworthily. "Give not" (He says) "that
which is holy unto the dogs, lest in time they
trample them under their feet " (Matt. vii. 6), that
is, lest they despise, lest they repudiate [them] .
Yet he did not say this, but what was more fear-
ful than this. For he constrains their souls by
what is fearful. For this also is adapted to con-
vert, no less than consolation. And at the same
time he shows both the difference, and the


chastisement, and sets forth the judgment up
them, as though it were an evident matt
" Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ;
shall he be thought worthy?" Here also
appears to me to hint at the mysteries.

[4.] Next he adds testimony, saying, (ver. ;
30) " It is a fearful thing to fall into the han
of the Living God." " For " it is written : " V«
geance [belongeth] unto Me, I will recompen
saith the Lord. And again, The Lord sh
judge His people." "Let us fall," it is sa
" into the hands of the Lord, and not into 1
hands of men." (Ecclus. ii. 18.") But if
repent not, ye shall "fall into the hands (
God : that is fearful : it is nothing, to " fall i
the hands of men." When, he means, we
any man punished here, let us not be terrif
at the things present, but shudder at the thi
to come. " For according to His mercy, sc
His wrath." ^ And, " His indignation will i
upon sinners." (Ecclus. v. 6.)

At the same time too he hints at someth
else. For " Vengeance [belongeth] unto M
he says, " I will recompense." This is said
regard to their enemies, who are doing evil, '
to those who are suffering evil. Here he is cons
ingthem too, all but saying, God abideth fore
and liveth, so that even if they receive :
[their reward] now, they will receive it he
after. They ought to groan, not we : for
indeed shall fall into their hands, but they i
the hands of God. For neither is it the suff€
who suffers the ill, but he that does it ; noi
it he who receives a benefit that is benefit
but the benefactor.

[5.] Knowing then these things, let us
patient as to suffering evil, forward as to ki
nesses. And this will be, if we think lightly
wealth and honor. He that hath stripped h
self of those affections, is of all men most ger
ous, and more wealthy even than he who w<
the purple. Seest thou not how many e
come through money? I do not say how m
through covetousness, but merely by our atta
ment to these things. For instance, if a r
has lost his money, he leads a life more wretc
than any death. Why grievest thou, O m
why weepest thou ? Because God has delive
Thee from excessive watching? Because t
dost not sit trembling and fearful? Again
any one chain thee to a treasure, commanc
thee to sit there perpetually, and to keep w£
for other people's goods, thou art grieved, t
art disgusted ; and dost thou, after thou 1
bound thyself with most grievous chains, gr
when thou art delivered from the slav(


■ or, " Art thou . . . dost thou give?"


2 [Or better, 2 Sam. xxiv. 14. — F. G.l

3 St. Chry.s. may have had in mind the latter part of the
just cited, Ecclus. ii. 18, " for as His majesty is, so is His me
and combined it with the first part of the verse he next cites. Et
V. 6, " For mercy and wrath come from Him," &c.


OMILY XX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


459


ruly sorrows and joys are [matters] of
ncy.' For we guard them as if we had ant-
her's.

Now my discourse is for the women. A
oman often has a garment woven with gold,
id this she shakes, wraps up in linen, keeps
ith care, trembles for it, and has no enjoyment

it. For either she dies, or she becomes a
idow. Or, even if none of these things hap-
:n, yet from fear lest wearing it out by contin-
il use, she should deprive herself of it, she
jprives herself of it in another way, by sparing
But she passes it on [you say] to another,
ut neither is this clear : and even if she should
iss it on, the other again will also use it in the
.rae way. And if any one will search their
juses, he will find that the most costly gar-
ents and other choice things, are tended with
lecial honor, as if they were living masters,
or she does not use them habitually, but fears
id trembles, driving away moths and the other
ings that are wont to eat them, and laying
est of them in perfumes and spices, nor per-
itting all persons to be counted worthy of the
j;ht of them, but oftentimes carefully putting
era in order herself with her husband.
Tell me : did not Paul with reason call covet-
isness "idolatry"? (Col. iii. 5.) For these
ow as great honor to their garments, their
Id, as they to their idols.

[6.] How long shall we stir up the mire?
ow long shall we be fixed to the clay and the
ickmaking ? For as they toiled for the King

the Egyptians, so do we also toil for the
ivil, and are scourged with far more grievous
ipes. For by how much the soul surpasses
e body, by so much does anxiety the weals

scourging. We are scourged every day, we
e full of fear, in anxiety, in trembling. But if
! will groan, if we will look up to God, He
adeth to us, not Moses, nor Aaron, but His own
ord, and compunction. When this [word] has
me, and taken hold of our souls. He will free
ira the bitter slavery. He will bring us forth
t of Egypt, from unprofitable and vain zeal,
ira slavery which brings no gain. For they
ieed went forth after having at least received
tkien [ornaments], the wages for building, but
1 [receive] nothing : and would it were noth-
i;. For indeed we also receive, not golden
( laments, but the evils of Egypt, sins and
I istisements and punishments.

Let us then learn to be made use of, let us
1 rn to be spitefully treated ; this is the part
' a Christian. I,et us think lightly of golden
inicnt, let us think lightly of money, that we
1 y not think lightly of our salvation. Let us
' "k lightly of money and not think lightly of


jTpoAijil/ews [preoccupation. — F. G.].


the soul. For this is chastised, this is punished :
those things remain here, but the soul departeth
yonder. Why, tell me, dost thou cut thyself to
pieces, without perceiving it ?

[7.] These things I say to the overreaching
And it is well to say also to those who are over-
reached. Bear their overreachings generously ;
they are ruining themselves, not you. You in-
deed they defraud of your money, but they
strip themselves of the good will and help of
God. And he that is stripped of that, though
he clothe himself with the whole wealth of the
world, is of all men most poor : and so he who
is the poorest of all, if he have this, is the
wealthiest of all. For " the Lord " (it is said)
"is my shepherd, and I shall lack nothing."
(Ps. xxiii. I.)

Tell me now, if thou hadst had a husband, a
great and admirable man, who thoroughly loved
thee and cared for thee, and then knewest that
he would live always, and not die before thee,
and would give thee all things to enjoy in secur-
ity, as thine own : wouldst thou then have
wished to possess anything ? Even if thou hadst
been stripped of all, wouldst thou not have
thought thyself the richer for this ?

Why then dost thou grieve? Because thou
hast no property ? But consider that thou hast
had the occasion of sin taken away. But is it
because thou hadst [property] and hast been
deprived of it? But thou hast acquired the
good will of God. And how have I acquired
it (you say) ? He has said, " Wherefore do ye
not rather suffer wrong?" (i Cor. vi. 7.) He
hath said, " Blessed are they who bear all things
with thankfulness." ^ Consider therefore how
great good will thou wilt enjoy, if thou showest
forth those things by [thy] works. For one
thing only is required from us, " in all things to
give thanks " to God, and [then] we have all
things in abundance. I mean, for instance :
hast thou lost ten thousand pounds of gold?
Forthwith give thanks unto God, and thou hast
acquired ten times ten thousand, by that word
and thanksgiving.

[8.] For tell me when dost thou account Job
blessed? When he had so many camels, and
flocks, and herds, or when he uttered that say-
ing : " The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken
away"? (Job i. 21.) Therefore also the devil
causes us losses, not that he may take away our
goods only, for he knows that is nothing, but that
through them he may compel us to utter some
blasphemy. So in the case of the blessed Job
too, he did not strive after this only, to make
him poor, but also to make him a blasphemer.
At any rate, when he had stripped him of every-


^ It docs not appear what passage of Scripture St. Chrys. referred
to: the altered text has, "He hath said: 'In everything give
thanlts.' He hath said, ' Blessed are the poor in spirit.'


460


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX


thing, observe what he says to him through his
wife, " Say some word against the Lord, and
die." (Job ii. 9.) And yet, O accursed one,
thou hadst stripped him of everything. ' But '
(he says) ' this is not what I was striving for ;
for I have not yet accomplished that for which
I did all. I was striving to deprive him of
God's help : for this cause I deprived him of
his goods too. This is what I wish, that other
is nothing. If this be not gained, he not only
has not been injured at all, but has even been
benefited.' Thou seest that even that wicked
demon knows how great is the loss in this
matter ?

And see him plotting the treachery through
the wife. Hear this, ye husbands, as many as
have wives that are fond of money, and compel
you to blaspheme God. Call Job to mind.
But let us see, if it please you, his great modera-
tion, how he silenced her. "Wherefore" (he
says) " hast thou spoken as one of the foolish
women [speaketh]?" (Job ii. 10.) Of a
truth " evil communications corrupt good man-
ners" (i Cor. XV. 33), at all times indeed, but
particularly in calamities : then they who give
evil advice have strength. For if the soul is
even of itself prone to impatience, how much
more, when there is also an adviser. Is it not
thrust into a pit? A wife is a great good, as
also a great evil. For because a wife is a great
[good], observe from what point he [Satan]
wishes to break through the strong wall. ' The
depriving him of his property' (he says) 'did
not take him ; the loss has produced no great
effect.' Therefore he says, ' If indeed he will
curse thee to thy face.' (Job ii. 5.) You see
whither he was aspiring.'

If then we bear [losses] thankfully, we shall
recover even these things ; and if we should not
recover them, our reward will be greater. For
■when he had wrestled nobly, then God restored
to him these things also. When He had shown
the devil, that it is not for these things that he
serves Him, then He restored them also to him.

[9.] For such is He. When God sees that
we are not riveted to things of this hfe, then
He gives them to us. When He sees that we
set a higher value on things spiritual, then He
also bestows on us things carnal. But not first,


' irov tirvtt.


lest we should break away from things spiritual
and to spare us He does not give carnal things
to keep us away from them, even against ou
will.

Not so (you say) but if I receive [them],
am satisfied, and am the more thankful. It i
false, O man, for then especially wilt thou b
thoughtless.

Why then (you say) does He give [them] t
many ? Whence is it clear, that He gives [them]
But who else, you say, gives ? Their overreach
ing, their plundering. How then does He alio
these things? As He also [allows] murder
thefts, and violence.

What then (you will say) as to those wl
receive by succession an inheritance from the
fathers, being themselves full of evils innume
able ? And what of this ? How does God suff
them (you say) to enjoy these things ? Surely ju
as He allows thieves, and murderers, and oth
evil doers. For it is not now the time of jud
ment, but of the best course of life.

And what I just now said, that I repeat, th
they shall suffer greater punishment, who, whi
they have enjoyed all good things, do not eve
so become better. For all shall not be punishi
alike ; but they who, even after His benefil
have continued evil, shall suffer a greater punisi
ment, while they who after poverty [have doi
this] not so. And that this is true, hear wh
He says to David, " Did I not give thee all tl
master's goods?" (2 Sam. xii. 8.) Whenev
then thou seest a young man that has receivi
a paternal inheritance without labor and co
tinues wicked, be assured that his punishme
is increased and the vengeance is made mo
intense. Let us not then emulate these ; but
any man has succeeded to virtue, if any man h
obtained spiritual wealth, [him let us emulaK
For (it is said) " Woe to them that trust in the
riches" (cf Ps. xUx. 6) : "Blessed are they th
fear the Lord." (Ps. cxxviii. i.) To which
these, tell me, wouldst thou belong ? Doubtle
to those who are pronounced blessed. Ther
fore emulate these, not the other, that thou al
mayest obtain the good things which are laid 1
for them. Which may we all obtain, in Chr,
Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father 1;
glory together with the Holy Ghost, now ai
for ever, and world without end. Amen.


OMII.Y XXI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


461


HOMILY XXI.


Hebrews x. 32-34.


But call to remembrance the former days, in which after
ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
afflictions ;i partly, whilst ye were made a gazing
stock both by reproaches and afflictions," and partly
whilst ye became companions of them that were so
used. For ye had compassion on those who were
in bonds," and took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, knowing that ye have for yourselves* in heaven
a better and an enduring substance."


"i.] The best Physicians after they have
ade a deep incision, and have increased the
ins by the wound, soothing the afflicted part,
d giving rest and refreshment to the disturbed
ul, proceed not to make a second incision, but
ther soothe that which has been made with
ntle remedies, and such as are suited to remove
e violence of the pain. This Paul also did,
er he had shaken their souls, and pierced
em with the recollection of Hell, and con-
iced then, that he must certainly perish, who
les despite to the grace of God, and after he
d shown from the laws of Moses, that they
10 shall perish, and the more [fearfully], and
nfirm it by other testimonies, and had said,
[t is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
e Living God" (c. x. 31) : then, lest the
ul desponding through excessive fear, should
swallowed up with grief, he soothes them
commendations and exhortation, and gives
:m zeal derived from their own conduct. For,
says, " call to remembrance the former days,
which after ye had been enlightened, ye en-
red a great fight of afflictions." Powerful is
: exhortation from deeds [already done] :
he who begins a work ought to go fonvard
d add to it. As if he had said, when ye were
jught in" [to the Church], when ye were in
rank of learners, ye displayed so great readi-
is, so great nobleness ; but now it is no longer
And he who encourages, does thus espe-
.Uy encourage them from their own example.
And he did not simply say, "ye endured a
[it " ° but a " great " [fight]. Moreover he did
t say " temptations " but " fight," which is an
TCSsion of commendation and of very great
lise.


■ Toi? 5ea/jLioi$. This is held to be the true reading of the sacred
k: Toi? fieffM0i« fiov was substituted here, but not in the body of
tl Homily, in some MSS. and in the editions of St. Chrys. before
tUitncdictinc.

t<ivroU without ev is the approved reading of the sacred text,
ai is found in all the MSS, and Edd. of St. Chrys. [It is the read-
irin the margin of the A. V. and of the R. V. There is but slight
•iiority for the ev. " In heaven" is also omitted by the more im-
plant authorities, the critical editors, and by the R. V. — F. G.]

;iijve<r9«. « aSAijtrir, a contest, as that of wrestlers.


Then he also enumerates them particularly,
amplifying his discourse, and multiplying his
praise. How? "Partly" (he says) "whilst ye
were made a gazing-stock by reproaches and
afflictions"; for reproach is a great thing, and
calculated to pervert the soul, and to darken the
judgment. For hear what the prophet says : '
" While they daily say unto me, Where is thy
God?" (Ps. xhi. 10.) And again, " If the enemy
had reproached me, I would have borne it."
(Ps. Iv. 12.) For since the human race is ex-
ceedingly vainglorious, therefore it is easily
overcome by this.

And he did not simply say " by reproaches,"
but that even with great intensity, being " made
a gazing-stock."* For when a person is re-
proached alone, it is indeed painful, but far more
so when in presence of all. For tell me how great
the evil was when men who had left the mean-
ness of Judaism, and gone over, as it were, to
the best course of life, and despised the customs
of their fathers, were ill treated by their own
people, and had no help.

[2.] I cannot say (he says) that ye suffered
these things indeed and were grieved, but ye
even rejoiced exceedingly. And this he ex-
pressed by saying, " Whilst ye became compan-
ions of them that were so used," and he brings
forward the Apostles themselves. Not only (he
means) were ye not ashamed of your own suffer-
ings, but ye even shared with others who were
suffering the same things. This too is the lan-
guage of one who is encouraging them. He said
not, ' Bear my afflictions, share with me,' but
respect your own.

"Ye had compassion on them that were in
bonds."' Thou seest that he is speaking con-
cerning himself and the rest who were in prison.
Thus ye did not account " bonds " to be bonds :
but as noble wrestlers so stood ye : for not
only ye needed no consolation in your own
[distresses], but even became a consolation to
others.

And " ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods." O ! what " full assurance of faith " !
(c. x. 22.) Then he also sets forth the mo-
tive, not only consoling them for their strug-
gles, but also that they might not be shaken
from the Faith. When ye saw your property


' The common editions have the entire text, *' My tears have
been my meat day and night, while," &c.

° A catena, the Verona editions, and perhaps one MS. have " with
my bonds."


462


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI


plundered (he means) ye endured ; for already
ye saw Him who is invisible, as visible : which
was the effect of genuine faith, and ye showed it
forth by your deeds themselves.

Well then, the plundering was perhaps from
the force of the plunderers, and no man could
prevent it ; so that as yet it is not clear, that ye
endured the plundering for the faith's sake.
(.Although this too is clear. For it was in your
power if you chose, not to be plundered, by
not believing.) But ye did what is far greater
than this ; the enduring such things even " with
joy " ; which was altogether apostolical, and
worthy of those noble souls, who rejoiced when
scourged. For, it says, " they departed from
the presence of the council, rejoicing that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for the
Name.'" (Acts v. 41.) But he that endures
" with joy," shows that he has some reward, and
that the affair is no loss but a gain.

Moreover the expression " ye took " ' shows
their willing endurance, because, he means, ye
chose and accepted.

" Knowing " (he says) " that ye have for your-
selves in heaven a better and an enduring sub-
stance " ; instead of saying, firm, not perishing
like this.

[3.] In the next place, having praised them,
he says, (ver. 35) " Cast not away therefore your
confidence, which hath great recompense of re-
ward." What meanest thou? He did not say,
' ye have cast it away, and recover it ' : but,
which tended more to strengthen them, " ye
have it," he says. For to recover again that
which has been cast away, requires more labor :
but not to lose that which is held fast does not.
But to the Galatians he says the very opposite :
" My children of whom I travail in birth again,
till Christ be formed in you " (Gal. iv. 19) ; and
with reason ; for they were more supine, whence
they needed a sharper word ; but these were
more faint-hearted, so that they rather needed
what was more soothing.

"Cast not away therefore " (he says) "your
confidence," so that they were in great confi-
dence towards God. " Which hath " (he says)
" great recompense of reward." " And when
shall we receive them (some one might say) ?
Behold ! All things on our part have been done."
Therefore he anticipated them on their own
supposition, saying in effect. If ye know that ye
have in heaven a better substance, seek nothing
here.

" For ye have need of patience," not of any
addition [to your labors], that ye may con-
tinue in the same state, that ye may not cast
away what has been put into your hands. Ye


* itarri^iiud'rjffay i/irep Tou ovoftaroi aTtii.a(rdrjvai. The common
editions of St. Chrys. as the common text of the New Testament,
add a'<Tovt *' His Name," in this and in other places.

' ir/}oac5c{aff9c.


need nothing else, but so to stand as ye have
stood, that when ye come to the end, ye maj
receive the promise.

(Ver. 36) " For " (he says) " ye have neec
of patience, that after ye have done the will ol
God, ye might receive the promise." Ye havi
need of one thing only, to bear with the delay
not that ye should fight again. Ye are at thi
very crown (he means) ; ye have borne all thf
combats of bonds, of afflictions ; your good'
have been spoiled. What then? Henceforwarc
ye are standing to be crowned : endure this only
the delay of the crown. O the greatness of th
consolation ! It is as if one should speak to ai
athlete who had overthrown all, and had n
antagonist, and then was to be crowned, and ye
endured not that time, during which the presi
dent of the games comes, and places the crow
[upon him] ; and he impatient, should wish t
go out, and escape as though he could not bea
the thirst and the heat.

He then also hinting this, what does he say
(Ver. 37) "Yet a little while and He that sha
come will come, and will not tarry." For lef
they should say. And when will He come ? Hi
comforts them from the Scriptures. For thu
also when he says in another place, " Now is ou
salvation nearer " (Rom. xiii. 11), he comfort
them because the remaining time is short. Am
this he says not of himself but from the Scrip
tures.'' But if from that time it was said, " Ye
a little while, and He that shall come will come
and will not tarry," it is plain that now He i
nearer. Wherefore also waiting is no small re
ward.

(Ver. 38) "Now the just" (he says) "sha
live by faith, but if any man draw back. My soi
shall have no pleasure in him." This is a grea
encouragement when one shows that they hav
succeeded in the whole matter and are losing i
through a little indolence. (Ver. 39) "Butw
are not of them that draw back unto perditior
but of them that believe to the saving of th
soul." ,

[4.] (c. xi. I, 2) "Now faith is the sutj
stance'' of things hoped for, the evidence o,
things not seen. For by it the elders obtaine
a good report." O what an expression has h
used, in saying, " an evidence of things nc
seen." For [we say] there is "evidence," i;
the case of things that are very plain." Fait|
then is the seeing things not plain (he means],
and brings what are not seen to the same fu^


* It is to be observed that the words " He that comcth will cod
and will not tarry," are from the prophet Habakkuk ii. 3; whe
the LXX. has, edf i»<TTep»)o-j7 viro/xeci'Oi' avTov ('* Him " not " it.'
oTi ep^o^fo? ijf «t, Kat ov ixrj xpovivjj, &c. The Apostle interprt
this by adding the article: 6 ipx6iJ.tvo^, the well-known designatic
of the Messiah. '"substantiality." 1

** ^riKiav, Savilc and Morell following some MSS. read ai^Aw ^
" obscure " : but St. Chrys. means that we use the word iKeyvw |
a proof which makes things most certain and evident [and so Mu '
anus read. — F. G.j.


3MII.V XXI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


463


surance with what are seen. So then neither
it possible to disbelieve in things which are
en, nor, on the other hand can there be faith,
less a man be more fully assured with respect

things invisible, than he is with respect to
ings that are most clearly seen. For since the
ijects of hope seem to be unsubstantial, Faith
/es them substantiality,' or rather, does not
it it, but is itself their substance.^ For in-
mcc, the Resurrection has not come, nor does
exist substantially, but hope makes it substan-
1 in our soul. This is [the meaning of] " the
bstance of things."

If therefore it is an " evidence of things not
en," why forsooth do you wish to see them, so
to fall away from faith, and from being just?''
ice " the just shall live by faith," whereas ye,
ye wish to see these things, are no longer
thful. Ye have labored (he says), ye have
■uggled : I too allow this, nevertheless, wait ;

this is Faith : d:> not seek the whole " here."

5.] These things were indeed said to the
ebrews, but they are a general exhortation also
many of those who are here assembled. How,
d in what way? To the faint-hearted ; to the
;an-spirited. For when they see the wicked
ospering, and themselves faring ill, they are
ubled, they bear it impatiently : while they
ig for the chastisement, and the inflicting ven-
ance on others ; while they wait for the re-
rds of their own sufferings. " For yet a little
ne, and He that shall come will come."
Let us then say this to the slothful : Doubt-
s there will be punishment ; doubtless He will
me, henceforth the events of the * Resurrec-
n are even at the doors.

Whence [does] that [appear] (you say) ?
do not say, from the prophets ; for neither

I now speak to Christians only ; but even if a
athen be here, I am perfectly confident, and
ng forward my proofs, and will instruct him.
)w (you say) ?

Christ foretold many things. If those former
ngs did not come to pass, then do not beheve
Jm ; but if they all came to pass, why doubt
ncerning those that remain? And indeed, it
re very unreasonable,' nothing having come
pass, to believe the one, or when all has come
pass, to disbelieve the others.
But I will make the matter more plain by an

mple. Christ said, that Jerusalem should be
:en, and should be so taken as no city ever
s before, and that it should never be raised
and in fact this prediction came to pass.
! said, that there should be "great tribulation"
latt. xxiv. 21), and it came to pass. He said
It a grain of mustard seed is sown, so should


' viroaTflurii'.

' oviria.

' or, '* righteous.'*


* Ta T7J9 a.


the preaching [of the Gospel] 'be extended :
and every day we see this running over the
world. He said, that they who left father or
mother, or brethren, or sisters, should have both
fathers and mothers ; And this we see fulfilled
by facts. He said, " in the world ye shall have
tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have over-
come the world " (John xvi. 33), that is, no man
shall get the better of you. And this we see by
the events has come to pass. He said that
" the gates of hell shall not prevail against the
Church" (Matt. xvi. 18), even though perse-
cuted, and that no one shall quench the preach-
ing [of the Gospel] : and the experience of
events bears witness to this prediction also : and
yet when He said these things, it was very hard
to believe Him. Why? Because all these were
words, and He had not as yet given proof of the
things spoken. So that they have now become
far more credible. He said that "when the
Gospel should have been preached among all
the nations, then the end shall come" (Matt,
xxiv. 14) ; lo ! now ye have arrived at the end :
for the greater part of the world hath been
preached to, therefore the end is now at hand.
Let us tremble, beloved.

[6.] But what, tell me? Art thou anxious
about the end? It indeed is itself near, but
each man's life and death is nearer." For it is
said, " the days of our years are seventy years ;
but if [one be] in strength, fourscore years."
(Ps. xc. 10; [LXX. Ixxxix. 10].) The day of
judgment is near. Let us fear. " A brother
doth not redeem; shall man redeem?" (Ps.
xlix. 7 ; [LXX. xlviii. 8].) There we shall re-
pent much, "but in death no man shall praise
Him." (Ps. vi. 5 ; [LXX. 6].) Wherefore he
saith, " Let us come before His presence with
thanksgiving" (Ps. xcv. 2 ; [LXX. xciv.]), that
is, his coming. For here [in this life] indeed,
whatever we do has efficacy ; but there, no
longer. Tell me, if a man placed us for a little
while in a flaming furnace, should we not submit
to anything in order to escape, even were it nec-
essary to part with our money, nay to undergo
slavery? How many have fallen into grievous
diseases, and would gladly give up all, to be de-
livered from them, if the choice were offered
them ? If in this world then, a disease of short
duration so afflicts us, what shall we do yonder,
when repentance will be of no avail?

[7.] Of how many evils are we now full, with-
out being conscious of them ? We bite one an-
other, we devour one another, in wronging, ac-
cusing, calumniating, being vexed by the credit
of oiu- neighbors. (Cf. Gal. v. 15.)

And see the difficulty.' When a man wishes


* ^ 6e iKavrov ^wJj iyyVTepa iroXAw Kai if t«A«vt^, But Mut*
" sed et vitae finis uniuscujuscunquc propc est."
' TO \a\en6y.


464


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI,


to undermine the reputation of a neighbor, he
says, ' Such an one said this of him ; O God,
forgive me, do not examine me strictly, I must
give account of what I have heard.' ' \Vhy then
dost thou speak of it at all, if thou dost not believe
it ? Why dost thou speak of it ? Why dost thou
make it credible by much reporting? Why dost
thou pass on the story which is not true ? Thou
dost not believe it, and thou entreatest God not
to call thee to strict account ? Do not say it
then, but keep silence, and free thyself from all
fear.

But I know not from whence this disease has
fallen upon men. We have become tattlers,
nothing remains ^ in our mind. Hear the exhor-
tation of a wise man who says, " Hast thou heard
a word ? Let it die in ' thee, be bold ; it will not
burst thee." (Ecclus. xix. 10.) And again, "A
fool heareth a word, and travaileth, as a women
in labor of a child." (Ecclus. xix. 11.) We are
ready to make accusations, prepared for con-
demning. Even if no other evil thing had been
done by us, this were sufficient to ruin us, and to
carry us away to Hell, this involves us in ten
thousand evils. And that thou mayest know
this certainly, hear what the prophet says, " Thou
satest and spakest against thy brother." (Ps. 1.
20.)

But it is not I, you say, but the other [who
told me]. Nay rather, it is thyself; for if
thou hadst not spoken, another would not have
heard : or even if he should hear it, yet //lou
wouldest not have been to blame for the sin.
We ought to shade over and conceal the fail-
ings of neighbors, but thou paradest them under
a cloak of zeal for goodness. Thou becomest,
not an accuser, but a gossip, a trifler, a fool.
O what cleverness ! Without being aware of it,
thou bringest disgrace upon thyself as well as
on him.

And see what great evils which arise from this.
Thou provokest the wrath of God. Dost thou
not hear Paul saying about widows, " they not
only " (these are his words) " learn to be idle,
but tattlers also and busybodies, wandering about
from house to house, and speaking things which
they ought not." (i Tim. v. 13.) So that even
when thou believest the things which are said
against thy brother, thou oughtest not even in
that case to speak of them ; much less, when
thou dost not believe them.

But thou [forsooth] lookest to thine own in-
terest? Thou fearest to be called to account by
God ? Fear then, lest even for thy tattling thou
be called to account. For here, thou canst not
say, ' O God, call me not to account for light


* Or might it be read, aico^( \6yov o^ciAoi ; ** am I responsible for
what I hear, for common reports? "

* ivanofiivti. ' ivairoBaviru,


talking ' : for the whole matter is light talking.
Why didst thou publish it? Why didst thou in-
crease the evil? This is sufficient to destroy us.
On this account Christ said, " Judge not, that ye
be not judged." (Matt. vii. i.)

But we pay no regard to this, neither are we
brought to our senses by what happened to the
Pharisee. He said what was true, " I am not as
this Publican" (Luke xviii. 11), he said it too
in no man's hearing ; yet was he condemned.
If he were condemned when he said what was
true, and uttered it in no man's hearing, what
fearful [punishment] shall not they suffer, who
like gossiping women, carry about everywhere
lies which they do not even themselves believe i
What shall they not endure ?

[8.] Plenceforward let us set " a door and a
bolt before the mouth." (Ecclus. xxviii. 25.)
For innumerable evils have arisen from tattling
families have been ruined, friendships torn asun
der, innumerable other miseries have happened
Busy not thyself, O man, about the affairs of th)
neighbor.

But thou art talkative and hast a weakness.
Talk of thine own [faults] to God : thus the
weakness will be no longer a weakness, but an
advantage. Talk of thy own [faults] to thj
friends, those who are thorough friends and
righteous men, and in whom thou hast confi-
dence, that so they may pray for thy sins. I:
thou speak of the [sins] of others, thou art no-
wise profited, neither hast thou gained anything
but hast ruined thyself. If thou confessest th)
own [sins] to the Lord, thou hast great reward
for one says, " I said, I will confess against my
self mine iniquity to the Lord, and Thou forgav
est the impiety of my heart." (Ps. xxxii. 5.)

Dost thou wish to judge? Judge thine owi
[sins]. No one will accuse* thee, if thou con
demn thyself: but he will accuse if thou do no
condemn ; he will accuse thee, unless thou con
vict thyself; will accuse thee of insensibility
Thou hast seen such an one angry, irritated, do ,
ing something else out of place ? Think at once ,
even thou on thy own [faults] : and thus thoi
wilt not greatly condemn him, and wilt free thy
self from the load of thy past transgressions. 1 1
we thus regulate our own conduct, if we thu ■.
manage our own life, if we condemn ourselves!
we shall probably not commit many sins, and wij
shall do many good things, being fair and mod
erate ; and shall enjoy all the promises to then
that love God : to which may all attain, by thi
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesu
Christ, with whom to the Father together will
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now am
for ever and world with end. Amen.


* eyxoAcu


Homily XXII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


465


HOMILY XXII.


Hebrews xi. 3, 4.


■Through faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God; so that things which
are seen were not made of things which do appear.
By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness '
that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts:
and by it he being dead yet speaketh." "

[i.] Faith"^ needs a generous and vigorous

oul, and one rising above all things of sense,

nd passing beyond tlie weakness of human

asonings. For it is not possible to become

believer, otherwise than by raising one's self
bove the common customs [of the world].

Inasmuch then as the souls of the Hebrews
•ere thoroughly weakened, and though they had
egun from faith, yet from circumstances, I mean
ifferings, afflictions, they had afterwards become
int-hearted, and of httle spirit, and were shaken
om [their position], he encouraged them first
ideed from these very things, saying, " Call to
membrance the former days " (c. x. 32) ;

xt from the Scripture saying, " But the just
lall live by faith " (c. x. 38) ; afterwards from
•guments, saying, " But Faith is the substance

things hoped for, the evidence of things not
;en." (c. xi. i.) And now again from their
refathers, those great and admirable men, as
uch as saying ; If where the good things were
ose at hand, all were saved by faith, much
ore are we.

For when a soul finds one that shares the same
fferings with itself, it is refreshed and recovers
eath. This we may see both in the case of

ith, and in the case of affliction : " that there
ay be comfort for you ■* it is said through our
utual faith." (Rom. i. 12.) For mankind
e very distrustful, and cannot place confidence

themselves, are fearful about whatever things
ey think they possess, and have great regard
the opinion of the many.

[2.] What then does Paul do? He encour-

es them by the fathers ; and before that by

: common notions [of mankind].^ For tell

:, he says, since Faith is calumniated ° as being

thing without demonstration'' and rather a

* " was testified of."

* AoAei, with the most approved MSS. of the Epistle; the edi-
ts hive AaAetToi ; which is the reading of the common texts of
N. T.

^ &irre tlvai irapdKXTjtrtv vfiiv, the common editions follow MSS.
vhich the very words of Rom. i. 12 have been substituted.

' Thus the sentence is inconsequent, as it stands in the best
~: in the common editions it is altered to, " For inasmuch as the
I was at that time calumniated," &c. ' avano&tiKTov.


matter of deceit, therefore he shows that the
greatest things are attained through faith and
not through reasonings. And how does he
show this, tell me?* It is manifest, he saith,
that (}od made the things which are, out of
things which are not," things which appear, out
of things which appear not, things which subsist,
out of things which subsist not. But whence [is
it shown] that He did this even " by a Word " ?
For reason suggests nothing of this kind ; but on
the contrary, that the things which appear are
[formed] out of things which appear.

Therefore the philosophers expressly say that
' nothing comes out of things that are not ' '"
being " sensual " (Jude ig),and trusting nothing
to Faith. And yet these same men, when they
happen to say anything great and noble, are
caught entrusting it to P'aith. For instance,
that " God is without beginning," and unborn " " :
for reason does not suggest this, but the contrary.
And consider, I beseech you, their great folly.
They say"* that God is without beginning ; and
yet this is far more wonderful than the [creation]
out of things that are not. For to say, that He
is without beginning, that He is unborn, neither
begotten by Himself nor by another is more full
of difficulties,''' than to say that God made the
things which are, out of things which are not.
For here there are many things uncertain : as,
that some one made it, that what was made had
a beginning, that, in a word, it was made. But
in the other case, what? He is self-existing,"
unborn. He neither had beginning nor time ;
tell me, do not these things require faith ? But
he did not assert this, which was far greater, but
the lesser.

Whence [does it appear], he would say, that
God made these things ? Reason does not sug-
gest it ; no one was present when it was done.
Whence is it shown? It is plainly the result of
faith. "Through faith we understand that the
worlds were made." Why "through faith"?
Because " the things that are seen were not
made of things which do appear." For this
is Faith.

[3.] Having thus stated the general [princi-


* At this place and generally throughout the Homily: the later
texts and the common editions insert the words of the Epistle, but
not so the best MSS. or the old translation.

" cf oiiK ofTt.n', i.e. " out of nothing."

10 *< J)e nihilo nihil " is probably referred to.

^' avap^os- ^' ayei'l'JJTO?.

i'* Xfyoi'Tt^, an irregular construction : the common texts substi-
tute ^iyovaiv.

^* anoptitTepov. t" guinotiaTOi,


466


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


pie],* he afterwards tests' it by individuals. For
a man of note is equivalent to the world. This
at all events he afterwards hinted. For when
he had matched it against one or two hundred
persons, and then saw the smallness of the num-
ber, he afterwards says, " by whom the world was
outweighed in worth."^ (c. xi. 38.)

And observe whom he puts first, him who
was ill-treated, and that by a brother. It was
their own affliction,* "For you also" (he says)
" have suffered like things of your own country-
men." (i Thess. ii. 14.) And by a brother
who had been nothing wronged, but who envied
him on God's account ; showing that they also
are looked on with an evil eye and envied. He
honored God, and died because he honored
Him : and has not yet attained to a resurrec-
tion. But his readiness is manifest, and his
part ' has been done, but God's part has not yet
been carried out towards him.

And by a " more excellent sacrifice " in this
place, he means that which is more honorable,
more splendid, more necessary.

And we cannot say (he says) that it was not
accepted. He did accept it, and said unto
Cain, ["Hast thou] not [sinned], if thou
rightly offer, but dost not rightly divide?"
(Gen. iv. 7, LXX.) So then Abel both rightly
offered, and rightly divided. Nevertheless for
this, what recompense did he receive? He
was slain by his brother's hand : and that sen-
tence which his father endured on account of
sin, this he first received who was upright. And
he suffered so much the more grievously because
it was from a brother, and he was the first [to
suffer] .

And he did these things rightly looking to no
man. For to whom could he look, when he so
honored God? To his father and his mother?
But they had outraged Him in return for His
benefits. To his brother then? But he also ha,d
dishonored [God]. So that by himself he
sought out what was good.

And he that is worthy of so great honor, what
does he suffer? He is put to death. And how
too was he otherwise " testified of that he was
righteous " ? It is said, that fire came down and
consumed the sacrifices. For instead of ["And
the Lord] had respect to Abel and to his sacri-
fices " (Gen. iv. 4), the Syriac'^ said, "And He
set them on fire." He therefore who both by
word and deed bare witness to the righteous


' TO Koivov, ' yVfiLVaCet.

' a$io<;. St. Chrys. takes the word in its primary sense, " of
like value,"" worth as much as." See Horn, xxvii. [6], pp.489 sqq.

* oiKtlov TO ndSoi. ^ Ta Trap' auroi).

• The reading of some MSS. and of the editions except Savile's
was o (tiipt'o? instead of b Svpo«. On this Montfaucon has the note:
"This sentence is imperfect. Mutianus's rendering is, 'On Abel
(saith he) He looked, and on his sacrifices." But in the Syrian lan-
guage it has, ' And set [them] on fire.' It would seem, therefore,
that we should read, b Si'OO?, Kal ivenvpiati', elnef. The Hebrew
words are ."P.'T 1?I^1» which (not the Syriac translator, but) Thco-
dotion renders xai ivtirvpiaty 6 9e6f , ' And God set [themj on fire,*


man and sees him slain for His sake, did not
avenge him, but left him to suffer.

But your case is not such : for how could it
be ? You who have both prophets and examples,
and encouragements innumerable, and signs and
miracles accomplished? Hence that was faith
indeed. For what miracles did he see, that he
might believe he should have any recompense
of good things? Did he not choose virtue from
Faith alone ?

What is, " and by it he being dead yet speak-
eth " ? That he might not cast them into great
despondency, he shows that he has in part ob-
tained a recompense. How? 'The influence
coming from him '' is great, he means, " and he
yet speaketh " ; that is, [Cain] slew him, but he
did not with him slay his glory and memory.
He is not dead ; therefore neither shall ye die.
For by how much the more grievous a man's
sufferings are, so much the greater is his glory.'

How does he " yet speak " ? This is a sign
both of his being alive, and of his being by all
celebrated, admired, counted blessed. For he
who encourages others to be righteous, speaks.
For no speech avails so much, as that man's suf-
fering. As then heaven by its mere appearance
speaks, so also does he by being had in remem-
brance. Not if he had made proclamation of
himself, not if he had ten thousand tongues, and
were alive, would he have been so admired as
now. That is, these things do not take place
with impunity, nor lightly, neither do they pass
away.

[4.] (Ver. 5) "By faith Enoch was translated,
that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him." This man
displayed greater faith than Abel. How (you
ask) ? Because, although he came after him,
yet what befell [.\bel] was sufficient to guide
him back.' How ? God foreknew that [Abel]
would be killed. For He said to Cain : " Thou .
hast sinned : do not add thereto." ° Honored
by him, He did not protect him. And yet j
neither did this throw him [Enoch] into indif-
ference. He said not to himself, ' What need
of toils and dangers? Abel honored God, yet
He did not protect him. For what advantage ^
had he that was departed, from the punishment


as may be seen in our edition of the Hexapla, and is proved by Jer-
ome's testimony on the passage. For the Syriac translation is,
'and God was well pleased.' So perhaps it might be an error of
Chry^ostom," Fou- of the six MSS. mentioned by Mr. Field [but
not the Catena] have Svpos. [Field's MSS. A and O have Kvpiot-
— F. G.] "^ T) tnKTKOJrr) Tj -nap' avrov.

* [aTToiTTpei^at. Some of Field's MSS. read (iTi<TTpfi}jat. The
sentence is not clear, but the meaning seems to be, " to guide him
back from the evil ways of the world around." The Bened. transla-
tor has ad eu7n a7'eriendum: Mutianus, ad revocanduvi eum ft
dehortandum. The English edition, "to turn him away from
[serving God]," is certainly wrong. — F. p.]

• The words of the Septuagint, Gen. iv. 7, are iiMapTe?; ^(tuxo
troc: for which St. Chrys. substitutes the words of Ecclus. xxi. u
TJ^iapTes; ^il) rrpocrOft^ €Ti. He combines these two texts (either from
confusing them or by way of explanation) in three other places. Se<
Mr. Fields' note. The words were addressed to Cain before be,
killed his brother. j


lOMILV XXII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


467


te


f his brother? And what benefit could he reap
lerefrom ? Let us allow that he suffers severe
unishment : what is that to him who has been
ain ? ' He neither said nor thought anything
f this kind, but passing beyond all these things,
e knew that if there is a God, certainly there is
Rewarder also : although as yet they knew
athing of a resurrection. But if they who as
know nothing of a resurrection, and see con-
adictory things here, thus pleased [God], how
uch more should we ? For they neither knew
a resurrection, nor had they any examples to
lok to. This same thing then made [Enoch]
ell-pleasing [to God], namely, that he received
Dthing. For he knew that [God] " is a re-
arder." Whence [knew he this] ? " For He
compensed Abel," do you say? So that rea-
m suggested other things, but faith the oppo-
of what was seen. Even then (he would
y) if you see that you receive nothing here, be
Dt troubled.

How was it " by faith " that " Enoch was
anslated " ? Because his pleasing [God] was
cause of his translation, and faith [the cause]
his pleasing [Him]. For if he had not known
at he should receive a reward, how could he
ive pleased [Him] ? " But without faith it is
ipossible to please " Him. How? If a man
lieve that there is a God and a retribution, he
11 have the reward. Whence then is the well-
easing?

"5.] It is necessary to "believe that He is,"
; 'what He is." If "that He is" needs
ith, and not reasonings ; it is impossible to
mprehend by reasoning ' what He is.' If
He is a rewarder " needs Faith and not
isonings, how is it possible by Reasoning to
rapass His essence?^ For what Reasoning
Q reach this ? For some persons say that the
ings that exist are self-caused.^ Seest thou
t unless we have Faith in regard to all things,
t only in regard to retribution, but also in re-
d to the very being of God, all is lost to us?
But many ask whither Enoch was translated,
d why he was translated, and why he did not
, neither he nor Elijah, and, if they are still
re, how they live, and in what form. But to
these things is superfluous. For that the
was translated, and that the other was taken
the Scriptures have said ; but where they
and how they are, they have not added :
they say nothing more than is necessary,
r this indeed took place, I mean his transla-
immediately at the beginning, the human
[thereby] receiving a hope of the destnic-
of death, and of the overthrow of the devil's


at


That is, what the substance of God is, is not a part of what we
t believe in order to please Him: nor can it be ascertained by
mings.

r4 T^f ovaias . ' avT<ifiara.


tyranny, and that death will be done away ; for
he was translated, not dead, but " that he should
not see death."

Therefore he added, he was translated alive,
because he was well-pleasing [unto God]. For
just as a Father when he has threatened his son,
wishes indeed immediately after he has threat-
ened, to relax his threat, but endures and con-
tinues resolute, that for a time he may chasten
and correct him, allowing the threat to remain
firm ; so also God, to speak as it were after the
manner of men, did not continue resolute, but
immediately showed that death is done away.
And first He allows death to happen, wishing to
terrify the father through the son : For wishing
to show that the sentence is verily fixed. He
subjected to this punishment not wicked men at
once, but him even who was well-pleasing, I
mean, the blessed Abel ; and almost immedi-
ately after him. He translated Enoch. More-
over, He did not raise the former, lest they
should immediately grow bold ; but He trans-
lated the other being yet ahve : having excited
fear by Abel, but by this latter giving zeal to be
well-pleasing unto Him. Wherefore they who
say that all things are ruled and governed of
themselves,* and do not expect a reward, are
not well-pleasing; as neither are the heathen.
For " He becomes a rewarder of them that dili-
gently seek Him " by works and by knowledge.

[6.] Since then we have " a rewarder," let
us do all things that we may not be deprived of
the rewards of virtue. For indeed the neglect-
ing such a recompense, the scorning such a
reward, is worthy of many tears. For as to
"those who diligently seek Him," He is a
rewarder, so to those who seek Him not, the
contrary.

"Seek" (He says) "and ye shall find"
(Matt. vii. 7) : but how can we find the Lord?
Consider how gold is found ; with much labor.
[" I sought the Lord] with my hands " (it is
said) " by night before Him, and I was not de-
ceived " (Ps. Ixxvii. 2. See LXX [Ps. Ixxvi. 3]),
that is, just as we seek what is lost, so let us
seek God. Do we not concentrate our mind
thereon ? Do we not enquire of every one ? Do
we not travel from home ? Do we not promise
money?

For instance, suppose that any among us has
lost his son, what do we not do? What land,
what sea do we not make the circuit of? Do
we not reckon money, and houses, and every-
thing else as secondary to the finding him?
And should we find him, we cling to him, we
hold him fast, we do not let him go. And when
we are going to seek anything whatever, we busy
ourselves in all ways to find what is sought. How


468


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


much more ought we to do this in regard to
God, as seeking what is indispensable ; nay
rather, not in the same way, but much more !
But since we are weak, at least seek God as
thou seekest thy money or thy son. Wilt thou
not leave thy home for Him? Hast thou never
left thy home for money ? Dost thou not busy
thyself in all ways? When thou hast found [it],
art thou not full of confidence ?

[7.] "Seek" (He says) "and ye shall find."
For things sought after need much care, espe-
cially in regard of God. For many are the hin-
drances, many the things that darken, many that
impede our perception. For as the sun is man-
ifest, and set forth publicly before all, and we
have no need to seek it ; but if on the other hand
we bury ourselves and turn everything upside
down, we need much labor to look at the sun ;
so truly here also, if we bury ourselves in the
depth of evil desires, in the darkness of passions
and of the affairs of this life, with difficulty do
we look up, with difficulty do we raise our heads,
with difficulty do we see clearly. He that is bur-
ied underground, in whatever degree he sees
upwards, in that degree does he come towards
the sun. Let us therefore shake off the earth,
let us break through the mist which lies upon
us. It is thick, and close, and does not allow
t]s to see clearly.

And how, you say, is this cloud broken
through? If we draw to ourselves the beams
of " the sun of righteousness." " The lifting up
of my hands " (it is said) " is an evening sacri-
fice." (Ps. cxh. 2.) With our hands let us also
lift up our mind : ye who have been initiated
know what I mean,^ perhaps too ye recognize
the expression, and see at a glance what I have
hinted at. Let us raise up our thoughts on high.

I myself know many men almost suspended
apart from the earth, and beyond measure
stretching up their hands, and out of heart be-
cause it is not possible to be lifted into the air,
and thus praying with earnestness. Thus I
would have you always, and if not always, at
least very often ; and if not very often, at least
now and then, at least in the morning, at least
in the evening prayers.* For, tell me, canst thou
not stretch forth the hands? Stretch forth the
will, stretch forth as far as thou wilt, yea even to
heaven itself. Even shouldst thou wish to touch
the very summit, even if thou wouldst ascend
higher and walk thereon, it is open to thee. For
our mind is lighter, and higher than any winged
creature. And when it receives grace from the
Spirit, O ! how swift is it ! How quick is it ! How
does it compass all things ! How does it never
sink down or fall to the ground ! These wings


* The words of the Liturgy which were said throughout the
Church Catholic, *' Lift up^our hearts," &c.

* iy ratf ((i>9ifat(, iv rati iantptvaif.


let us provide for ourselves : by means of them
shall we be able to fly even across the tempestu-
ous sea of this present life. The swiftest birds
fly unhurt over mountains, and woods, and seas,
and rocks, in a brief moment of time. Such also
is the mind ; when it is winged, when it is sepa-
rated from the things of this life, nothing can
lay hold of it, it is higher than all things, even
than the fiery darts of the devil.

The devil is not so good a marksman, as to
be able to reach this height ; he sends forth his
darts indeed, for he is void of all shame, yet he
does not hit the mark ; the dart returns to him
without effect, and not without effect only, but it
[falls] upon his own head. For what is sent
forth by him must of necessity strike [some-
thing] . As then, that which has been shot out
by men, either strikes the person against whom
it is directed, or pierces bird, or fence, or gar-
ment, or wood, or the mere air, so does the dart
of the devil also. It must of necessity strike ;
and if it strike not him that is shot at, it neces-
sarily strikes him that shoots it. And we may
learn from many instances, that when we are not
hit, without doubt he is hit himself. For in-
stance, he plotted against Job : he did not hit
him, but was struck himself. He plotted against
Paul, he did not hit him, but was struck himself.
If we watch, we may see this happening every-
where. For even when he strikes, he is hit;
much more then [when he does not hit].

[8.] Let us turn his weapons then against
himself, and having armed and fortified ourselves
with the shield of faith, let us keep guard with
steadfastness, so as to be impregnable. Now
the dart of the devil is evil concupiscence. Anger
especially is a fire, a flame ; it catches, destroys,
consumes ; let us quench it, by longsuffering,
by forbearance. For as red-hot iron dipped into
water, loses its fire, so an angry man falling in
with a patient one does no harm to the patient
man, but rather benefits him, and is himself more
thoroughly subdued.

For nothing is equal to longsuffering. Such
a man is never insulted ; but as bodies of ada-
mant are not wounded, so neither are such souls.
For they are above the reach of the darts. The
longsuffering man is high, and so high as not to
receive a wound from the shot. When one is
furious, laugh ; but do not laugh openly, lest
thou irritate him : but laugh mentally on his ,
account. For in the case of children, when they ,
strike us passionately, as though forsooth thej|
were avenging themselves, we laugh. If then,
thou laugh, there will be as great difference be-
tween thee and him, as between a child and a
man : but if thou art furious thou hast made [
thyself a child. For the angry are more sense- 1
less than children. If one look at a furious child
does he not laugh at him ? " The poor-spirited '


)MiLy xxni.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


469


is said) "is mightily simple." (Prov. xiv.
.) The simple then is a child : and " he who
longsuffering " (it is said) "is abundant in
idom." This " abundant wisdom " then let
follow after, that we may attain to the good


things promised us in Christ Jesus our Lord,
with whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXIII.

Hebrews xi. 7.


faith Noah, being warned of God * of things not
seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the
saving of his house; by the which he condemned
the world, and became heir of the righteousness
which is by Faith."

I.] "By faith" (he says) "Noah being
med of God." As the Son of God, speaking
His own coming, said, " In the days of Noah
y married and were given in marriage " (Luke
26, 27), therefore the Apostle also recalled
their mind an appropriate image. For the
mple of Enoch, was an example only of
th ; that of Noah, on the other hand, of un-
ef also. And this is a complete consolation
I exhortation, when not only believers are
id approved, but also unbelievers suffer the
losite.

'or what does he say? "By faith being

ned of God." '' What is " being warned of

d "? It is, " It having been foretold to him."

why is the expression " divine communica-

"' (Luke ii. 26) used? for in another place

it is said, " and it was communicated * to

by the Spirit," and again, " and what saith

divine communication?"^ (Rom. xi. 4.)

st thou the equal dignity of the Spirit ? For

God reveals,' so also does the Holy Spirit.

why did he speak thus ? The prophecy is

ed " a divine communication."

Of things not seen as yet," he says, that is

he rain.

Moved with fear, prepared an ark." Reason
;ed suggested nothing of this sort ; For " they
marrying and being given in marriage " ;
air was clear, there were no signs [of change] :
nevertheless he feared : " By faith " (he
) " Noah being warned of God of things not
I as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark
he saving of his house."

;Mf<artcrdcif. * ^i- ice;^pT;iLiaTnrMeVoi'.

.;p^. This word is properly used of quasi-Divine commuuica-
nuide through oracles : the words vprj^aTi'^w and xP»?^LnTiff/i69
the same meaning. Hence the emphatic character of the words
' " in our version of the text, Rom. xi. 4; and so in the other
g^ which St. Chrys. cites ^Luke ii, 26), the Divinity of the
opirit (he says) is imphed m the use of the word riv k^xPT^'*'
iFov vwo (not 6ta) ToO Hi/cv^aTOf, " a divine communication
by the Spirit."


How is it, " By the which he condemned the
world " ? He showed them to be worthy of
punishment, since they were not brought to their
senses even by the preparation.

"And he became" (he says) "heir of the
righteousness which is by Faith " : that is, by
his believing God he was shown to be righteous.
For this is the [part] of a soul sincerely dis-
posed towards Him and judging nothing more
reliable than His words, just as Unbelief is the
very contrary. Faith, it is manifest, works right-
eousness. For as we have been warned of God
respecting Hell, so was he also : and yet at that
time he was laughed at ; he was reviled and
ridiculed ; but he regarded none of these things.

[2.] (Ver. 8, 9) " By faith Abraham when he
was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeyed ; and he
went out not knowing whither he went. By faith
he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a
strange country, dwelling in tabernacles, with
Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise." [" By faith "] : for (tell me) whom
did he see to emulate ?° He had for father a
Gentile, and an idolater ; he had heard no
prophets ; he knew not whither he was going.
For as they of the Hebrews who believed, looked
to these [patriarchs] as having enjoyed blessings
innumerable, he shows that none of them ob-
tained anything as yet ; all are unrewarded ; no
one as yet received his reward. " He " escaped
from his country and his home, and " went out
not knowing whither he went."

And what marvel, if he himself [were so],
when his seed also dwelt in this same way ? For
seeing the promise disproved' (since He had
said, " To thee will I give this land, and to thy
seed" — Gen. xii. 7; xiii. 15), he saw his son
dwelling there ; and again his grandson saw
himself dwelling in a land not his own ; yet was
he nowise troubled. For the affairs of Abraham
happened as we might have expected, since the
promise was to be accomplished afterwards in
his family (although it is said even to himself,


" " To endeavor to imitate, or even surpass."


470


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII


"To thee, and to thy seed," not, "to thee
through thy seed," but " to thee and to thy
seed") : still neither he, nor Isaac, nor Jacob,
enjoyed the promise. For one of them served
for hire, and the other was driven out : and he
himself even was failing ' through fear : and
while he took some things indeed in war, others,
unless he had had the aid of God, would have
been destroyed. On this account [the Apostle]
says, " with the heirs of the same promise " ;
not himself alone, he means ; but the heirs also.

[3.] (Ver. 13) "These all died in faith," he
says, " not having obtained ^ the promises." At
this place it is worth while to make two enqui-
ries ; how, after saying that [God] " translated
Enoch, and he was not found, so that he did
not see death," does he say, " These all died
in Faith." And again, after saying, " they not
having obtained' the promises," he declares that
Noah had received a reward, "to the saving
of his house," and that Enoch had been " trans-
lated," and that Abel "yet speaks," and that
Abraham had gained a hold on the land, and
yet he says, "These all died in Faith, not having
obtained the promises." What then is [meant] ?

It is necessary to solve the first [difficulty],
and then the second. " These all " (he says)
" died in faith." The word " all " is used here
not because all had died, but because with that
one exception "all these had died," whom we
know to be dead.

And the [statement] " not having obtained
the promises," is true : for surely the promise to
Noah was not to be this [which is here spoken
of]. But further, of what kind of "promises"
is he speaking? For Isaac and Jacob received
the promises of the land ; but as to Noah and
Abel and Enoch, what kind of promises did
they receive ? Either then he is speaking con-
cerning these three ; or if concerning those
others also, the promise was not this, that Abel
should be admired, nor that Enoch should be
translated, nor that Noah should be preserved ;^
but these things came to them for their virtue's
sake, and were a sort of foretaste of things to
come. For God from the beginning, knowing
that the human race needs much condescension,
bestows on us not only the things in the world
to come, but also those here ; as for instance,
Christ said even to the disciples, " Whosoever
hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, shall receive an hundredfold and


* tf e'ffiTTT*: i.e. Ti)« vnoa\f<Tebi^, " of the promise," is Mr. Field's
interpretation; Mutianus has paeiie excidernt.

2 K0fAt<7ajLie^oi. This word is used by St. Chrys. throughout this
passage without any variation of reading. The text of the Epistle
here has Aaflbi'Te?, but in ver. 39, ou« e«OMi<rai'To. [St. Chrys. in
another work has the reading AaSorre?, but KOMiaa^croi is generally
adopted by the critical editors as the true text in the Epistle. — F. G.]

^ We must probably understand also, " nor that the Patriarchs
should live in Canaan": »he argument seems to require this; be-
sides, in the statement of the difficulty, Abraham's having " got a
hold on the land " is mentioned together with the blessings bestowed
on Abel, Enoch, and Noah, as something already given them.


shall inherit everlasting life." (Matt. xix. 29.)
And again, " Seek ye the kingdom of God, anc
all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt
vi. 33.) Seest thou that these things are giver
by Him in the way of addition, that we mighl
not faint?* For as the athletes have the ben
efit of careful attention, even when engaged ir
the combat, but do not then enjoy entire ease
living under rules, yet afterwards they enjo)
it entire : so God also does not grant us hen
to partake of " entire " ease. For even hen
He does give [some].

[4.] " But having seen them afar off," he says,
" and embraced them." Here he hints at some
thing mystical ; that they received beforehani
all the things which have been spoken concern
ing things to come ; concerning the resurrectior
concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, concernin
the other things, which Christ proclaimed whe
He came, for these are " the promises " of whic
he speaks. Either then he means this, or, tha
they did not indeed receive them, but die
in confidence respecting them, and they wer
[thus] confident through Faith only.

" Having seen them afar off" : four gener?
tions before ; for after so many [generations]
they went up out of Egypt.

" And embraced them," saith he, and wer
glad. They were so persuaded of them as eve;
to "embrace [or "salute"] them," from th
metaphor of persons on ship-board seeing fror
afar the longed-for cities : which, before the
enter them, they take and occupy by words 0
greeting.

(Ver. 10) "For they looked" (he says) "fc
the ° city which hath foundations, whose builde
and maker is God." Seest thou that they r(
ceived them in this sense, in their alread
accepting them and being confident respectin
them. If then to be confident is to receive,
is in your power also to receive. For thesi
although they enjoyed not those [blessings], yi
still saw them by their longing desire. Wh
now do these things happen? That we migl
be put to shame, in that they indeed, whe
things on earth were promised them, regardel
them not, but sought the future " city " : when |
as God again and again speaks to us of the cit) |
which is above, and yet we seek that which i
here. He said to them, I will give you th'
things of the present [world]. But when Hi
saw, or rather, when they showed themselvii
worthy of greater things, then He no longi
suffers them to receive these, but those greati
ones ; wishing to show us that they are worth I


• I


* See above, p. 408.

" St. Chrys. does not cite nor yet refer to the words jcat jrftfffl* I
T€?, " and were persuaded of them." They are found in the comni< !j
editions of the Epistle, but are not supposed to be a genuine part I
the Sacred Text. [They are rejected by all critical editors, and ha
very little support from the authorities for this text. — F. G.J

^ rijf ffoAif. ' iToAii'.


:oMiLv xxin.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


471


f greater things, being unwilling to be bound
these. As if one should promise playthings
an intelligent child, not that he might receive
lem, but by way of exhibiting his philosophy,
hen he asks for things more important. For
lis is to show, that they hekl off from the land
ith so great earnestness, that they did not even
cept what was given. Wherefore their pos-
rity receive it on this account, for themselves
ere worthy of the land.

What is, " the city which hath foundations " ?

or are not these [which are visible] " founda-

Dns " ? In comparison of the other, they are not.

" Whose Builder and Maker is God." O !

Tiat an encomium on that city !

[5.] (Ver. 11) "By faith also Sarah herself,"

says. Here he began [speaking] in a way

put them to shame, in case, that is, they

,ould show themselves more faint-hearted than

woman. But possibly some one might say,

ow "by faith," when she laughed? Nay,

liile her laughter indeed was from unbehef, her

ar [was] from Faith, for to say, " I laughed

)t" (Gen. xviii. 15), arose from Faith. From

is then it appears that when unbelief had been

eared out. Faith came in its place.

By faith also Sarah received strength to con-
ive seed even when she was past age." ^ What
" to conceive seed "?^ She who was become
ad, who was barren, received power for the re-
ining of seed, for conception. For her imper-
ction was two-fold ; first from her time of life,
r she was really old ; secondly from nature, for
e was barren.

(Ver. 12) "Wherefore even from one they" all
sprang, as the stars of the sky, and as the sand
lich is by the sea-shore." " Wherefore " (he
ys) "even from one they" all "sprang." Here
not only says that she bare [a child], but that
e also became mother of so many as not even
litful wombs [are mothers of]. "As the stars,"
e says. How then is it that He often num-
rs them, although He said, " As the stars of
heaven shall not be numbered, so neither
all your seed"? (Gen. xv. 5.) He either
:ans the excess, or else [speaks of] those who
continually being born. For is it possible, tell
;, to number their forefathers of one family as,
h an one son of such an one, and such an
e son of such an one ? But here such are the
omises of God, so skillfully arranged are His
dertakings.

[6.] But if the things which He promised as
ditional, are so admirable, so beyond expecta-
n, so magnificent, what will those be, to which
;se are an addition, to which these are some-
cat irapa Kaipov ^At*ctas. The common texts of St. Chrys. add
cTtjccf, in accordance with the common editions of the New
tament; but in neither case is it supposed to be genuine. [Field's
omits it, and it is not in critical editions of the text of rieb, —
'.3 * (cs Kara^oAt)!' aire/>;AaTOf,


what over and above ? What then can be more
blessed than they who attain them ? What more
wretched than those who miss them? For if a
man when driven out from his native country, is
pitied by all ; and when he has lost an inherit-
ance is considered by all as an object of com-
passion, with what tears ought he to be bewailed,
who fails of Heaven, and of the good things there
stored up? Or rather, he is not even to be
wept for : for one is wept for, when he suffers
something of which he is not himself the cause ;
but when of his own choice he has entangled
himself in evil, he is not worthy' of tears, but
of wailings ; ■* or rather then of mourning ; '' since
even our Lord Jesus Christ mourned and wept
for Jerusalem, impious as it was. Truly we are
worthy of weepings innumerable, of wailings in-
numerable. If the whole world should receive a
voice, both stones, and wood, and trees, and wild
beasts, and birds, and fishes, and in a word, the
whole world, if receiving a voice it should bewail
us who have failed of those good things, it would
not bewail and lament enough. P'or what lan-
guage, what intellect, can represent that blessed-
ness and virtue, that pleasure, that glory, that
happiness, that splendor? "What eye hath not
seen, and ear hath not heard, and what hath not
entered into the heart of man" (i Cor. ii. 9),
(he did not say, that they simply surpass [what
we imagine] ; but none hath ever conceived) "the
things which God hath prepared for them that love
Him." For of what kind are those good things
likely to be, of which God is the Preparer and
Establisher? For if immediately after He had
made us, when we had not yet done anything.
He freely bestowed so great [favors]. Paradise,
familiar intercourse with Himself, promised us
immortality, a hfe happy and freed from cares ;
what will He not bestow on those who have
labored and struggled so greatly, and endured
on His behalf? For us He spared not His Onl5
Begotten, for us when we were enemies He gave
up His own Son to death ; of what will He not
count us worthy, having become His friends?
what will He not impart to us, having recon-
ciled us to Himself?

[7.] He both is abundantly and infinitely
rich ; and He desires and earnestly endeavors to
obtain our friendship ; we do not thus earnestly
endeavor. What am I saying, ' do not earnestly
endeavor ' ? We do not wish to obtain the
good things as He wishes it. And what He has
done shows that He wishes it more [than we].
For while, for our own sake, we with difficulty
think lightly of a little gold : He, for our sake,
gave even the Son who was His own. Let us
make use of the love of God as we ought ; let us
reap the fruits of His friendship. For " ye are


aftoy.


* Bpijvtitv,


* ircf^ovf.


472


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


My friends " (he says) " if ye do what I say to
you." (John xv. 14.) How wonderful ! His
enemies, who were at an infinite distance from
Him, whom in all respects He excels by an in-
comparable superiority, these He has made His
friends and calls them friends. What then
should not one choose to suffer for the sake of
this friendship ? For the friendship of men we
often incur danger, but for that of God, we do
not even give up money. Our [condition] does
indeed call for mourning, for mourning and tears
and wailings, and loud lamentation and beating
of the breast. We have fallen from our hope,
we are humbled from our high estate, we have
shown ourselves unworthy of the honor of God ;
even after His benefits we are become unfeeling,
and ungrateful. The devil has stripped us of all
our good things. We who were counted worthy
to be sons ; we His brethren and fellow-heirs,
are come to differ nothing from His enemies
that insult Him.

Henceforward, what consolation shall there be
for us ? He called us to Heaven, and we have
thrust ourselves down to hell. " Swearing and
lying and stealing and adultery, are poured out
upon the earth." (Hos. iv. 2.) Some "min-
gle blood upon blood " ; and others do deeds
worse than blood-shedding. Many of those that
are wronged, many of those that are defrauded
prefer ten thousand deaths to the suffering such
things : and except they had feared God, would
even have killed themselves, being so murder-
ously disposed against themselves. Are not
these things then worse than blood-shedding ?

[8.] " Woe is me, my soul ! For the godly man
is perished from the earth, and there is none up-
right among men" (Mic. vii. i, 2, LXX.) ; let
us also now cry out, first about our own selves :
but aid me in my lamentation.

Perhaps some are even disgusted and laugh.
For this very cause ought we to make our lam-
entations the more intense, because we are so
mad and beside ourselves, that we do not know
that we are mad, but laugh at things for which
we ought to groan. O man ! " There is wrath
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men" (Rom. i. 18) ; "God
will come manifestly : a fire will burn before
Him, and round about Him will be a mighty tem-
pest." (Ps. 1. 3.) " A fire will burn before Him,
and consume His enemies on every side." (Ps.
xcvii. 3.) "The day of the Lord is as a burn-
ing oven." (Mai. iv. i.) And no man lays
up these things in his mind, but these tremen-
dous and fearful doctrines are more despised
than fables, and are trodden under foot. He
that heareth, — there is no one : while they who
laugh and make sport are — all. What resource
will there be for us ? Whence shall we find safety?
" We are undone, we are utterly consumed "


(Num. xvii. 12), we are become the laughing-
stock of our enemies, and a mockery for the
heathen and the Demons. Now is the devil
greatly elated ; he glories and is glad. The an-
gels to whom we had been entrusted are all
ashamed and in sadness : there is no man to
convert [you] : all means have been used by us
in vain, and we seem to you as idle talkers. It
is seasonable even now to call on the heaven,
because there is no man that heareth ; to take
to witness the elements : " Hear, O heaven !
and give ear, O earth ! for the Lord hath
spoken." (Isa. i. 2.)

Give a hand, stretch it forth, O ye who have
not yet been overwhelmed, to them who are un-
done through their drunkenness : ye that are
whole to them that are sick, ye that are sober-
minded to them that are mad, that are giddily
whirling round.

Let no man, I beseech you, prefer the favor
of his friend to his salvation ; and let violence
and rebuke look to one thing only, — his bene-
fit. When one has been seized by a fever, even
slaves lay hold of their Masters. For when that
is pressing on him, throwing his mind into con-
fusion, and a swarm of slaves are standing by,
they recognize not the law of Master and Ser-
vant, in the calamity of the Master.

Let us collect ourselves, I exhort you : there
are daily wars, submersions [of towns], destruc-
tions innumerable all around us, and on every
side the wrath of God is enclosing us as in a net.
And we, as though we were well-pleasing to
Him, are in security. We all make our hands
ready for unjust gains, none for helping others :
all for plundering, none for protecting : each
one is in earnest as to how he shall increase his
possessions ; no one as to how he shall aid the
needy : each one has much anxiety how he may
add to his wealth ; no one how he may save
his own soul. One fear possesses all, lest (you
say) we should become poor ; no man is in an-
guish and trembling lest we should fall into hell.
These things call for lamentations, these call foi
accusation, these call for reprobation.

[9.] But I do not wish to speak of these
things, but I am constrained by my grief. For-
give me : I am forced by sorrow to utter many
things, even those which I do not wish. I see
that our wound is grievous, that our calamity is
beyond comfort, that woes have overtaken us
greater than the consolation. We are undone,
" O that my head were waters and mine eyes
a fountain of tears " (Jer. ix. i), that I might
lament. Let us weep, beloved, let us weep, let
us groan.

Possibly there may be some here who say,
He talks to us of nothing but lamentation, noth-
ing but tears. It was not my wish, believe me.
it was not my wish, but rather to go through a


JMILY XXIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


473


lurse of commendations and praises : but now
is not the season for these. Beloved, it is not
nenting which is grievous, but the doing things
lich call for lamentations. Sorrow is not the
ing to shrink from, but the committing things
call for sorrow. Do not thou be punished,
I will not mourn. Do not die, and I will
weep. If the body indeed lies dead, thou
Uest on all to grieve with thee, and thinkest
Dse without sympathy who do not mourn :
when the soul is perishing, dost thou tell
not to mourn ?

But I cannot be a father, if I do not weep,
im a father full of affection. Hear how Paul
aims, " My little children, of whom I travail
birth again" (Gal. iv. 19) : what mother in
ild-birth utters cries so bitter as he ! Would
it were possible for thee to see the very fire
is in my heart, and thou wouldest know,
I bum [with grief] more intense than any
man, or girl that suffers untimely widowhood,
does not so mourn over her husband, nor
father over his son, as I do over this mul-
ide that is here with us.

see no progress. Everything turns to cal-
inies and accusations. No man makes it his
iness to please God ; but (he says) ' let us
ak evil of such an one or such an one.'
ich an one is unfit to be among the Clergy.'
ich an one does not lead a respectable life.'


It


id


It


It


When we ought to be grieving for our own evils,
we judge others, whereas we ought not to do
this, even when we are pure from sins. " For
who maketh thee to differ " (he says) " and
what hast thou which thou didst not receive?
But if thou hast received it, why dost thou
glory, as though thou hadst not received it?"
(i Cor. iv. 7.) " And thou, why dost thou judge
thy brother" (Rom. xiv. 10), being thyself full
of innumerable evils? When thou sayest, Such
an one is a bad man, and a spendthrift, and
vicious, think of thyself, and examine strictly
thy own [condition], and thou wilt repent of
what thou hast said. For there is no, no not
any, such powerful stimulus to virtue, as the
recollecting of our sins.

If we turn over these two things in our minds,
we shall be enabled to attain the promised bless-
ings, we shall be enabled to cleanse ourselves
and wipe away [what is amiss]. Only let us
take serious thought sometime ; let us be anxious
about the matter, beloved. Let us grieve here
in reflection, that we may not grieve yonder in
punishment, but may enjoy the everlasting bless-
ings, where " pain and sorrow and sighing are
fled away" (Isa. xxxv. 10), that we may attain
to the good things which surpass man's under-
standing, in Christ Jesus our Lord, for to Him
is glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXIV.

Hebrews xi. 13-16.


lese all died in faith,' not having received the prom-
ises, but having seen them afar off,'^ and embraced
them, and confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such
things, declare plainly that they seek a country.
And truly if they had been mindful of that country
from whence they came out, they might have had
opportunity to have returned. But now they desire
a better country, that is, an heavenly; wherefore
God is not ashamed ^ to be called their God, for He
hath prepared for them a city."

I.] The first virtue, yea the whole of virtue,
be a stranger to this world, and a sojourner,
to have nothing in common with things here,
to hang loose from them, as from things

Qge to us ; As those blessed disciples did, of
he says, " They wandered about in sheep-
I, and in goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted.


|Thc words of the A. V. '* and were persuaded of them," «ai
(it*?, arc not in St. Chrysostom's text or in that of any critical
In the R, V. they are omitted. — F. G.J
" ashamed of them, to be," &c.


j tormented :* of whom the world was not worthy."
(c. xi. 37, 38.)

They called themselves therefore " strangers " ;
but Paul said somewhat much beyond this : for
not merely did he call himself a stranger, but
said that he was dead to the world, and that the
world was dead to him. " For the world " (he
says) "has been crucified to me and I to the
world." (Gal. vi. 14.) But we, both citizens'
and quite alive, busy ourselves about everything
here as citizens. And what righteous men were
to the world, " strangers " and " dead," that we
are to Heaven. And what they were to Heaven,
alive and acting as citizens, that we are to the
world. Wherefore we are dead, because we
have refused that which is truly life, and have
chosen this which is but for a time. Wherefore
we have provoked God to wrath, because when
the enjoyments of Heaven have been set before


* " ill-treated."


' troAiTOf.


474


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X)


us, we are not willing to be separated from
things on earth, but, like worms, we turn about
from the earth to the earth, and again from this
to that ; * and in short are not willing to look up
even for a little while, nor to withdraw ourselves
from human affairs, but as if drowned in torpor
and sleep and drunkenness, we are stupefied
with imaginations.

[2.] And as those who are under the power
of sweet sleep lie on their bed not only during
the night, but even when the morning has over-
taken them, and bright day has come, and are
not ashamed to indulge in pleasure, and to make
the season of business and activity a time of
slumber and indolence, so truly we also, when
the day is drawing near, when the night is far
spent, or rather the day ; for " work " (it is said)
"while it is day" (John ix. 4) ; when it is day
we practice all that belongs to the night, sleep-
ing, dreaming, indulging in luxurious fancies ;
and the eyes of our understanding are closed as
well as those of our body ; we speak amiss, we
talk absurdly ; even if a person inflict a deep
wound upon us, if he carry off all our substance,
if he set the very house on fire, we are not so
much as conscious of it.

Or rather, we do not even wait for others to
do this, but we do it ourselves, piercing and
wounding ourselves every day, lying in unseemly
fashion, and stripped bare of all credit, all honor,
neither ourselves conceaUng our shameful deeds,
nor permitting others to do so, but lying ex-
posed to public shame, to the ridicule, the num-
berless jests of spectators and passers-by.

[3.] Do ye not suppose that the wicked
themselves laugh at those who are of like char-
acters to themselves, and condemn them ? For
since God has placed within us a tribunal which
cannot be bribed nor ever utterly destroyed,
even though we come to the very lowest depth
of vice ; therefore even the wicked themselves
give sentence against themselves, and if one call
them that which they are, they are ashamed, they
are angry, they say that it is an insult. Thus
they condemn what they do, even if not by their
deeds, yet by their words, by their conscience,
nay rather even by their deeds. For when they
carry on their practices out of sight and secretly,
they give the strongest proof of the opinion they
hold concerning the thing itself. For wicked-
ness is so manifest, that all men are its accusers,
even those who follow after it, while such is the
quality of virtue, that it is admired even by those
who do not emulate it. For even the fornicator
will praise chastity, and the covetous will con-
demn injustice, and the passionate will admire
patience, and blame quarrelsomeness, and the
wanton [will blame] wantonness.


1 from this piece of earth to that.


How then (you say) does he pursue tl
things? From excessive indolence, not bec£
he judges it good ; otherwise he would not h
been ashamed of the thing itself, nor would
have denied it when another accused him. ]
many when caught, not enduring the sha
have even hanged themselves. So strong is
witness within us in behalf of what is good
becoming. Thus what is good is brighter t
the sun, and the contrary more unsightly t
anything.

[4.] The saints were " strangers and sojoi
ers." How and in what way? And where c
Abraham confess himself " a stranger and a
journer"? Probably indeed he even hin
confessed it : ^ but David both confessed " I
a stranger " and what ? " As all my fathers we
(Ps. xxxix. 12.) For they who dwell in te
they who purchase even burial places for mo
evidently were in some sense strangers, as 1
had not even where to bury their dead.

What then ? Did they mean that they v
" strangers " from the land that is in Palest.
By no means : but in respect of the whole wo
and with reason ; for they saw therein noni
the things which they wished for, but everyt.
foreign and strange. They indeed wishec
practice virtue : but here there was much w
edness, and things were quite foreign to th
They had no friend, no familiar acquainta
save only some few.

But how were they "strangers"? '1
had no care for things here. And this
showed not by words, but by their deeds,
what way?

He said to Abraham, " Leave that w
seems thy country and come to one that is
eign " : And he did not cleave to his kind
but gave it up as unconcernedly as if he '
about to leave a foreign land. He said to
" Offer up thy son," and he offered him up
he had no son ; as if he had divested himse
his nature, so he offered him up. The w(
which he had acquired was common tc
passers-by, and this he accounted as not)
He yielded the first places to others : he t
himself into dangers; he suffered troubles i
merable. He built no splendid houses, hi
joyed no luxuries, he had no care about d
which all are things of this world ; but live
all respects as belonging to the City yonder
showed hospitality, brotherly love, merciful
forbearance, contempt for wealth and for ;
ent glory, and for all else.

And his son too was such as himself:
he was driven away, when war was mad'
him, he yielded and gave way, as being in J
eign land. For foreigners, whatever they s'


* See Gen. xxiii. 4.


roMii-Y XXIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


475


idure it, as not being in their own country,
ven when his wife was taken from him, he en-
jred this also as being in a strange land : and
^ed in all respects as one whose home was
)ove, showing sobermindedness and a well-
•dered life.' For after he had begotten a son,
; had no more commerce with his wife, and it
13 when the flower of his youth had passed
at he married her, showing that he did it not
am passion, but in subservience to the promise
God.

And what did Jacob ? Did he not seek bread

ily and raiment, which are asked for by those

ho are truly strangers, by those that have come

great poverty? When he was driven out, did

not as a stranger give place? Did he not

rve for hire? Did he not suffer afflictions

numerable, everywhere, as a stranger?

[5.] And these things (he says) they said,

eeking " their " own country." Ah ! how

eat is the difference ! They indeed were in

ivail-pains each day, wishing to be released

jm this world, and to return to their country.

It we, on the contrary, if a fever attack us,

iglecting everything, weeping like little chil-

en, are frightened at death.

Not without reason we are thus affected. For

ice we do not live here like strangers, nor as

hastening to our country, but are like persons

at are going away to punishment, therefore we

ieve, because we have not used circumstances

' we ought, but have turned order upside down.

ence we grieve when we ought to rejoice :

■ nee we shudder, like murderers or robber

iefs, when they are going to be brought before

' c judgment-seat, and are thinking over all the

ings they have done, and therefore are fearful

d trembling.

They, however, were not such, but pressed on.
id Paul even groaned ; " And we " (he says)
hat are in this tabernacle do groan, being bur-
ned." (2 Cor. V. 4.) Such were they who
re with Abraham ; " strangers," he says, they
re in respect of the whole world, and " they
ight a country."

What sort of " country " was this ? Was it
It which they had left ? By no means. For
lEt hindered them if they wished, from return-
5 again, and becoming citizens? but they
ight that which is in Heaven? Thus they de-
ed their departure hence, and so they pleased
»d ; for " God was not ashamed to be called
5ir God."

[6.] Ah ! how great a dignity ! He vouch-
ed " to be called their God." What dost thou
f? He is called the God of the earth, and
! God of Heaven, and hast thou set it down
a great thing that " He is not ashamed to be


* mt^pOITVVril' KO^fliOTIJTa,


called their God " ? Great and truly great this
is, and a proof of exceeding blessedness. How ?
Because He is called God of earth and of
heaven as also of the Gentiles : in that He cre-
ated and formed them : but [God] of those
holy men, not in this sense, but as some true
friend.

And I will make it plain to you by an exam-
ple ; as in the case of [slaves] in large house-
holds, when any of those placed over the
household are very highly esteemed, and manage
everything themselves, and can use great free-
dom towards their masters, the Master is called
after them, and one may find many so called.
But what do I say? As we might say the
God, not of the Gentiles but of the world, so
we might say " the God of Abraham." But
you do not know how great a dignity this is, be-
cause we do not attain to it. For as now He is
called the Lord of all Christians, and yet the
name goes beyond our deserts : consider the
greatness if He were called the God of one
[person] ! He who is called the God of the
whole world is " not ashamed to be called " the
God of three men : and with good reason : for
the saints would turn the scale, I do not say
against the world ^ but against ten thousand
such. " For one man who doeth the will of the
Lord,' is better than ten thousand transgressors."
(Ecclus. xvi. 3.)

Now that they called themselves " strangers "
in this sense is manifest. But supposing that
they said they were " strangers " on account of
the strange land, why did David also [call him-
self a stranger] ? Was not he a king? Was not
he a prophet? Did he not spend his life in his
own country ? Why then does he say, " I am a
stranger and a sojourner"? (Ps. xxxix. 12.)
How art thou a stranger? " As " (he says) " all
my fathers were." Seest thou that they too
were strangers ? We have a country, he means,
but not really our country. But how art thou thy-
self a stranger? As to the earth. Therefore they
also [were strangers] in respect of the earth :
For " as they were," he says, so also am I ; and
as he, so they too.

[7.] Let us even now become strangers ; that
God may " not be ashamed of us to be called
our God." For it is a shame to Him, when He
is called the God of the wicked, and He also is
ashamed of them ; as He is glorified when He
is [called the God] of the good and the kind,
and of them that cultivate virtue. For if " we "
decline to be called the masters of our wicked
slaves, and give them up ; and should any one


* See on ver. 36, pp. 488 sqq.

3 Mr. Field observes that St. Chrj^s. repeatectly cites Ecclus.
xvi. 3. thus; and that while the Greek is simply, " for one is better
than a thousand," the Syriac seems to have read on Kptiairi0u.fit
iroiuv dtKrtixa, &c. So the English version has ** for one ikai it
Just,"


476


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI


come to us and say, ' such a one does innumer-
able bad things, he is your slave, is he not ? ' We
immediately say, " by no means," to get rid of the
disgrace : for a slave has a close relation to his
master, and the discredit passes from the one to
the other.' — But they were so illustrious, so
full of confidence, that not only was He " not
ashamed to be called " from them, but He even
Himself says, " I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."
(Ex. iii. 6.)

Let us also, my beloved, become "strangers" ;
that God may " not be ashamed of us " ; that
He may not be ashamed, and deliver us up to
Hell. Such were they who said, " Lord, have
we not prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy
Name have done many wonderful works ! "
(Matt. vii. 2 2.) But see what Christ says to
them : " I know you not : " the very thing which
masters would do, when wicked slaves run to
them, wishing to be rid of the disgrace. " I
know you not," He says. How then dost Thou
punish those whom Thou knowest not ? I said,
" I know not," in a different sense : that is, " I
deny you, and renounce you." But God forbid
that we should hear this fatal and terrible utter-
ance. For if they who cast out demons and
prophesied, were denied, because their life was
not suitable thereto ; how much more we !

[8.] And how (you ask) is it possible that
they should be denied, who have shown pro-
phetic powers, and wrought miracles, and cast
out demons? Is it probable they were after-
wards changed, and became wicked ; and there-
fore were nothing benefited, even by their former
virtue. For not only ought we to have our
beginnings splendid, but the end also more
splendid still.

For tell me, does not the Orator take pains to
make the end of his speech splendid, that he
may retire with applause? Does not the public
officer make the most splendid display at the
close of his administration ? The wrestler, if he
do not make a more splendid display and con-
quer unto the end, and if after vanquishing all
he be vanquished by the last, is not all unprofita-
ble to him? Should the pilot have crossed the
whole ocean, yet if he wreck his vessel at the
port, has he not lost all his former labor? And
what [of] the Physician? If, after he has freed
the sick man from his disease, when he is on
the point of discharging him cured, he should
then destroy him, has he not destroyed every-
thing? So too in respect of Virtue, as many as
have not added an end suitable to the begin-
ning, and in unison and harmony with it, are
ruined, and undone. Such are they who have
sprung forth from the starting place bright and

> The Mntence is left incomplete: The common editions add,
" much more does God.**


exulting, and afterwards have become faint ar
feeble. Therefore they are both deprived
the prize, and are not acknowledged by tht
master.

Let us listen to these things, those of us w!
are in love of wealth : for this is the greate
iniquity. " For the love of money is the ro
of all evil." (i Tim. vi. lo.) Let us hste
those of us who wish to make our present pc
sessions greater, let us listen and sometime cea
from our covetousness, that we may not h{
the same things as they [will hear]. Let
listen to them now, and be on our guard, tl
we may not hear them then. Let us listen n
with fear, that we may not then listen with v(
geance : " Depart from Me " (He says) ;
never knew you" (Matt. vii. 23), no not ev
then (He means) when ye made a display
prophesyings, and were casting out demons.

It is probable that He also here hints at son
thing else, that even then they were wicke
and from the beginning, grace wrought even
the unworthy. For if it wrought through Balaa
much more through the unworthy, for the sa
of those who shall profit [by it].

But if even signs and wonders did not av
to deliver from punishment ; much more, if
man happen to be in the priestly dignity : ^ ev
if he reach the highest honor, even if grace wc
in him to ordination, even if unto all the otl
things, for the sake of those who need his leadi
ship,' he also shall hear, " I never knew the<
no, not even then when grace wrought in thee

[9.] O ! how strict shall the search be th(
as to purity of life ! How does that, of its(
suffice to introduce us into the kingdom ? Wh
the absence of it gives up the man [to destn
tion], though he have ten thousand miracles a
signs to show. For nothing is so pleasing
God as an excellent course of life. " If ye Ic
Me " (John xiv. 15), He declares ; He did i
say, " work miracles," but what ? " Keep My co
mandments." And again, " I call you friend
(John XV. 14), not when ye cast out demo
but " if ye keep My words." For those thit
come of the gift of God : but these after I
gift of God, of our own diligence also. Let
strive to become friends of God, and not rem;
enemies to Him.

These things we are ever saying, these exh^
tations we are ever giving, both to ourselves a
to you : but nothing more is gained. VVhe
fore also I am afraid. And I would have wish
indeed to be silent, so as not to increase y(
danger. For when a person often hears, a
even so does not act, this is to provoke I
Lord to anger. But I fear also myself tl
other danger, that of silence, if when I am i


3 a^iufian iepariKcp.


' T)j5 irpovraatatp


:OMILY XXV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


477


ainted to the ministering of the word, I should
Did my peace.

What shall we then do that we may be saved ?
et us begin [the practice of] virtue, as we
ive opportunity : let us portion out the virtues
ourselves, as laborers do their husbandry ; in
is month let us master evil-speaking, injurious-
;ss, unjust anger ; and let us lay down a law
r ourselves, and say. To-day let us set this
^ht. Again, in this month let us school our-
Ives in forbearance, and in another, in some
her virtue : And when we have got into the
ibit of this virtue let us go to another, just as
the things we learn at school, guarding what
already gained, and acquiring others.
After this let us proceed to contempt for
:hes. First let us restrain our hands from
asping, and then let us give alms. Let us
t simply confound everything, with the same
nds both slaying and showing mercy forsooth,
ter this, let us go to some other virtue, and
im that, to another. " Filthiness and foolish
king and jesting, let it not be even named


among you." (Eph. v. 4, 3.) Let us be thus
far in the right way.

There is no need of spending money, there
is no need of labor, none of sweat, it is enough
to have only the will, and all is done. There
is no need to travel a long way, nor to cross a
boundless ocean, but to be in earnest and of
ready mind, and to put a bridle on the tongue.
Unseasonable reproaches, anger, disorderly lusts,
luxuriousness, expensiveness, let us cast off ; and
the desire of wealth also from our soul, perjury
and habitual oaths.

If we thus cultivate ourselves, plucking out
the former thorns, and casting in the heavenly
seed, we shall be able to attain the good things
promised. For the Husbandman will come and
will lay us up in His Gamer, and we shall attain
to all good things, which may we all attain, by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father together with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now
and for ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXV.

Hebrews xi. 17-19.


y faith [Abraham],' when he was tried, offered up
Isaac; and he that had received the promises offered
up his only-begotten son, of whom it was said, That
in Isaac shall thy seed be called : accounting that
God was able to raise him up even from the dead;
from whence also he received him in a figure."

1 1.] Great indeed was the faith of Abraham,
while in the case of Abel, and of Noah, and
Enoch, there was an opposition of reasonings
y, and it was necessary to go beyond human
lonings ; in this case it was necessary not

tto go beyond human reasonings, but to
ifest also something more. For what was
jod ' seemed to be opposed to what was of
and faith opposed faith, and command
mise.

mean this : He had said, " Get thee out of
country, and from thy kindred, and I will
; thee this land." (Gen. xii. i, 7.) "He
e him none inheritance in it, no not so much
to set his foot on." (Acts vii. 5.) Seest
how what was done was opposed to the
raise ? Again He said, " In Isaac shall thy
ibe called" (Gen. xxi. 12), and he believed :
again He says. Sacrifice to Me this one, who


Mr. Field's text omits 'A^paaiit, and has ie^atievos for ava-
no. 70V 0<ov, the acts and words of God.


was to fill all the world from his seed. Thou
seest the opposition between the commands and
the promise ? He enjoined things that were in
contradiction to the promises, and yet not even
so did the righteous man stagger, nor say he
had been deceived.

For you indeed, he means, could not say this,
that He promised ease and gave tribulation.
For in our case, the things which He promised,
these also He performs. How so ? " In the
world" (He says), "ye shall have tribulation."
(John xvi. 33.) " He that taketh not his cross
and foUoweth Me, is not worthy of Me." (Matt.
X. 38.) " He that hateth not his life shall not
find it." (John xii. 25.) And, "He that for-
saketh not all that he hath, and followeth after
Me, is not worthy of Me." (Luke xiv. 27, 33.)
And again, " Ye shall be brought before ralers
and kings for My sake." (Matt. x. 18.) And
again, " A man's foes shall be they of his own
household." (Matt. x. 36.) But the things
which pertain to rest are yonder.

But with regard to Abraham, it was different.
He was enjoined to do what was opposed to the
promises ; and yet not even so was he troubled,
nor did he stagger, nor think he had been de-
ceived. But you endure nothing except what
was promised, yet you are troubled.


478


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX


[2.] He heard the opposite of the promises
from Him who had made them ; and yet he was
not disturbed, but did them as if they had been
in harmony [therewith]. For they were in
harmony ; being opposed indeed according to
human calculations, but in harmony [when
viewed] by Faith*. And how this was, the
Apostle himself has taught us, by saying, " ac-
counting' that God was able to raise Him up,
even from the dead." By the same faith (he
means) by which he beUeved that God gave
what was not,'' and raised up the dead, by the
same was he persuaded that He would also
raise him up after he had been slain in sacrifice.
For it was alike impossible (to human calcu-
lation, I mean) from a womb which was dead
and grown old and already become useless for
child-bearing to give a child, and to raise again
one who had been slain. But his previous faith
prepared the way for things to come.

And see ; the good things came first, and the
hard things afterwards, in his old age. But for
you, on the contrary, (he says) the sad things
are first, and the good things last. This for
those who dare to say, ' He has promised us
the good things after death ; perhaps He has
deceived us.' He shows that " God is able to
raise up even from the dead," and if God be
able to raise from the dead, without all doubt
He will pay all [that He has promised] .

But if Abraham so many years before, believed
" that God is able to raise from the dead," much
more ought we to believe it. Thou seest (what
I at first said) that death had not yet entered in,
and yet He drew them at once to the hope of
the resurrection, and led them to such full assur-
ance, that when bidden, they even slay their
own sons, and readily offer up those from whom
they expected to people the world.

And he shows another thing too, by saying,
that " God tempted Abraham." (Gen. xxii. i.)
What then ? Did not God know that the man was
noble and approved ? Why then did He tempt
him? Not that He might Himself learn, but
that He might show to others, and make his
fortitude manifest to all.^ And here also he
shows the cause of trials, that they may not
suppose they suffer these things as being for-
saken [of God]. For in their case indeed, it
was necessary that they should be tried, because
there were many who persecuted or plotted
against them : but in Abraham's case, what need
was there to devise trials for him which did not


* ^oytvafitfoi. The cognate word Aoyttrjab? is used throughout
for our ' reasoning," '* calculation."

* oiiK ofTa f)^api<raTo, i.e. Isaac. See Rom. iv. 17. " Before
God, inwhom he believed, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth
those things which be not as though they were (ri firi oi-Ttt w? oi-ra) ;
and for the next clause, see ib. ver. 19, " He considered not his own
body, now dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarah's womb": to which,
so to say, life was restored.

» [S«e St. Cyr. Alex. GlapA. 87.]


exist? Now this trial, it is evident, was by F
command. The others indeed happened
His allowance, but this even by His comraan
If then temptations make men approved in su^
wise that, even where there is no occasion, G(
exercises His own athletes ; much more oug
we to bear all things nobly.

And here he said emphatically, " By fail
when he was tried, he offered up Isaac," 1
there was no other cause for his bringing t
offering but that.

[3.] After this he pursues the same thougl
No one (he says) could allege, that he h
another son, and expected the promise to
fulfilled from him, and therefore confiden
offered up this one. "And" (his words ai
" he offered up his only-begotten, who h
received the promises." Why sayest th
"only-begotten"? What then? Of whom v
Ishmael sprung? I mean "only-begotten" (
would say) so far as relates to the word of I
promise. Therefore after saying, " Only-beg
ten," showing that he says it for this reason,
added, " of whom it was said. In Isaac shall t
seed be called," that is, " from " him. Sc'
thou how he admires what was done by 1
Patriarch ? " In Isaac shall thy seed be calle(
and that son he brought to be sacrificed.

Afterwards, that no one may suppose he d(
this in despair, and in consequence of this co
mand had cast away that Faith,* but may und
stand that this also was truly of faith, he says tl
he retained that faith also, although it seem
be at variance with this. But it was not at v£
ance. For he did not measure the power
God by human reasonings, but committed all
faith. And hence he was not afraid to say, t
God was " able to raise him up, even from
dead."

" From whence also he received him in
figure,"^ that is in idea,' by the ram, he mea
How? The ram having been slain, he a
saved : so that by means of the ram he receii
him again, having slain it in his stead. 1
these things were types : for here it is the i
of God who is slain.

And observe, I beseech you, how great is
lovingkindness. For inasmuch as a great fa
was to be given to men, He, wishing to do t
not by favor, but as a debtor, arranges tha
man should first give up his own son on acco
of God's command, in order that He Him
might seem to be doing nothing great in giv
up His own Son, since a man had done '
before Him ; that He might be supposed to
it not of grace, but of debt. For we wish to
this kindness also to those whom we love, oth
to appear first to have received some Mtde th

* conviction [?]. ^ iy irapojSoXp.

« iV viToieiyfiaTt, see c. ix. 9, »3.


lOMILY XXV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


479


rom them, and so give them all : and we boast
oore of the receiving than of the giving ; and we
(o not say, We gave him this, but, We received
lis from him.

"From whence also" (are his words) "he
eceived him in a figure," i.e. as in a riddle '
for the ram was as it were a figure of Isaac)
r, as in a type. For since the sacrifice had
een completed, and Isaac slain in purpose,^
lerefore He gave him to the Patriarch.

'4.] Thou seest, that what I am constantly

lying, is shown in this case also? When we

avc proved that our mind is made perfect, and

ave shown that we disregard earthly things,

len earthly things also are given to us ; but

before ; lest being bound to them already,

ceiving them we should be bound still. Loose

lyself from thy slavery first (He says), and

len receive, that thou mayest receive no longer

a slave, but as a master. Despise riches, and

lou shalt be rich. Despise glory, and thou

lalt be glorious. Despise the avenging thyself

thine enemies, and then shalt thou attain it.

espise repose, and then thou shalt receive it :

lat in receiving thou mayest receive not as a

isoner, nor as a slave, but as a freeman.

For as in the case of little children, when the

lild eagerly desires childish playthings, we hide

em from him with much care, as a ball, for

stance, and such like things, that he may not

hindered from necessary things ; but when

thinks little of them, and no longer longs for

em, we give them fearlessly, knowing that

nceforth no harm can come to him from

em, the desire no longer having strength

ough to draw him away from things neces-

so God also, when He sees that we no

iger eagerly desire the things of this world,

enceforward permits us to use them. For

possess them as freemen and men, not as

ildren.

For [in proof] that if thou despise the aveng-
thyself on thine enemies, thou wilt then
ain it, hear what he says, " If thine enemy
nger, feed him ; if he thirst, give him drink,"
d he added, " for in so doing, thou shalt heap
■Is of fire on his head." (Rom. xii. 20.) And
in, that if thou despise riches, thou shalt then
tain them, hear Christ saying, " There is no
which hath left father, or mother, or house,
brethren, who shall not receive an hundred-
d, and shall inherit everlasting life." (Matt.
:. 29.) And that if thou despise glory, thou
lit then attain it, again hear Christ Himself
ing, "He that will be first among you, let
n be your minister." (Matt. xx. 26.) And


i» aiyiyfiarif where one thing is said, and another covertly
nt: as the expression is used i Cor. xiii. 12, of our present
wkdge of the Blessedness of Heaven. ' tjj irpoaipe'aci.


again, " For whosoever shall humble himself, he
shall be exalted." (Matt, xxiii. 12.)

What sayest thou? If I give drink to mine
enemy, do I then punish him ? If I give up my
goods, do I then possess them ? If I humble my-
self, shall I then be exalted? Yea, He says, for
such is My power, to give contraries by means
of contraries. I abound in resources and in
contrivances : be not afraid. The ' Nature of
things ' follows My will : not I attend upon
Nature. I do all things : I am not controlled
by them : wherefore also I am able to change
their form and order.

[5.] And why dost thou wonder if [it is so]
in these instances ? For thou wilt find the same
also in all others. If thou injure, thou art
injured ;' if thou art injured, then thou art unin-
jured ; if thou punish, then thou hast not pun-
ished another, but hast punished thyself. For
" he that loveth iniquity," it is said, " hateth his
own soul." (Ps. xi. 5, LXX.) Seest thou that
thou dost not injure, but art injured ? * There-
fore also Paul says, " Why do ye not rather take
wrong?" (i Cor. vi. 7.) Dost thou see that
this is not to be wronged ?

When thou insultest, then art thou insulted.
And most persons partly know this : as when
they say one to another, " Let us go away, do
not disgrace yourself" Why? Because the dif-
ference is great between thee and him : for
however much thou insultest him, he accounts
it a credit. Let us consider this in all cases,
and be above insults. I will tell you how.

Should we have a contest with him who wears
the purple, let us consider that in insulting him,
we insult ourselves, for we become worthy to be
disgraced. Tell me, what dost thou mean?
When thou art a citizen of Heaven, and hast the
Philosophy that is above, dost thou disgrace thy-
self with him " that mindeth earthly things " ?
(Phil. iii. 19.) For though he be in possession
of countless riches, though he be in power, he
does not as yet know the good that is therein.
Do not in insulting him, insult thyself. Spare
thyself, not him. Honor thyself, not him. Is
there not some Proverb such as this, He that
honoreth,' honoreth himself? With good rea-
son : for he honors not the other, but himself.
Hear what a certain wise man says, " Do honor
to thy soul according to the dignity thereof."
(Ecclus. x. 28.) "According to the dignity
thereof," what is this? If he have defrauded


3 T)5iKyiffrii,

* This reading, adopted by Mr. Field, is found only in one MS.
followed by Savile and the later editions: the other authorities, in-
cluding Miitianus' version, have, "Seest thou that thou hast not
been injured, but injurest?" Perhaps this may be the true reading,
St. Chrys. in these words turning his address to those who are suffer-
ing worldly wrong: and sriying that if they patiently endure, they
are not the suffererSj but innict suffering on their oppressors, thougn
the expression aSixei? is very strong.

"* or, *' respects [another], respects," &c.


48o


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX\


(it means), do not thou defraud; if he has
insulted, do not thou insult.

[6.] Tell me, I pray thee, if some poor man
has taken away clay thrown out of thy yard,
wouldst thou for this have summoned a court of
justice ? Surely not. Why ? Lest thou shouldst
disgrace thyself; lest all men should condemn
thee. The same also happens in this case. For
the rich man is poor, and the more rich he is,
the poorer is he in that which is indeed poverty.
Gold is clay, cast out in the yard, not lying in
thy house, for thy house is Heaven. For this,
then, wilt thou summon a Court of Justice, and
will not the citizens on high condemn thee ? Will
they not cast thee out from their country, who
art so mean, who art so shabby, as to choose to
fight for a little clay? For if the world were
thine, and then some one had taken it, oughtest
thou to pay any attention to it ?

Knowest thou not, that if thou wert to take
the world ten times or an hundred times, or ten
thousand times, and twice that, it is not to be
compared with the least of the good things in
Heaven ? He then who admires the things here
slights those yonder, since he judges these
worthy of exertion, though so far inferior to the
other. Nay, rather indeed he will not be able
to admire those other. For how [can he],
whilst he is passionately excited towards these
earthly things? Let us cut through the cords
and entanglements : for this is what earthly
things are.

How long shall we be stooping down ? How
long shall we plot one against another, like wild
beasts ; like fishes ? Nay rather, the wild beasts
do not plot against each other, but [against]
animals of a different tribe. A bear for instance
does not readily kill a bear, nor a serpent kill a
serpent, having respect for the sameness of
race. But thou, with one of the same race, and
having innumerable claims,' as common origin,
rational faculties, the knowledge of God, ten
thousand other things, the force of nature, him
who is thy kinsman, and partaker of the same
nature — him thou killest, and involvest in evils
innumerable. For what, if thou dost not thrust
thy sword, nor plunge thy right hand into his
neck, other things more grievous than this thou
doest, when thou involvest him in innumerable
evils. For if thou hadst done the other, thou
wouldst have freed him from anxiety, but now
thou encompassest him with hunger, with slavery,
with feelings of discouragement, with many sins.
These things I say, and shall not cease to say,
not [as] preparing you to commit murder : nor
as urging you to some crime short of that ; but
that you may not be confident, as if you were
not to give account. " For " (it says) " he that


taketh away a livelihood" (Ecclus. xxxiv. 22
and asketh bread, it says.^

[7.] Let us at length keep our hands to oui
selves, or rather, let us not keep them, bi
stretch them out honorably, not for graspin;
but for alms-giving. Let us not have our han
unfniitful nor withered ; for the hand whic
doeth not alms is withered ; and that which i
also grasping, is polluted and unclean.

Let no one eat with such hands ; for this i
an insult to those invited. For, tell me, if
man when he had made us lie down on tapestr)
and a soft couch and linen interwoven wii
gold, in a great and splendid house, and ha
set by us a great multitude of attendants, ar
had prepared a tray* of silver and gold, ar
filled it with many dainties of great cost and (
all sorts, then urged us to eat, provided v
would only endure his besmearing his ham
with mire or with human ordure, and so sittir
down to meat with us — would any man endu;
this infliction? Would he not rather have coi
sidered it an insult? Indeed I think he woulc
and would have gone straightway off. But no
in fact, thou seest not hands filled with what
indeed filth, but even the very food, and y(
thou dost not go off, nor flee, nor find faul
Nay, if he be a person in authority, thou eve
accountest it a grand affair, and destroyest thir
own soul, in eating such things. For covetou
ness is worse than any mire ; for it pollutes, m
the body but the soul, and makes it hard to 1
washed. Thou therefore, though thou see
him that sitteth at meat defiled with this fil
both on his hands and his face, and his hou;
filled with it, nay and his table also full of it (f
dung, or if there be anything more unclean th;
that, it is not so unclean and polluted as tho
viands), dost thou feel as if forsooth thou we
highly honored, and as if thou wert going
enjoy thyself?

And dost thou not fear Paul who allows us
go without restraint to the Tables of the heath(
if we wish, but not even if we wish to those 1
the covetous ? For, " if any man who is calli
a Brother" (i Cor. v. 11), he says, meanii
here by Brother every one who is a believ
simply, not him who leads a solitary life. F
what is it which makes brotherhood? T
Washing of regeneration ; the being enabled i
call God our Father. So that he that is a Men !
if he be a Catechumen, is not a Brother," b


' 3uc«twfuir«»


» Kax aprov airiiVt <^i^i. There is great variation in the M-
of this passage; and possibly the true reading is lost. St. Chi
partly quotes Ecclus. xxxi. 22 of the Septuaginl (xxxiv. 22 of
Version), " He that taketh away his living slayeth his neighbor, i
he that defraudeth the hireling of his hire is a blood-shedder."
the text stands we must suppose that he is alluding to sayings wfc
had become proverbial, and that his hearers would supply thcwoi
'* is a murderer *' ; or *' is the same."

* TaTrijTwi'. * nivaKa.

*• It will be observed that the word n-ttrro?, *' believer,'* L«.
" one who believes and is baptized " : as opposed to the unbaptis


[OMILV XXVI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


481


le believer though he be in the world, is a
rother. " If any man," saith he, " that is
lUed a Brother." (i Cor. v. 11.) For at
lat time there was not even a trace of any one
ading a Monastic life, but this blessed [Apos-
e] addressed all his discourse to persons in
le world. " If any man," he says, " that is
illed a Brother, be a fornicator, or covetous,
■ a drunkard, with such an one, no not to eat."
ut not so with respect to the heathen : but
If any of them that believe not," meaning the
athen, " bid you and ye be disposed to go,
hatsoever is set before you eat." (i Cor. x.

7.)

[8.] " If any man that is called Brother be "
le says) "a drunkard." Oh ! what strictness !
;t we not only do not avoid drunkards, but
en go to their houses, partaking of what they
t before us.

Therefore all things are upside down, all
ings are in confusion, and overthrown, and
ined. For tell me, if any such person should
vite thee to a banquet, thee who art accounted
)or and mean, and then should hear thee say,
[nasmuch as the things set before me are
he fruit] of overreaching, I will not endure

defile my own soul," would he not be morti-
d ? Would he not be confounded ? Would he
be ashamed? This alone were sufficient

correct him, and to make him call himself
etched for his wealth, and admire thee for
poverty, if he saw himself with so great
mestness despised by thee.
But we " are become " (I know not why)
lervants of men" (i Cor. vii. 23), though


Paul cries aloud throughout, "Be not ye the
servants of men." Whence then have we be-
come " servants of men " ? Because we first
became servants of the belly, and of money,
and of glory, and of all the rest ; we gave up
the liberty which Christ bestowed on us.

What then awaiteth him who is become a
servant (tell me) ? Hear Christ saying, " The
servant abideth not in the house for ever."
(John viii. 35.) Thou hast a declaration com-
plete in itself, that he never entereth into the
Kingdom ; for this is what " the House " means.
For, He says, " in My Father's House are many
mansions." (John xiv. 2.) "The servant"
then " abideth not in the House for ever." By
a servant He means him who is " the servant of
sin." But he that " abideth not in the House
for ever," abideth in Hell for ever, having no
consolation from any quarter.

Nay, to this point of wickedness are matters
come, that they even give alms out of these
[ill-gotten gains], and many receive [them].
Therefore our boldness has broken down, and
we are not able to rebuke any one. But how-
ever, henceforward at least, let us flee the mis-
chief arising from this ; and ye who have rolled
yourselves in this mire, cease from such defile-
ment, and restrain your rage for such banquets,
if even now we may by any means be able to
have God propitious to us, and to attain to the
good things which have been promised : which
may we all obtain in Christ Jesus our Lord,
with whom to the Father together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and
for ever, and world without end. Amen,


HOMILY XXVI.


Hebrews xi. 20-22.


ly faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning
things to come. By faith, Jacob when he was a
dying blessed both the sons of Joseph, and wor-
shiped ^ leaning on the top of his staff. By faith,
Joseph when he died made mention of the depart-
ing of the children of Israel, and gave command-
ment concerning his bones."

|i.] " Many prophets and righteous men "

is said) " have desired to see those things

ich ye see, and have not seen them ; and to


1 tliough ihcy believed and were so religious as to devote them-
!S to an ascetic life. Also, that at this time there were those

had given themselves up to an ascetic life and still deferred
• &iptism, see St. Greg. Naz. Horn. xl. i8. In the later form of
text, this clause has been altered to "So that a Catechumen,

though he be a Monk, is not a brother."

Of* "bowed himself, made obeisance."


hear those things which ye hear and have not
heard them." (Matt. xiii. 17.) Did then those
righteous men know all the things to come?
Yea, most certainly. For if because of the
weakness of those who were not able to receive
Him, the Son was not revealed, — He was with
good reason revealed to those conspicuous in
virtue. This Paul also says, that they knew
"the things to come," that is the resurrection
of Christ.

Or he does not mean this : but that " By
faith, concerning things to come " [means]
not [concerning] the world to come, but " con-
cerning things to come " in this world. For
how [except by faith] could a man sojourning
in a strange land, give such blessings ?


482


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXV]


But on the other hand he obtained the bless-
ing, and yet did not receive it.' Thou seest
that what I said with regard to Abraham, may
be said also of Jacob, that they did not enjoy ^
the blessing, but the blessings went to his pos-
terity, while he himself obtained the "things to
come." For we find that his brother rather
enjoyed the blessing. For [Jacob] spent all
his time in servitude and working as a hireling,
and [amid] dangers, and plots, and deceits,
and fears ; and when he was asked by Pharaoh,
he says, " Few and evil have my days been "
(Gen. xlvii. 9) ; while the other lived in inde-
pendence and great security, and afterwards
was an object of terror to [Jacob]. Where
then did the blessings come to their accomplish-
ment, save in the [world] to come?

Seest thou that from the beginning the wicked
have enjoyed things here, but the righteous the
contrary ? Not however all. For behold, Abra-
ham was a righteous man, and he enjoyed things
here as well, though with affliction and trials.
For indeed wealth was all he had, seeing all else
relating to him was full of affliction. For it is
impossible that the righteous man should not be
afflicted, though he be rich : for when he is will-
ing to be overreached, to be wronged, to suffer
all other things, he must be afflicted. So that
although he enjoy wealth, [yet is it] not without
grief. Why? you ask. Because he is in afflic-
tion and distress. But if at that time the right-
eous were in affliction, much more now.

" By Faith," he says, " Isaac blessed Jacob and
Esau concerning things to come " (and yet Esau
was the elder ; but he puts Jacob first for his
excellence) . Seest thou how great was his Faith ?
Whence did he promise to his sons so great bless-
ings? Entirely from his having faith in God.

[2.] " By Faith, Jacob when he was a dying,
blessed both the sons of Joseph." Here we
ought to set down the blessings entire, in order
that both his faith and his prophesying may be
made manifest. "And worshiped leaning,"^ he
says, " upon the top of his staff." Here, he
means, he not only spoke, but was even so con-
fident about the future things, as to show it also
by his act. For inasmuch as another King was
about to arise from Ephraim, therefore it is said,
"And he bowed himself upon the top of his
staff." That is, even though he was now an old
man, " he bowed himself" to Joseph, showing
the obeisance of the whole people which was to
be [directed] to him. And this indeed had al-

^ That is, Jacob obtained the blessing from Isaac, but did not
himsetr receive the good things bestowed by the blessing. There-
fore the good things to come were not those of this world. This is
a reply to the second, the alternative, interpretation suggested.

' aTtMvtivro, This is the reading of the best MSS. and the oldest
translation. There seems no reason to adopt the later reading anut-
vaTOt " he did not enjoy."

3 irpotTtitvt'TtiTep, as Gen. xlvii. 31. The same word also is used
in the LXX. in Gen. xxxvii. 7, 9, 10, of Joseph's dreams, where our
version has " made obeisance " and " bow down ourselves."


ready taken place, when his brethren " bowei
down " to him : but it was afterwards to com
to pass through the ten tribes. Seest thou hoi
he foretold the things which were to be aftei
wards? Seest thou how great faith they had
How they beheved "concerning the things t
come " ?

For some of the things here, the things pres
ent, are examples of patience only, and of er
during ill-treatment, and of receiving nothin
good ; for instance, what is mentioned in th
case of Abraham, in the case of Abel. Bii
others are [examples] of Faith, as in the case c
Noah, that there is a God, that there is a recom
pense. (For Faith in this place is manifold
both of there being a recompense, and of awail
ing it, not under the same conditions," and c
wrestling before the prizes.) And the things als
which concern ° Joseph are of Faith only. Josep
heard that [God] had made a promise to Abra
ham, that He had engaged His word " to the
and to thy seed will I give this land ; " and thoug
in a strange land, and not yet seeing the engage
ment fulfilled, but never faltered even so, bu
so believed as even to " speak of the Exodus, an
to give commandment concerning his bones.
He then not only believed himself, but led o
the rest also to Faith : that having the Exodu
always in mind (for he would not have " give
commandment concerning his bones," unless h
had been fully assured [of this] ), they migl
look for their return [to Canaan].

Wherefore, when some men say, ' See ! Eve
righteous men had care about their sepulchers
let us reply to them, that it was for this reason
for he knew that "the earth is the Lord's and a
that therein is."' (Ps. xxiv. i.) He could m
indeed have been ignorant of this, who lived i
so great philosophy, who spent his whole life i
Egypt. And yet if he had wished, it was poss
ble for him to return, and not to mourn or ve
himself. But when he had taken up his fathi
thither, why did he enjoin them to carry u
thence his own bones also ? Evidently for th
reason.

But what? Tell me, are not the bones
Moses himself laid in a strange land? And thos
of Aaron, of Daniel, of Jeremiah ? And as \
those of the Apostles we do not know whei
those of most of them are laid. For of Pet'
indeed, and Paul, and John, and Thomas, tl
sepulchers are well known ; but those of tl
rest, being so many, have nowhere becon
known.* Let us not therefore lament at i
about this, nor be so little-minded. For wher
ever we may be buried, " the earth is the Lord-


* ffoAuTpOTTO?.

* Kat Tov firj int TOt« auTOts a{rT»;»' avafjiipttv,

* Tii KOTOL. ' TO irXripaina avrov.
s ov6afJiOV yvupifiot yeyovaa^


OMILY XXVI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


483


»d all that therein is." (Ps. xxiv. i.) Cer-

inly what must take place, does take place :

mourn however, and lament, and bewail the

^parted, arises from littleness of mind.

[3] (Ver. 23) "By faith, Moses when he was

)rn, was hid three months of his parents." Dost

ou see that in this case they hoped for things

1 the earth after their death ? ' And many things

ire fulfilled after their death. This is for some

10 say, ' After death those things were done

r them, which they did not obtain while alive ;

)r did they believe [would be] after their

ath.'

Moreover Joseph did not say. He gave not
e land to me in my life-time, nor to my father,
»r to my grandfather, whose excellence too
ght to have been reverenced ; and will He
uchsafe to these wretched people what He
not vouchsafe to them? He said nothing of
this, but by Faith he both conquered and
nt beyond all these things.
He has named Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
cob, Joseph, all illustrious and admirable men.
;ain he makes the encouragement greater, by
inging down the matter to ordinary persons,
that the admirable should feel thus, is noth-
vvonderful, and to appear inferior to them, is
so dreadful : but to show oneself inferior
sn to people without names, this is the dread-
thing. And he begins with the parents of
3ses, obscure persons, who had nothing so
at as their son [had]. Therefore also he
es on to increase the strangeness of what he
n by enumerating even women that were har-
;, and widows. For " by Faith" (he says)
he harlot Rahab perished not with them that
ieved not, when she had received the spies
h peace." And he mentions the rewards not
y of belief but also of unbelief; as in [the
le of] Noah.

But at present we must speak of the parents
Moses. Pharaoh gave orders that all the male
Idren should be destroyed, and none had es-
led the danger. Whence did these expect to
e their child? From faith. What sort of
ith? "They saw" (he says) " that he was a
per child." The very sight drew them on to
,th : thus from the beginning, yea from the
y swaddling-clothes, great was the Grace that
poured out on that righteous man, this be-
not the work of nature. For observe, the
Id immediately on its birth appears fair and
; disagreeable to the sight. Whose [work] was
i? Not that of nature, but of the Grace of
d, which also stirred up and strengthened that


barbarian woman, the Egyptian, and took and
drew her on.

And yet in truth Faith had not a sufficient
foundation in their case. For what was it to be-
lieve from sight? But you (he would say) be-
lieve from facts and have many pledges of Faith.
For " the receiving with joyfulness the spoiling
of their goods" (c. x. 34), and other such
[things], were [evidences] of Faith and of Pa-
tience. But inasmuch as these [Hebrews] also
had believed, and yet afterwards had become
faint-hearted, he shows that the Faith of those
[saints of old] also was long continued,^ as, for
instance, that of Abraham, although the circum-
stances seemed to contend against it.

" And " (he says) " they were not afraid of the
king's commandment," although that was in
operation,' but this [their hope respecting their
child] was simply a kind of bare expectation,
.^nd this indeed was [the act] of his parents ;
but Moses himself what did he contribute ?

[4.] Next again an example appropriate to
them, or rather greater than that. For, saith
he, (ver. 24-26) " by faith Moses when he was
come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season ; esteeming
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt ; * for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward." As though he had
said to them, ' No one of you has left a palace,
yea a splendid palace, nor such treasures ; nor,
when he might have been a king's son, has he
despised this, as Moses did.' And that he did
not simply leave [these things], he expressed
by saying, " he refused," that is, he hated, he
turned away. For when Heaven was set before
him, it was superfluous to admire an Egyptian
Palace.

And see how admirably Paul has put it. He
did not say, ' Esteeming heaven, and the things
in heaven,' ' greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt,' but what ? " The reproach of Christ."
For the being reproached for the sake of Christ
he accounted better than being thus at ease ;
and this itself by itself was reward.

" Choosing rather " (he says) " to suffer afflic-
tion with the people of God." For ye indeed
suffer on your own account, but he " chose " [to
suffer] for others ; and voluntarily threw him-
self into so many dangers, when it was in his
power both to live religiously, and to enjoy good
things.

" Than " (he says) " to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season." He called unwillingness " to


i.e. they hoped that thiough their child, when they were dead,

Promised blessings upon earth (or in the land of Canaan) would

iven. In the next sentence St. Chrys. seems to return to the

ocluct of Joseph, in order to add an observation, which he had

Oii led before.


* ei? iroAu naperfii'tTO. * iKitvo ivrifrytiro.

* AtvvjrTou. This is the approved reading of the sacred text and
of St. Chrys. The common editions have ty AiyiijrT<(», " in Egypt,"
in each ofthe three places where the words recur.


484


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXV:


suffer affliction with the " rest " sin " : this, he
says, [Moses] accounted to be " sin." If then
he accounted it " sin " not to be ready to
" suffer affliction with " the rest, it follows that
the suffering affliction must be a great good ;
since he threw himself into it from the royal
palace.

But this he did, seeing some great things be-
fore him. " Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt."
What is, " the reproach of Christ " ? It is,
being reproached in such ways as ye are, the
reproach which Christ endured ; Or that he
endured for Christ's sake : for " that rock was
Christ"' (i Cor. x. 4) ; the being reproached
as you are.

But what is " the reproach of Christ " ? That
[because] we repudiate the [ways] of our fathers
we are reproached ; that we are evil-entreated
when we have run to God. It was likely that
he also was reproached, when it was said to him,
" Wilt thou kill me as thou killedst the Egyptian
yesterday?" (Ex. ii. 14.) This is "the re-
proach of Christ," to be ill-treated to the end,
and to the last breath : as He Himself was re-
proached and heard, "If Thou be the Son of
God" (Matt, xxvii. 40), from those for whom
He was crucified, from those who were of the
same race. This is " the reproach of Christ "
when a man is reproached by those of his own
family, or by those whom he is benefiting. For
[Moses] also suffered these things from the man
■who had been benefited [by him].

In these words he encouraged them, by show-
ing that even Christ suffered these things, and
Moses also, two illustrious persons. So that this
is rather " the reproach of Christ " than of Moses,
inasmuch as He suffered these things from " His
own." (John i. 11.) But neither did the one
send forth lightnings, nor the Other feel any
[anger] ,^ but He was reviled and endured all
things, whilst they "wagged their heads." (Matt,
xxvii. 39.) Since therefore it was probable that
they [the readers] also would hear such things,
and would long for the Recompense, he says
that even Christ and Moses had suffered the
like. So then ease^ is [the portion] of sin ; but
to be reproached, of Christ. For what then
dost thou wish ? " The reproach of Christ," or
ease?

[S-] (Ver. 27) "By faith he forsook Egypt
not fearing the wrath of the king ; for he endured
as seeing Him who is Invisible." What dost
thou say ? That he did not fear ? And yet the
Scripture says, that when he heard, he "was


^ The later MSS. and common editions add some explanatory
words, thus: " he suffered for Christ's sake when he was reviled in
the matter of the rock, from which he brought out water: and * that
rock ' (he says) * was Christ ' "; they omit the clause next following.


afraid"* (Ex. ii. 14), and for this cause pre
vided for safety by flight, and stole away, ani
secretly withdrew himself; and afterwards h
was exceedingly afraid. Observe the expres
sions with care : he said, " not fearing the wrat
of the king," with reference to his even present
ing himself again. For it would have been [th
part] of one who was afraid, not to undertak
again his championship, nor to have any han
in the matter. That he did however agai
undertake it, was [the part] of one who com
mitted all to God : for he did not say, ' He i
seeking me, and is busy [in the search], and
cannot bear again to engage in this matter.'

So that even flight was [an act of] fait)
Why then did he not remain (you say) ? Th,
he might not cast himself into a foreseen dange
For this finally would have been tempting [God]
to leap into the midst of dangers, and say, ' Lt
us see whether God will save me.' And th
the devil said to Christ, " Cast Thyself down,
(Matt. iv. 6.) Seest thou that it is a diabolic,
thing, to throw ourselves into danger withoi
cause and for no purpose, and to try whethi
God will save us? For he [Moses] could r
longer be their champion when they who wei
receiving benefits were so ungrateful. It woul
therefore have been a foolish and senseless thin
to remain there. But all these things were doni
because, " he endured as seeing Him who
Invisible."

[6.] If then we too always see God with 01
mind, if we always think in remembrance (
Him, all things will appear endurable to us, a
things tolerable ; we shall bear them all easil
we shall be above them all. For if a person sei
ing one whom he loves, or rather, rememberir
him is roused in spirit, and elevated in though
and bears all things easily, while he delights :
the remembrance ; one who has in mind Hi
who has vouchsafed to love us in deed, ar
remembers Him, when will he either feel an i
thing painful, or dread anything fearful or daii
gerous? When will he be of cowardly spiri
Never.

For all things appear to us difficult, becau:
we do not have the remembrance of God as v
ought ; because we do not carry Him abo
alway in our thoughts. For surely He mig
justly say to us, " Thou hast forgotten Me, I al
will forget thee." And so the evil becomes tw
fold, both that we forget Him and He us. F
these two things are involved in each othe
yet are two. For great is the effect of Goc
remembrance, and great also of His being r
membered by us. The result of the one is th
we choose good things ; of the other that \


* See Ex. ii. 14, 15. St. Chrys. is speaking of Moses' &f
after killing the Egyptian.


iOMII.Y XXVI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


485


iccomplish them, and bring them to their end.'
rherefore the prophet says, " 1 will remember
rhee from the land of Jordan, and from the
ittle hill of Hermon." (Ps. xlii. 6.) The
jeople which were in Babylon say this : being
here, I will remember Thee.

[7.] Therefore let us also, as being in Baby-
on, [do the same]. For although we are not
itting among warlike foes, yet we are among
nemies. For some [of them] indeed were
itting as captives, but others did not even feel
heir captivity, as Daniel, as the three children
cf. Ps. cxxxvii. I ) ; who even while they were
n captivity became in that very country more
lorious even than the king who had carried
hem captive. And he who had taken them
aptive does obeisance to ^ the captives.

Dost thou see how great virtue is ? When they
irere in actual captivity he waited on them as
nasters. He therefore was the captive, rather
han they. It would not have been so marvel-
lus if when they were in their native country,
le had come and done them reverence in their
)wn land, or if they had been nilers there. But
he marvelous thing is, that after he had bound
hem, and taken them captive, and had them in
lis own country, he was not ashamed to do them
everence in the sight of all, and to " offer an
iblation."' (Dan. ii. 46.)

Do you see that the really splendid things are
hose which relate to God, whereas human things
re a shadow ? He knew not, it seems, that he
■as leading away masters for himself, and that
iC cast into the furnace those whom he was
bout to worship. But to them, these things
rere as a dream.

Let us fear God, beloved, let us fear [Him] :
van should we be in captivity, we are more
lorious than all men. Let the fear of God be
resent with us, and nothing will be grievous,
ven though thou speak of poverty, or of dis-
ase, or of captivity, or of slavery, or of any
ther grievous thing : Nay even these very
lings will themselves work together for us the
ther way. These men were captives, and the
ing worshiped them : Paul was a tent-maker,
nd they sacrificed to him as a God.

[8.] Here a question arises : Why, you ask,
id the Apostles prevent the sacrifices, and rend
leir clothes, and divert them from their attempt,

id say with earnest lamentation, " What are ye
oing? we also are men of like passions with
ou" (Acts xiv. 15) ; whereas Daniel did noth-
ig of this kind.

For that he also was humble, and referred


^ * Probably this is to be understood according to that said Horn.
i. 5 [sM^rUf pp. 425, 426J of the co-operation of Grace and the hu-
ll will.

* irpoffKvfei, Dan. ii. 46.

* liavaa, Dan. ii. 46, according to the translation of Theodolion,
^id the Vatican MS. The Alex, has ftafva, as has one MS. of St.

(hrys.


[the] glory to God no less than they, is evident
from many places. Especially indeed is it evi-
dent, from the very fact of his being beloved by
God. For if he had appropriated to himself
the honor belonging to God, He would not have
suffered him to live, much less to be in honor.
Secondly, because even with great openness he
said, " And as to me, O King, this secret hath
not been revealed to me through any wisdom
that is in me." (Dan. ii. 30.) And again; he
was in the den for God's sake, and when the
prophet brought him food, he saith, " For God
hath remembered me." (Bel and the Dragon,
ver. 38.) Thus humble and contrite was he.

He was in thd den for God's sake, and yet he
counted himself unworthy of His remembrance,
and of being heard. Yet we though daring [to
commit] innumerable pollutions, and being of all
men most polluted, if we be not heard at our
first prayer, draw back. Truly, great is the dis-
tance between them and us, as ^reat as between
heaven and earth, or if there be any greater.

What sayest thou? After so many achieve-
ments, after the miracle which had been wrought
in the den, dost thou account thyself so humble ?
Yea, he says ; for what things soever we have
done, "we are unprofitable servants." (Luke
xvii. 10.) Thus by anticipation did he fulfill the
evangelical precept, and accounted himself noth-
ing. For " God hath remembered me," he said.
His prayer again, of how great lowliness of mind
it is full. And again the three children said
thus, " We have sinned, we have committed ini-
quity." (Song of the Three Children, ver. 6.)
And everywhere they show their humility.

And yet Daniel had occasions innumerable
for being puffed up ; but he knew that these
also came to him on account of his noi being
puffed up, and he did not destroy his treasure.
For among all men, and in the whole world he
was celebrated, not only * because the king cast
himself on his face and offered sacrifice to him,
and accounted him to be a God, who was him-
self honored as God in all parts of the world :
for he ruled over the whole [earth] ; (and this
is evident from Jeremiah. " Who putteth on
the earth," saith he, " as a garment." (See Jer.
xliii. 12 and Ps. civ. 2.) And again, " I have
given it to Nebuchadnezzar My servant " (Jer.
xxvii. 6), and again from what he [the King]
says in his letter) .' And because he was held
in admiration not only in the place where he
was, but everywhere, and was greater than if the
rest of the nations had been present and seen
him ; when even by letters [the King] confessed
his submission ° and the miracle. But yet again
for his wisdom he was also held in admiration,


* The apodosis seems to be, " But yet again for his wisdom," &c.,
which comes after some parentheses.

^ See Dan. iv. i, &c. * rgy fi«vA«ta*'.


486


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX


for it is said, "Art thou wiser than Daniel?"
(Ezek. xxviii. 3.) And after all these things he
was thus humble, dying ten thousand times for
the Lord's sake.

Why then, you ask, being so humble did he
not repel either the adoration which was paid
him by the king, or the offerings?

[9.] This I will not say, for it is sufficient for
me simply to mention the question, and the rest
I leave to you, that at least in this way I may
stir up your thoughts. (This however I conjure
you, to choose all things for the fear of God,
having such examples ; and because in truth we
shall obtain the things here also, if we sincerely
lay hold on the things which are to come.) For
that he did not do this out of arrogance, is evi-
dent from his saying, " Thy gifts be to thyself."
(Dan. V. 17.)

For besides this also again is another question,
how while in words he rejected it, in deed he
received the honor, and wore the chain ' [of
gold]. (Dan. v. 29.)

Moreover while Herod on hearing the cry " It
is the voice of a god and not of a man," inas-
much as " he gave not God the glory, burst in
sunder, and all his bowels gushed out " (Acts
xii. 22, 23 ; see i. 18), this man received to him-
self even the honor belonging to God, not words
only.

However it is necessary to say what this is.
In that case [at Lystra] the men were falling
into greater idolatry, but in this [of Daniel] not
so. How? For his being thus accounted of,
was an honor to God. Therefore he said in
anticipation, " And as to me, not through any
wisdom that is in me." (Dan. ii. 30.) And be-
sides he does not even appear to have accepted
the offerings. For he [the king] said (as it is
written) that they should offer sacrifice, but it
did not appear that the act followed. But there
[at Lystra] they carried it even to sacrificing
the bulls, and "they called" the one "Jupiter
and " the other " Mercurius." (Acts xiv. 12.)

The chain [of gold] then he accepted, that
he might make himself known ; the offering


however why does it not appear that he rejec
it ? For in the other case too they did not
it, but they attempted it, and the Apostles h
dered them ; wherefore here also he ought
once to have rejected [the adoration]. A
there it was the entire people : here the Ki
Why he did not divert him [Daniel] expres;
by anticipation, [viz.] that [the king] was ;
making an offering [to him] as to a God, to
overthrow of religious worship, but for the gres
wonder. How so? It was on God's acco
that [Nebuchadnezzar] made the deer
wherefore [Daniel] did not mutilate' the he
[offered]. But those others [at Lystra] did
act thus, but supposed them to be indeed gt
On this account they were repelled.

And here, after having done him reverei
he does these things : for he did not revere
him as a God, but as a wise man.

But it is not clear that he made the offeri
and even if he did make it, yet not that it
with Daniel's acceptance.

And what [of this], that he called him " Be
shazzar, the name of" his own "god "?' T
[it seems] they accounted their gods to be nc
ing wonderful, when he called even the cap
thus ; he who commands all men to worship
image,* manifold and of various colors, and 1
adores the dragon."

Moreover the Babylonians were much n:
foolish than those at Lystra. Wherefore it
not possible at once to lead them on to t
And many [more] things one might say :
thus far these suffice.

If therefore we wish to obtain all good thi:
let us seek the things of God. For as they ■
seek the things of this world fail both of tl
and of the others, so they who prefer the th:
of God, obtain both. Let us then not seek tl
but those, that we may attain also to the g
things promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, 1
whom to the Father together with the F
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for (
and world without end. Amen.


> See Dan. iv. 8.


* Ban, iii. i, &c.

B Bel and the Dragon 24.


iOMILY XXVII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


487


HOMILY XXVII.


Hebrews xi. 28-31.


Through faith, he kept the Passover and the sprinkling
of blood, lest he that destroyed the first-born should
touch them. By faith they passed through the Red
Sea, as by dry land; which the Egyptians assaying
to do, were drowned.' By faith, the walls of Jericho
fell down, after they had been compassed aljout
seven days. By faith, the harlot Rahab perished
not with them that believed not, when she had re-
ceived the spies with peace."

[i.] Paul is wont to establish many things

icidently, and is very full" of thoughts. For

en uch is the grace of The Spirit. He does not

re: omprehend a few ideas in a multitude of words,

ut includes great and manifold thought in

riijirevity of expressions. Observe at least how,

I a the midst' of exhortation, and when discours-

ig about faith, of what a type and mystery

e reminds us, whereof we have the reality.

Through faith " (he says) " he kept the Pass-

acjver and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that

estroyed the first-born should touch them."

But what is "the sprinkling of blood "?* A

iitmbwas slain in every household, and the blood

'as smeared on the door-posts, and this was a

aieans of warding off the Egyptian destruction.

f then the blood of a lamb preserved the Jews

nhurt in the midst of the Egyptians, and under

3 great a destruction, much more will the blood

f Christ save us, who have had it sprinkled''

nil ot on the door-posts, but in our souls. For

1 van now also the Destroyer is going about in

i lis depth of night : but let us be armed with

■is-iat Sacrifice. (He calls the "sprinkling"^

nointing.) For God has brought us out from

Igypt, from darkness, from idolatry.

Although what was done, was nothing, what

H'as achieved was great. For what was done

i 'as blood ; but was achieved, was salvation, and

ie stopping, and preventing of destruction.

'he angel feared the blood ; for he knew of

'hat it was a Type ; he shuddered, thinking on

le Lord's death; therefore he did not touch

le door-posts.

Moses said. Smear, and they smeared, and

'ere confident. And you, having the Blood of

^e Lamb Himself, are ye not confident?

[2.] " By faith, they passed through the Red
'Ca as by dry land." Again he compares one
'hole people with another, lest they should say,
'e cannot be as the saints.


* *"TeirovTtfffl7)(rai' is the reading adopted by Mr. Field, but Kart-
o9i)(rav, " swallowed up," seems to be the reading of his MSS. See
IS arinotation. 2 n-u^rbs.

«v Tdfei. 4 irp6<T\vtrtv,

fvtj^pLOiitvovv, " been anointed with it."

irpM-x"'""'. the word used by St. Paul, which we translate
spnnkluig."


" By faith " (he says) " they passed through
the Red Sea, as by dry land, which the Egyptians
assaying to do, were drowned." Here he leads
them also to a recollection of the sufferings in
Egypt.

How, " by faith " ? Because they had hoped
to pass through the sea, and therefore they
prayed : or rather it was Moses who prayed.
Seest thou that everywhere Faith goes beyond
human reasonings, and weakness and lowliness?
Seest thou that at the same time they both be-
lieved, and feared punishment, both in the blood
on the doors, and in the Red Sea?

And he made it clear that it was [really]
water, through those that fell into it, and were
choked ; that it was not a mere appearance :
but as in the case of the lions those who were
devoured proved the reality of the facts, and in
the case of the fiery furnace, those who were
burnt ; so here also thou seest that the same
things become to the one a cause of salvation '
and glory, and to the other of destruction.

So great a good is Faith. And when we fall
into perplexity, then are we delivered, even
though we come to death itself, even though our
condition be desperate. For what else was left
[for them] ? They were unarmed, compassed
about by the Egyptians and the sea ; and they
must either be drowned if they fled, or fall into
the hands of the Egyptians. But nevertheless
[He] saved them from impossibilities. That
which was spread under the one as land, over-
whelmed the others as sea. In the former case
it forgot its nature : in the latter it even armed
itself against them. (Cf Wisd. xix. 20.)

[3.] " By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down,
after they had been compassed about for seven
days." For assuredly the sound of trumpets is
not able to throw down stones, though one blow
for ten thousand years ; but Faith can do all
things.

Seest thou that in all cases it is not by natural
sequence, nor yet by any law of nature that it
was changed, but all is done contrary to expec-
tation? Accordingly in this case also all is done
contrary to expectation. For inasmuch as he
had said again and again, that we ought to trust
to the future hopes, he introduced all this argu-
ment with reason, showing that not now [only],
but even from the beginning all the miracles
have been accomplished and achieved by means
of it.

" By faith, the harlot Rahab perished not with


irpoi <rwTiipia«.


488


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


tHoMiLY XX^


them that believed not, having received the spies
with peace." It would then be disgraceful, if
you should appear more faithless even than a
harlot. Yet she [merely] heard what the men
related, and forthwith believed. Whereupon the
end also followed ; for when all perished, she
alone was preserved. She did not say to her-
self, I shall be with my many friends.' She did
not say, Can I possibly be wiser than these judi-
cious men who do not believe, — and shall I
believe ? She said no such thing, but believed
what had taken place," which it was likely that
they would suffer.

[4.] (Ver. 32) "And what shall I more say?
For the time would fail me to tell." After this
he no longer puts down the names ; but having
ended with an harlot, and put them to shame
by the quality of the person, he no longer en-
larges on the histories, lest he should be thought
tedious. However he does not set them aside,
but runs over them, [doing] both very judi-
ciously, avoiding satiety, and not spoiling the
closeness of arrangement ; he was neither alto-
gether silent, nor did he speak so as to annoy ;
for he effects both points. For when a man is
contending vehemently [in argument], if he per-
sist in contending, he wearies out the hearer,
annoying him when he is already persuaded, and
gaining the reputation of vain ambitiousness.
For he ought to accommodate himself to what
is expedient.

" And what do I more say " (he says) ? " For
the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of
Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthah, of David
also and Samuel, and of the prophets."

Some find fault with Paul, because he puts
Barak, and Samson, and Jephthah in these places.
What sayest thou ? After having introduced the
harlot, shall he not introduce these? For do
not tell me of the rest of their life, but only
whether they did not believe and shine in Faith.

"And the prophets," he says, (ver. 33) "who
through faith subdued kingdoms." Thou seest
that he does not here testify to their life as being
illustrious ; for this was not the point in ques-
tion : but the enquiry thus far was about their
faith. For tell me whether they did not accom-
plish all by faith ?

"By faith," he says, "they subdued king-
doms ; " those with Gideon. " Wrought right-
eousness ; " who? The same. Plainly he means
here, kindness.'

I think it is of David that he says " they ob-
tained promises." But of what sort were these?
Those in which He said that his " seed should
sit upon " his " throne." (Ps. cxxxii. 12.)


' ft€T tflUV.

* Toic yevofiivoif ; probably the destruction of the Egyptians and
the Amontes, &c., Josn. ii. lo. The common texts have roU \tyo-


" Stopped the mouths of lions," (ver.
" quenched the violence of fire, escaped
edge of the sword." See how they were
death itself, Daniel encompassed by the lie
the three children abiding in the furnace,
Israelites,'* Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, in di\
temptations ; and yet not even so did they
spair. For this is Faith ; when things are ti;
ing out adversely, then we ought to believe *
nothing adverse is done, but all things in ■
order.

" Escaped the edge of the sword." I tl
that he is again speaking of the three childn

" Out of weakness were made strong." I
he alludes to what took place at their re
from Babylon. For " out of weakness," is
of captivity. When the condition of the
had now become desperate, when they wen
better than dead bones, who could have expe^
that they would return from Babylon, and
return only, but also " wax valiant " and "
to flight armies of aliens"? 'But to us,' s
one says," ' no such thing has happened.'
these are figures of " the things to come."

(Ver. 35) " Women received their dead rai
to life again." He here speaks of what occu'
in regard to the prophets, Elisha, [and] Eli
for they raised the dead.

[5.] (Ver. 35) "And others were tortui
not accepting deliverance, that they might
tain a better resurrection." But we have
obtained a Resurrection. I am able howt
he means, to show that they also were cut
and did "not accept [deliverance], that
might obtain a better resurrection." For
tell me, when it was open to them to live,
they not choose it ? Were they not evidi
looking for a better hfe? And they who
raised up others, themselves chose to di«
order " to obtain a better resurrection," not
as the children of those women.*

Here I think he alludes both to John an
James. For beheading is called " torturir,
It was in their power still to behold the sun
was in their power to abstain from reprov
[sinners], and yet they chose to die ; even,
who had raised others chose to die themsei
" that they might obtain a better resurrectici

(Ver. 36) " And others had trial of
mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of b
and imprisonment." He ends with these;
things that come nearer home. For these


* i.e. " when crossing the Red Sea." Field.

* oirb, " from " or " after."

* i.e. some Hebrew Christian.
' aiTOTV/MwaviffGrjaav.

* The children of the widow of Sarcpta, and the Shunami
been brought back to continue this life of temptation and sort
was a " better " kind of " Resurrection " which the prophets
to obtain themselves.

® aiT0TviJ.navttrti6^. For instances of this meaning of th< on
see Mr. Field's annot.

w f\€y(ai, the word used of St. John Baptist reproving nx
Luke iii. 19.


lOMILY XXVIl.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


489


mples] especially bring consolation, when the
istress is from the same cause, since even if you
e lention something more extreme, yet unless it
from the same cause, you have effected
othing. Therefore he concluded his discourse
'ith this, mentioning " bonds, imprisonments,
:ourges, stonings," alluding to the case of Ste-
t hen, also to that of Zacharias.

Wherefore he added, " They were slain with

le sword." What sayest thou ? Some "escaped

le edge of the sword," and some " were slain

ti y the sword." (Ver. 34.) What is this? Which

[f est thou praise ? Which dost thou admire ?

Ifhe latter or the former ? Nay, he says : the

ei)rraer indeed, is appropriate to you, and the

jittter, because Faith was strong even unto death

jself, and it is a type of things to come. For

reiie wonderful quahties of Faith are two, that it

eijoth accomplishes great things, and suffers great

ijiings, and counts itself to suffer nothing.

And thou canst not say (he says) that these

ere sinners and worthless. For even if you

|ut the whole world against them, I find that

[ley weigh down the beam and are of greater

•lue.' What then were they to receive in this

"e ? Here he raises up their thoughts, teaching

ihem not to be riveted to things present, but to

jiind'^ things greater than all that are in this

-:i resent life, since the " world is not worthy " of

:! lem. What then dost thou wish to receive

t ire ? For it were an insult to thee, shouldst thou

« sceive thy reward here.

cit [6.] Let us not then mind" worldly things,

;; )r seek our recompense here, nor be so beg-

:r irly. For if " the " whole "world is not wor-

t ly of" them, why dost thou seek after a part of

i ? And with good reason ; for they are friends

:, "God.

J Now by " the world " does he mean here the

;i;ople, or the creation itself? Both: for the

;ripture is wont to use the word of both. If

a e whole creation, he would say, with the human

Jings that belong to it, were put in the balance,
ey yet would not be of equal value with these ;
Ml id with reason. For as ten thousand measures
..-J' chaff and hay would not be of equal value to
;sj n pearls, so neither they ; for " better is one
'"■t doeth the will of the Lord, than ten thou-
i transgressors" (Ecclus. xvi. 3) ;* meaning
ten thousand" not [merely] many, but an
lite multitude.
Consider of how great value is the righteous
an. Joshua the son of Nun said, " Let the sun
md still at Gibeon, the moon at the valley of
om" (Josh. X. 12), and it was so. Let then
•>vhole world come, or rather two or three, or
, or ten, or twenty worlds, and let them say


rj


rhc common texts add the explanatory words, " For this cause
:e said, ' Of whom the world was not worthy.' "

* 'bfioruiitv^ * See above, p. 475, note 3.


and do this ; yet shall they not be able. But the
friend of God commanded the creatures of his
Friend, or rather he besought his Friend, and the
servants yielded, and he below gave command
to those above. Seest thou that these things are
for service fulfilling their appointed course ?

This was greater than the [miracles] of Moses.
Why (I ask) ? Because it is not a like thing to
command the sea and the heavenly [bodies] . For
that indeed was also a great thing, yea very great,
nevertheless it was not at all equal [to the other].

Why was this? The name of Joshua [Jesus],'
was a type. For this reason then, and because
of the very name, the creation reverenced him.
What then ! Was no other person called Jesus ?
[Yes] ; but this man was on this account so
called in type ; for he used to be called Hoshea.
Therefore the name was changed : for it was a
prediction and a prophecy. He brought in the
people into the promised land, as Jesus [does]
into heaven ; not the Law ; since neither did
Moses [bring them in], but remained without.
The Law has not power to bring in, but grace.
Seest thou the types which have been before
sketched out from the beginning? He laid his
commands on the creation, or rather, on the
chief part of the creation, on the very head it-
self as he stood below ; that so when thou seest
Jesus in the form of Man saying the same, thou
mayest not be disturbed, nor think it strange.
He, even while Moses was living, turned back
wars. Thus, even while the Law is living. He
directs ' all things ; but not openly.

[7.] But let us consider how great is the vir-
tue of the saints. If here they work such things,
if here they do such things, as the angels do,
what then above? How great is the splendor
they have ?

Perhaps each of you might wish to be such as
to be able to command the sun and moon. (At
this point what would they say who assert that
the heaven is a sphere ? ' For why did he not
[merely] say, " Let the sun stand still," but
added " Let the sun stand still at the valley of
Elom," that is, he will make the day longer?
This was done also in the time of Hezekiah.
The sun went back. This again is more wonder-
ful than the other, to go the contrary way, not
having yet gone round his course.)

We shall attain to greater things than these if
we will. For what has Christ promised us ? Not
that we shall make the sun stand still, or the
moon, nor that the sun shall retrace his steps,
but what ? "I and the Father will come unto
him," He says, " and We will make our abode
with him." (John xiv. 23.) What need have I


* [The two names being the same in Greek. Cf. H^«. iv. 8,
'Iriaovi. — F- G.l * naipttj..

' SiotKci; so TertuHian in the well-known words: .^<f». /^rax. i6,
8 See above, p. 314.


490


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX\


of the sun and the moon, and of these wonders,
when the Lord of all Himself comes down and
abides with me ? I need these not For what
need I any of these things ? He Himself shall
be to me for Sun and for Light. For, tell me,
if thou hadst entered into a palace, which wouldst
thou choose, to be able to re-arrange some of
the things which have been fixed there, or so to
make the king a familiar friend, as to p)ersuade
him to take up his abode with thee ? Much rather
the latter than the former.

[8.] But what wonder is it, says some one,
that what a man commands, Christ should also ?
But Christ (you say) needs not the Father, but
acts of His own authority, you say. Well. There-
fore first confess and say, that he needs not the
Father, and acts of His own authority : and then
I will ask thee, whether His prayer is not in the
way of condescension and arrangement (for
surely Christ was not inferior to Joshua the son
of Nun), and that He might teach us? For as,
when thou hearest a teacher lisping,' and saying
over the alphabet, thou dost not say that he is
ignorant ; and when he asks, \VTiere is such a
letter? thou knowest that he does not ask in
ignorance, but because he wishes to lead on the
scholar ; in like manner Christ also did not make
His prayer as needing prayer, but desiring to
lead thee on, that thou mayest continually apply
thyself to prayer, that thou mayest do it with-
out ceasing, soberly, and with great watchfulness.

.■\nd by watching, I do not mean, merely the
rising at night, but also the being sober' in our
prayers during the day. For such an one is
called watchful.' Since it is possible both in
praying by night to be asleep, and in praying
by day to be awake, when the soul is stretched
out towards God, when it considers with whom it
holds converse, to whom its words are addressed,
when it has in mind that angels stand by with
fear and trembling, while he approaches gaping
and scratching himself.

[9.] Prayer is a mighty weapion if it be made
wi& suitable mind. .\nd that thou mayest learn
its strength, continued entreaty has overcome
shamelessness, and injustice, and savage cruelty,
and overbearing rashness. For He says, " Hear
what the unjust judge saith." (Luke xviii. 6.)
Again it has overcome sloth also, and what
friendship did not effect, this continued entreaty
did : and " although he will not give him because
he is his friend " (He says), " yet because of his
importunity he will rise and give to him." ( Luke
xi. 8.) And continued assiduity made her worthy
who was unworthy. " It is not meet " (He says)
" to take the children's bread and to cast it to
the dogs. Yea ! Lord ' " she says, " for even
the dogs eat [the crumbs] from their master's


* amiMnai .


•piifUF.


table." (Matt. xv. 26, 27.) Let us apply c
selves to Prayer. It is a mighty weapon if it
offered with earnestness, if without vainglor}-
with a sincere mind. It has turned back w:
it has benefited an entire nation though un
serving. " I have heard their groaning " (
says) "and am come down to deliver thei
(.\cts \ni. 34.) It is itself a saving medici
and has power to prevent sins, and to heal n
deeds. In this the desolate widow was assi
ous. (i Tim. V. 5.)

If then we pray with humility, smiting
breast as the publican, if we utter what he <
if we say, " Be mercifial to me a sinner " (L
xviii. 13), we shall obtain all. For though
be not publicans, yet have we other sins not
than his.

For do not tell me, that thou hast gone wT'
in some small matter [only], since the thing t
the same nature. For as a man is equally ca 1
a homicide whether he has killed a child c t
man, so also is he called overreaching whet t
he be overreaching in much or in little.
and to remember injuries too, is no smal.
ter, but even a great sin. For it is said, " i
wa)'s of those who remember injuries [tei }
to death." (Prov. xii. 28, LXX.) And " e
that is angry with his brother without a cai :,
shall be in danger of hell," and he that " cal h
his brother a fool " (Matt. v. 22), and sensel ■
and numberless such things.

But we partake even of the tremendous n
teries unworthily, and we envy, and we re\
.\nd some of us have eren oftentimes b 0
drunk. But each one of these things, even :-
self by itself, is enough to cast us out of e
kingdom, and when they even come all togetl r,
what comfort shall we have ? We need m f
penitence, beloved, much prayer, much ent *•
ance, much perseverance, that we may be 1-
abled to attain the good things which have b (1
promised to us. ■

[10.] Let us then say, even we, " Be mere 1
to me a sinner," nay rather, let us not sa t
only, but let us also be thus minded ; and sht 1
another call us so, let us not be angry. ;
heard the words, " I am not as this Public; '
(Luke xviii. 11), and was not provoked then ,
but filled with compunction. He accepted t
reproach, and he put away the reproach. ' :
other sp>oke of the wound, and he sought t
medicine. Let us say then, " Be mercifiil to i
a sinner" (Luke xviii. 13) ; but even if ano' r
should so call us, let us not be indignant.

But if we say ten thousand evil things of <
selves, and are vexed when we hear them f |ii
others, then there is no longer humility, >r
confession, but ostentation and vainglory.
it ostentation (you say) to call one's self a
ner ? Yes ; for we obtain the credit of humi^,


T xxvnL]


HOMIUES ON HEBREWS.


49<


are ad»Hed.«care
r «« jUT dft onatniy of (wRid«t\ «« «i« de>
pixvi. ' So ^bat «e do Ais «oo for the sake of
It. Bat «lat is kMafi^? It is «ltta «»>
:: threr KTiles o^ to bew it; to ttnowlediie our
M)t. to endue evil sjiffcings. And m even
w-.Mild not be [a wuk] of bmili^ bat of
lv\'. Bat amr we cdl qiMsdw& limnrr^ «n>
I wthy. and ten tfwwaind o4«r smr^ wmw^ bM
^ ranotiKrapphroneofdM«tow^«e«ie>w(ed,
le Nrv-xMne »v*$«. 9eesft tlna tiat dtis b n«>t
an^r<«^oo. nor ^ven candor? Tbon sikklst of
Iqfseif thstt tbrni ait snch an one : be not in-
!^^-: if dmn heucst it abo said If otbei^

> «r»r thy sios wt wade %bm for tiiee,

dK^:-. others WiwMch thee: fortbqrbyaibiMdeo

tk nv^ch-vs ioik^vi twt thee dterleaM oamovis

c> }\v.Ki8ophy. H<s»r what d«e Vnkssed l\i\>i

i i|i^ when Stkunei oused biM^ <* Let bun alone "^

bitvqrs) '■tbe Loid badi bidden biM» that He

(besigfs) : "And


i*loQk<


thfe Loid mB (eq(«i(e «ne food for bb <
dds daxr/' (t Saa. sm> (i, it.)

But dxw while sayiac «ni tMafs of divsd^
e««i in «KCss if Aon IwaNaft not fioai otbws
the coaaaaendatMHB thtt ai« dne to tbe sMHt
n^teoo^uteantdL Seest tbon dat tbon ait
tniKacvidi dilafs VH*aie no sal^ects for triMnf ?
Par we e««n nnadiMe panes in onr desne for
Qtbcr pmbcs daft we wagr obtain j«t bj|ber
nanftmic^ dak we «ay be WMe ardnwed. So
that whwa we decBne to accept co— cndndoit
we do it Aat we aaay imient tbewk Andal
tbincs aie done byns for aedittMt for tmdk
Tbeiefoiealtbiagiaiebolow,aMiayncticnble>
Wbwtfow. I bewedh yon now at aajr nfee to
widtdnw froMi dns MMdar of evil^ iwiiatfoiy»
ant.! to live arxoidiaf to wlaft is i^pioved bv
tVod. dtat so y«n may «ttwa to die good things
Kt ixxnc. in Chitst jesus our Loidt widi wboM
to the F«th<T he skiy. KX($ether widi His Holy
aih) $001) $)>(rit, now'wd ever and weild wMioat
send. Aaaen.


HOMILY XXVIII.


Hbhhews sk 3T» )&


|T>


-Jif tk 4tfMftlkMl4
.*««»«( Am «Midk'*


\T aU times indeed, but e^pecialhr dken

Tv:^e«k npon the ncbie'vewante of da

A cv>«n«s over ne to fod dtapondencr

J wf ovm cvtndition.* bc«a«se we batx-

t in dkeams ex|>ene»c<\l the thin^ ainw^

those M«k spent their whote hxx^ (kh

the pefaItT <«f »«$. but al««|^ «k>in^

' axK) \>^t »l«r»\^ AlMiv^tevl

' c«n$tdeT. I beseech y«t»» E^j«h» to wbonn

vlKacouisx' has CMM iQwwl to^by* fi» ^

vVf him in this passaMk wd in biin bb

Rxptes ethl ^ whi<^ [eKMMpRj watsapuQMiMe

I th<-.r cttse^ Anvt hwdaf spoMftof wlwt VefoN

\'\^^ dMt '' thty weie dain with the

^vMdi'*bt tQ«tbndtac*^toEX>

^T«d dte sane diiat* wMt daakv

Ktn$$ i. &) Fttr since it was pmbdble

if w^mKI not as wt hoht the Apcadts in

esdmafetoi^ he NntyFs hi$ cxh^vtation

[ ftoaa biw wba bad been taken

I Hen>rak] a»d«bAw«s b«iM in ipe<M

stiosv


For "dier w«ndered aboot* fbe Skv«) **in
sheepr-dtia^' and <>Mt>«kvM^ bMHf dcaMMMw
attKted, tonnentevt* of wboaa Ais wqM was
not wvwthy.'*

lltev hkl not even rume«t» be sajc% tbioatb
die emess of atttctkMk no dty. no bMo^ no
fodf^ptsice i da SMoe wbidi Ooist wMt «*bM
th<^ Son of Man badt not where to by nSisbind.*'
vMatt. viS. to.) Why ^»o I say ** no Mgiaf
|4*c< "> No stMidHiif-plitc^ ; ^>r not even when
thev hjKt ^nei) the wiMemes^ were they at lest.
For he sakl nv>t. Ittey sat down in the wadk«a«v
bat ex-en when they vww theie, they ted. and
were vltix-en thence, not iHtt of the inhabited
woihi vwhr. but even oat of that which was wain-
babitabteJ And he lewMs daaa of the )4*t«s
whHethty were sett and «f thtefs whkb thMe
baWi Qneaaj.

Tlwh next, he say% they V»i»s «c«ve*ttens
afsiMt yoa ior t.'btiift^ atkft. Wlat aocvsa^on
ba^) thev a$aiiHk GISiK «b«n Ai^ drtwe bim
out. and i^ersecond Mn. and coipafcd hka to
MN«I^ widi foNtee? Wddh thtse CHebNws]
weredtMMlltoiafx At )«Mt« da biethietk k is
said, dteMkd to SMkd tiefienta dnae of the ^)i^^
cteltswhoweieattictedv *nSveiy aaan acvcMd-
)i« to bis nbiii:^ detenniktd to SHHd i^ief «M»


492


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX'


the brethren that dwelt in Judea " (Acts xi. 29),
which was [the case] of these also.

" Tormented " [or " ill-treated "], he says ;
that is, suffering distress, in joumeyings, in
dangers.

But "They wandered about," what is this?
" Wandering," he says, " in deserts and in moun-
tains and in dens and caves of the earth,"
like exiles and outcasts, as persons taken in the
basest [of crimes] , as those not worthy to see
the sun, they found no refuge from the wilder-
ness, but must always be flying, must be seeking
hiding-places, must bury themselves alive in the
earth, always be in terror.

[2.] What then is the reward of so great a
change ? ' What is the recompense ?

They have not yet received it, but are still
waiting ; and after thus dying in so great tribu-
lation, they have not yet received it. They
gained their victory so many ages ago, and have
not yet received [their reward]. And you who
are yet in the conflict, are you vexed ?

Do you also consider what a thing it is, and
how great, that Abraham should be sitting, and
the Apostle Paul, waiting till thou hast been per-
fected, that then they may be able to receive
their reward. For the Saviour has told them
before that unless we also are present, He will
not give it them. As an affectionate father might
say to sons who were well approved, and had
accomplished their work, that he would not give
them to eat, unless their brethren came. And
art thou vexed, that thou hast not yet received
the reward ? What then shall Abel do, who was
victor before all, and is sitting uncrowned ? And
what Noah ? And what, they who lived in those
[early] times : seeing that they wait for thee
and those after thee ?

Dost thou see that we have the advantage of
them? For "God" (he says) "has provided
some better thing for us." In order that they
might not seem to have the advantage of us
from being crowned before us. He appointed
one time of crowning for all ; and he that gained
the victory so many years before, receives his
crown with thee. Seest thou His tender care-
fulness ?

And he did not say, " that they without us
might not be crowned," but "that they with-
out us might not be made perfect " ; so that at
that time they appear perfect also. They were
before us as regards the conflicts, but are not
before us as regards the crowns. He wronged
not them, but He honored us. For they also
wait for the brethren. For if we are " all one
body," the pleasure becomes greater to this
body, when it is crowned altogether, and not
part by part. For the righteous are also worthy


1 aiLOiprfs, i.e. the accepting sufferings instead of an easy life.


of admiration in this, that they rejoice in
welfare of their brethren, as in their own.
that for themselves also, this is accordin{
their wish, to be crowned along with their
members. To be glorified all together,
great delight.

[3.] (C. xii. i) "Wherefore" (he s
" we also being compassed about with so g
a cloud of witnesses." In many places
Scripture derives its consolation in evils i
corresponding things. As when the pro
says, " From burning heat, and from storm,
rain." (Isa. iv. 6.) This at least he says
also, that the memory of those holy men
establishes and recovers the soul which had
weighed down by woes, as a cloud does him
is burnt by the too hot rays [of the sun].

And he did not say, "lifted on high a
us," but, "compassing us about," which
more than the other ; so that we are in gn
security.

What sort of " cloud " ? "A load of
nesses."^ With good reason he calls not
in the New [Testament] only, but those in
Old also, "witnesses" [or "martyrs"],
they also were witnesses to the greatnes;
God, as for instance, the Three Children, tl
with Elijah, all the prophets.

"Laying aside all things." "AH":
That is, slumber, indifference, mean reasoni
all human things.

"And the sin which doth [so] easily I
us " ; (.vTTipiaTaTov, that is either, " which a
circumvents us," or " what can easily be ciri
vented," ' but rather this latter. For it is
if we will, to overcome sin.

" Let us run with patience " (he says)
race that is set before us." He did not say
us contend as boxers, nor. Let us wrestle,.
Let us do battle : but, what was lightest oi
the [contest] of the foot-race, this has'
brought forward. Nor yet did he say, Ixi
add to the length of the course ; but, Ld
continue patiently in this, let us not faint,
us run " (he says) " the race that is set bi'
us."

[4.] In the next place as the sum and
stance of his exhortation, which he puts
first and last, even Christ. (Ver. 2) " Look-
(he says) " unto Jesus the Author and Fin
of our Faith " ; The very thing which C
Himself also continually said to His disci
" If they have called the Master of the 1:


' fiaprvpaty o-yKov. St. Chrys. connects oyjcoi' with fs-a
and takes Travra as a neuter plural ; the words of the Apostle,

TOV f\OVTt<i TTtDl.K€ifJ.fVOV JlfJ-tV V€lftO^, flapTVpUV OyKOV , alTO*

TrdvTa, he would understand thus, " Seeing we are compassec
with so great a cloud, a load of witnesses, let us lay aside all tl
&c. [But previously he has connected v/ith yett>o^, so t^
present connection with oy'coi' was probably au afterthought
spur of the moment. -^ F. G.]
^ ntpiaToatt' nadtiv.


XI Homily XXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


493


Beelzebub, how much more them of His house-
hold?" (Matt. X. 25.) And again, " The disciple
is not above his Master, nor the servant above
his Lord." (Matt. x. 24.)

"Looking" (he says), that is, that we may
learn to run. For as in all arts and games, we
impress the art upon our mind by looking to our
masters, receiving certain rules through our sight,
so here also, if we wish to run, and to learn to
run well, let us look to Christ, even to Jesus
the author and finisher of our faith." What is
this? He has put the Faith within us. For He
said to His disciples, " Ye have not chosen Me,
but I have chosen you" (John xv. 16); and
Paul too says, " But then shall I know, even as
also I have been known."' (i Cor. xiii. 12.)
He put the Beginning into us, He will also put
on the End.

" Who," he says, " for the joy that was set

before Him, endured the Cross, despising the

shame." That is, it was in His power not to

suffer at all, if He so willed. For " He did no

sin, neither was guile found in His mouth " ( i

Pet. ii. 22) ; as He also says in the Gospels,

"The Prince of the world cometh and hath

nothing in Me." (John xiv. 30.) It lay then

^ in His power, if so He willed, not to come to

the Cross. For, " I have power," He says, " to

J lay down My life, and I have power to take it

.: again." (John x. 18.) If then He who was

" under no necessity of being crucified, was cruci-

. \ fied for our sake, how much more is it right that

■ . we should endure all things nobly !

"„ "Who for the joy that was set before Him"

, (he says) " endured the cross, despising the

shame." But what is, " Despising the shame "?

, He chose, he means, that ignominious death.
'[^ For suppose that He died. Why [should He]
■":'also [die] ignominiously ? For no other reason,

'.;but to teach us to make no account of glory
..". from men. Therefore though under no obliga-
1" don He chose it, teaching us to be bold against
, It, and to set it at nought. Why did he say not

, ' pain," but " shame " ? Because it was not with

, pain^ that He bore these things.

What then is the end ? " He is set down at

.j ;he right hand of the throne of God." Seest

;hou the prize which Paul also says in an epistle,

. ' Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him,
.;^ ind given Him a Name which is above every

■ |, lame, that at the Name of Jesus Christ every
. . mee should bow." (Phil. ii. 9, 10.) He speaks
■;~|| n respect to the flesh.' Well then, even if there

*ere no prize, the example would suffice to per-
suade us to accept all [such] things. But now
'/■ Drizes also are set before us, and these no com-
•'; mon ones, but great and unspeakable.

[5.] Wherefore let us also, whenever we suf-


' Awmjt.


* the human nature.


fer anything of this kind, before the Apostles con-
sider Christ. Why? His whole Ufe was full of
insults. For He continually heard Himself
called mad, and a deceiver, and a sorcerer ; and
at one time the Jews said, " Nay," (it says) " but
He deceiveth the people." (John vii. 12.) And
again, " That deceiver said while He was yet
alive, after three days I will rise again." (Matt,
xxvii. 63.) As to sorcery too they calumniated
Him, saying, " He casteth out the devils by
Beelzebub." (Matt. xii. 24.) And that " He is
mad and hath a devil." (John x. 20.) " Said
we not well" (it says) "that He hath a devil
and is mad ? " (John viii. 48.)

And these things He heard from them, when
doing them good, performing miracles, showing
forth the works of God. For indeed, if He had
been so spoken of, when He did nothing, it
would not have been so wonderful : But [it is
wonderful] that when He was teaching what
pertained to Truth He was called " a deceiver,"
and when He cast out devils, was said to " have
a devil," and when He was overthrowing all that
was opposed [to God], was called a sorcerer.
For these things they were continually alleging
against Him.

And if thou wouldst know both the scoffs * and
the ironical jeerings,' which they made against
Him (what particularly wounds our souls), hear
first those from His kindred. " Is not this " (it
says) " the carpenter's son, whose father and
mother we know ? Are not his brethren all with
us?" (Matt. xiii. 55 ; Mark vi. 3 ; John vi. 42.)
Also scoffing at Him from His country, they said
He was " of Nazareth." And again, " search,"
it says, "and see, for out of Galilee hath no
prophet arisen." (John vii. 52.) And He en-
dured being so greatly calumniated. And again
they said, " Doth not the Scripture say, that
Christ cometh from the town of Bethlehem?"
(John vii. 42.)

Wouldst thou see also the ironical jeerings
they made ? Coming, it says, to the very cross
they worshiped Him ; and they struck Him
and buffeted Him, and said, " Tell us who it is
that smote Thee " (Matt. xxvi. 68) ; and they
brought vinegar to Him, and said, " If Thou be
the Son of God, come down from the Cross."
(Matt, xxvii. 40.) And again, the servant of
the High Priest struck Him with the palm of
his hand ; and He says, " If I have spoken evil,
bear witness of the evil ; but if well, why smit-
eth thou Me?" (John xviii. 23.) And in
derision they put a robe about Him ; and they
spat in His face ; and they were continually
applying their tests, tempting Him.

Wouldest thou see also the accusations, some
secret, some open, some from disciples ? " Will ye


* aKutftfiaTa.


494


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX>


also go away?" (John vi. 67) He says. And that
saying, " Thou hast a devil " (John viii. 48, vii.
20) , was uttered by those who already believed.

Was He not continually a fugitive, sometimes
in Galilee, and sometimes in Judea? Was not
His trial great, even from the swaddling clothes ?
When He was yet a young child, did not His
mother take Him and go down into Egypt?
For all these reasons he says, " Looking unto
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith,
who for the joy that was set before Him en-
dured the cross, despising the shame, and is
set down at the right hand of the throne of
God."

To Him then let us look, also to the [suffer-
ings ^] of His disciples, reading the [writings ^] of
Paul, and hearing him say, " In much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in persecutions,'' in dis-
tresses, in stripes, in imprisonments." (2 Cor.
vi. 4, 5.) And again, " Even to this present
hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-
place, and labor, working with our own hands.
Being reviled, we bless ; being persecuted, we
suffer it; being defamed, we entreat." (i Cor.
iv. 11-13.) Has any one [of us] suffered the
smallest part of these things ? For, he says, [we
are] " As deceivers, as dishonored, as having
nothing." (2 Cor. vi. 8, 10.) And again, "Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save
one ; thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, a night and a day have I been in the
deep ; in journeyings often, in tribulations, in
distress, in hunger." (2 Cor. xi. 24-26.) And
that these things seem good to God, hear him
saying, "For this I besought the Lord thrice,
and He said to me. My Grace is sufficient for
thee ; for My strength is made perfect in weak-
ness." (2 Cor. xii. 8-10.) "Wherefore," he
says, " I take pleasure in infirmities, in afflic-
tions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, that the power of Christ may
rest upon me." Moreover, hear Christ Himself
saying, " In the world ye shall have tribulation."
(John xvi. 33.)

[6.] Ver. 3. " For consider," saith he, " Him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against
Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your
minds." For if the sufferings of those near us
arouse us, what earnestness will not those of our
Master give us ! What will they not work in us !

And passing by all [else], he expressed the
whole by the [word] " Contradiction " ; and by
adding " such." For the blows upon the cheek,
the laughter, the insults, the reproaches, the
mockeries, all these he indicated by "contradic-
tion." And not these only, but also the things

1 Ta. ' TO.

* [The insertion of iv&iayyfxoi^ here appears to be entirely with-
out authority, and was probably a slip of memory, — F. G.]


which befell Him during His whole life
teaching.

For a great, a truly great consolation are
the sufferings of Christ, and those of the A
ties. For He so well knew that this is the b
way of virtue, as even to go that way HimseH
having need thereof: He knew so well that
ulation is expedient for us, and that it beo
rather a foundation for repose. For hear
saying, " If a man take not his cross, and ft
after Me, he is not worthy of Me." (Ms
38.) If thou art a disciple. He means, in
the Master ; for this is [to be] a disciple,
if while He went by [the path of) affliction,,
[goest] by that of ease, thou no longer trei
the same path, which He trod, but ant
How then dost thou follow, when thou foil-
not? How shalt thou be a disciple, not 1
after the Master? This Paul also says,
are weak, but ye are strong ; we are des]
but ye are honored." (i Cor. iv. 10.)
is it reasonable, he means, that we shou.
striving after opposite things, and yet tha'
should be disciples and we teachers ?

[7.] Affliction then is a great thing, bel
for it accomplishes two great things ; It
out sins, and it makes men strong.

What then, you say, if it overthrow am
stroy ? Affliction does not do this, but ou:
slothfulness. How (you say) ? If we are
and watchful, if we beseech God that He ' d
not " suffer us to be tempted above that w a
able " (i Cor. x. 13), if we always hold f;
Him, we shall stand nobly, and set our
against our enemy. So long as we have [
for our helper, though temptations blow
violently than all the winds, they will be
as chaff and a leaf borne lightly along.
Paul saying, " In all these things " (ai
words) "we are more than conquerors." (
viii. 37.) And again, "For I reckon th;
sufferings of this present time are not wor
be compared with the glory which sh;
revealed in us." (Rom. viii. 18.) And
"For the light affliction which is but
moment, worketh for us a far more exct fi
and eternal weight of glory." (2 Cor. iv.

Consider what great dangers, shipw
afflictions one upon another, and other
things, he calls " light " ; and emulate tl
flexible one, who wore this body simpl
heedlessly.* Thou art in poverty? But
such as Paul, who was tried by hunge
thirst, and nakedness. For he suffered th
for one day, but endured it continually. W
does this appear? Hear himself saying, '
unto this present hour we both hunge
thirst and are naked." (i Cor. iv. 11.)


icl

i<
i

ai

t

ai
n

:n

,V'

ai

101


* a7T\ai% KoX cuc^.


y


Homily XXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


495


How great glory did he already have in preach-

ing, when he was undergoing so great [afflic-

. 1 tions] ! Having now [reached] the twentieth

11 year [thereof], at the time when he wrote this.

\1 For he says, " I knew a man fourteen years ago,

whether in the body, or out of the body, I know

, not" (2 Cor. xii. 2.) And again, "After three

yeais " (he says) " I went up to Jerusalem."

(Gal. i. 18.) And again hear him saying, "It

were better for me to die, than that any man

should make my glorying void." (i Cor. ix.

15.) And not only this, but again also in writ-

; he said, " We are become as the filth of the

rid." (i Cor. iv. 13.) What is more diffi-

:lt to endure than hunger? What than freezing

jld? What than plottings made by brethren:

, , whom he afterwards calls "false brethren"?

';''■ (2 Cor. xi. 26.) Was he not called the pest of

'; the world? An Impostor? A subverter? Was he

"■ not cut with scourging?

' , [8.] These things let us take into our mind,

'; Jl beloved, let us consider them, let us hold them

"' in remembrance, and then we shall never faint,

, though we be wronged, though we be plundered,

." though we suffer innumerable evils. Let it be

granted us to be approved in Heaven, and all

things [are] endurable. Let it be granted us

" to fere well there, and things here are of no

'; account. These things are a shadow, and a

■' dream ; whatever they may be, they are noth-

■ ' ing either in nature or in duration, while those

"' ire hoped for and expected.

" ^ For what wouldst thou that we should com-

-^pare with those fearful things? What with the

■' unquenchable fire? With the never-dying worm ?

^ Which of the things here canst thou name in

■ comparison with the " gnashing of teeth," with

: the " chains," and the " outer darkness," with

- the " wrath," the " tribulation," the " anguish " ?

But as to duration ? Why, what are ten thousand

■ -' years to ages boundless and without end ? Not

* :' >o much as a little drop to the boundless ocean.

■^ But what about the good things ? There, the

^"' superiority is still greater. " Eye hath not seen,"

-• (it is said,) "ear hath not heard, neither have

■■■'^entered into the heart of man" (i Cor. ii. 9),

'■ ind these things again shall be during boundless

-■':'' iges. For the sake of these then were it not

-': well to be cut [by scourging] times out of num-

= " ber, to be slain, to be burned, to undergo ten

;'.' thousand deaths, to endure everything whatso-

•'■;ver that is dreadful both in word and deed?

-V' For even if it were possible for one to live when

■■'burning in the fire, ought one not to endure all

' for the sake of attaining to those good things

^^ promised ?

-? [9.] But why do I trifle in saying these things

!■ ) to men who do not even choose to disregard

-^ riches, but hold fast to them as though they were

immortal? And if they give a litde out of much,


think they have done all ? This is not Almsgiv-
ing. For Almsgiving is that of the Widow who
emptied out "all her living." (Mark xii. 44.)
But if thou dost not go on to contribute so much
as the widow, yet at least contribute the whole
of thy superfluity : keep what is sufficient, not
what is superfluous.

But there is no one who contributes even his
superabundance. For so long as thou hast many
servants,' and garments of silk, these things are
all superfluities. Nothing is indispensable or
necessary, without which we are able to live ;
these things are superfluous, and are simply
superadded.^ Let us then see, if you please,
what we cannot live without. If we have only
two servants, we can live. For whereas some
live without servants, what excuse have we, if we
are not content with two ? We can also have a
house built of brick of three rooms,' and this
were sufficient for us. For are there not some
with children and wife who have but one room?'*
Let there be also, if you will, two serving boys.

[10.] And how is it not a shame (you say)
that a gentlewoman ' should walk out with [only]
two servants? It is no shame, that a gentle-
woman should walk abroad with two servants,
but it is a shame that she should go forth with
many. Perhaps you laugh when you hear this.
Believe me it is a shame. Do you think it a
great matter to go out with many servants, like
dealers in sheep, or dealers in slaves ? This is
pride and vainglory, the other is philosophy
and respectability. For a gentlewoman ought
not to be known from the multitude of her at-
tendants. For what virtue is it to have many
slaves? This belongs not to the soul, and what-
ever is not of the soul does not show gentility.
When she is content with a few things, then is
she a gentlewoman indeed ; but when she needs
many, she is a servant and inferior to slaves.

Tell me, do not the angels go to and fro about
the world alone, and need not any one to follow
them ? Are they then on this account inferior
to us ? They who need no [attendants] to us who
need them? If then not needing an attendant
at all, is angelic, who comes nearer to the angelic
fife, she who needs many [attendants], or she
who [needs] few? Is not this a shame? For
a shame it is to do anything out of place.

Tell me who attracts the attention of those
who are in the public places," she who brings
many in her train, or she who [brings but] few?
And is not she who is alone, less conspicuous
even than she who is attended by few? Seest
thou that this [first-named conduct] is a shame ?
Who attracts the attention of those in the public


' i.e. slaves. * oUor.

' the open spaces of the streets where idlers gathered.


496


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVII


places, she who wears beautiful garments, or she
who is dressed simply and artlessly ? Again who
attracts those in the public places, she who is
borne on mules, and with trappings ornamented
with gold, or she who walks out simply, and as
it may be, with propriety? Or we do not even
look at this latter, if we even see her ; but the
multitudes not only force their way to see the
other, but also ask. Who is she, and Where from ?
And I do not say how great envy is hereby pro-
duced. What then (tell me), is it disgraceful
to be looked at or not to be looked at ? When
is the shame greater, when all stare at her, or
when no one [does] ? When they inform them-
selves about her, or when they do not even care ?
Seest thou that we do everything, not for mod-
esty's sake but for vainglory ?

However, since it is impossible to draw you
away from that, I am content for the present
that you should learn that this [conduct] is no
disgrace. Sin alone is a disgrace, which no one
thinks to be a disgrace, but everything rather
than this.

[ii.] Let your dress be such as is needful,
not superfluous. However, that we may not
shut you up too narrowly, this I assure you, that
we have no need of ornaments of gold, or of
lace.' And it is not I who say this. For that
the words are not mine, hear the blessed Paul
saying, and solemnly charging women " to adorn
themselves, not with plaitings [of the hair], or
gold, or pearls, or costly apparel." (i Tim. ii.
9.) But with what kind, O Paul, wouldest thou
tell us? For perhaps they will say, that only
golden things are costly ; and that silks are not
costly. Tell us with what kind thou wouldest?
" But having food and raiment,^ let us therewith "
(he says) " be content." ' ( i Tim. vi. 8.) Let our
garment be such as merely to cover us. For God
hath given them to us for this reason, that we
may cover our nakedness ; and this any sort of
garment can do, though but of trifling cost. Per-
haps ye laugh, who wear dresses of silk ; for in
truth one may well laugh, considering what Paul
enjoined and what we practice !

But my discourse is not addressed to women
only, but also to men. For the rest of the things
which we have are all superfluous ; only the
poor possess no superfluities ; and perhaps they
too from necessity : since, if it had been in their
power, even they would not have abstained [from
them] . Nevertheless, " whether in pretense or
in truth " (Phil. i. 18), so far they have no super-
fluities.

[12.] Let us then wear such clothes as are
sufficient for our need. For what does much
gold mean? To those on the stage these things
are fitting, this apparel belongs to them, to har-


' afiKt<r&T}v6ii*6a.


lots, to those who do everything to be looked a
Let her beautify herself, who is on the stage (
the dancing platform. For she wishes to attrai
all to her. But a woman who professes godl
ness, let her not beautify herself thus, but in
different way. Thou hast a means of beautif
ing thyself far better than that. Thou also ha
a theater : * for that theater make thyself beaut
ful : clothe thyself with those ornaments. Wh;
is thy theater? Heaven, the company of Angel
I speak not of Virgins only, but also of those i
the world. All as many as believe in Christ ha\
that theater. Let us speak such things that w
may please those spectators. Put on such ga
ments that thou mayest gratify them.

For tell me, if a harlot putting aside hi
golden ornaments, and her robes, and her laug
ter, and her witty and unchaste talk, clothe he
self with a cheap garment, and having dressf
herself simply come [on the stage], and utt
religious words, and discourse of chastity, ar
say nothing indelicate, will not all rise up ? W
not this theater be dispersed ? Will they not ca
her out, as one who does not know how to su
herself to the crowd, and speaks things foreif
to that Satanic theater? So thou also, if the
enter into the Theater of Heaven clad with h
garments, the spectators will cast thee out. Fi
there, there is no need of these garments of gol
but of different ones. Of what kind ? Of su<
as the prophet names, " clothed in fringed wo
of gold, and in varied colors " (Ps. xlv. 13), n
so as to make the body white and glistering, b
so as to beautify the soul. For the soul it
which is contending and wrestling in that The
ter. " All the glory of the King's daughter
from within " (Ps. xlv. 13), it says. With the
do thou clothe thyself; for [so] thou both d
liverest thyself from other evils innumerable, ai
thy husband from anxiety and thyself from cai

For so thou wilt be respected by thy husban
when thou needest not many things. For eve
man is wont to be shy towards those who ma
requests of him ; but when he sees that th
have no need of him, then he lets down his pric
and converses with them as equals. When t
husband sees that thou hast no need of him
anything, that thou thinkest lightly of the pri
ents which come from him, then, even thou
he be very arrogant,' he will respect thee mo:
than if thou wert clad in golden ornaments ; a:
thou wilt no longer be his slave. For those
whom we stand in need, we are compelled
stoop to. But if we restrain ourselves we sh
no longer be regarded as criminals,' but he kno
that we pay him obedience from the fear of Gc
not for what is given by him. For now, wh
that he confers great favors on us, whatev


* *' body of spcctatore."


* uirodtKoi.


[OMILY XXVIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


497


onor he receives, he thinks he has not received

II [that is due to him] : but then, though he

btain but a little, he will account it a favor ;

e does not reproach, nor will he be himself

jmpelled to overreach on thy account.

[13.] For what is more unreasonable, than to

rovide golden ornaments, to be worn in baths,

id in market places? However, in baths and

market places it is perhaps no wonder, but

lat a woman should come into Church so

eked out is very ridiculous. For, for what

jssible reason does she come in here wearing

)lden ornaments, she who ought to come in

at she may hear [the precept] " that they

lorn not themselves with gold, nor pearls, nor

stly array"? (i Tim. ii. 9.) With what object

en, O woman, dost thou come? Is it indeed

fight with Paul, and show that even if he

peat these things ten thousand times thou re-

rdest them not ? Or is it as wishing to put us

lur teachers to shame as discoursing on these

bjects in vain? For tell me; if any heathen

d unbeliever, after he has heard the passage

ad where the blessed Paul says these things,

ving a believing wife, sees that she makes

ach account of beautifying herself, and puts

ornaments of gold, that she may come into

lurch and hear Paul charging [the women]

It they adorn themselves, neither with "gold "

Tim. ii. 9), nor with "pearls," nor with " costly

ay," will he not indeed say to himself, when

sees her in her little room,' putting on these

ngs, and arranging them beautifully, " Why is

wife staying within in her little room ? Why

>he so slow ? Why is she putting on her golden

laments ? Where has she to go to ? Into the

urch? For what purpose? To hear? 'not

:h costly array ' ; " will he not smile, will he not

rst out into laughter? will he not think our

igion ^ a mockery and a deceit ? Wherefore,

eseech [you], let us leave golden ornaments

recessions, to theaters, to signs on the shops.^

let not the image of God be decked out

h these things : let the gentlewoman be

med with gentility, and gentility is the ab-

ce of pride, and of boastful display.

ay even if thou wish to obtain glory from

n, thou wilt obtain it thus. For we shall not

ider so much that the wife of a rich man

irs gold and silk (for this is the common

ctice of them all), as when she is dressed in

lain and simple garment made merely of

)I. This all will admire, this they will applaud.

■ in that adorning indeed of ornaments of

i and of costly apparel, she has many to

re with her. And if she surpass one, she is

)assed by another. Yea, even if she surpass

she must yield the palm to the Empress her-


itOiTtavLtrK<a, '

T«if irpo0>lNat{ rait cirl rwi/ cpycumfptuf*


self. But in the other case, she outdoes all,
even the Emperor's wife herself. For she alone
in wealth, has chosen the [dress] of the poor.
So that even if we desire glory, here too the
glory is greater.

[14.] I say this not only to widows, and to
the rich ; for here the necessity of widowhood
seems to cause this : but to those also who have
a husband.

But, you say, I do not please my husband [if
I dress plainly]. It is not thy husband thou
wishest to please, but the multitude of poor
women ; or rather not to please them, but to
make them pine [with envy], and to give them
pain, and make their poverty greater. How
many blasphemies are uttered because of thee !
'Let there be no poverty' (say they). 'God
hates the poor.' ' God loves not those in
poverty.' For that it is not thy husband whom
thou wishest to please, and for this reason thou
deckest thyself out, thou makest plain to all by
what thou thyself doest. For as soon as thou
hast passed over the threshold of thy chamber,*
thou immediately puttest off all, both the robes,
and the golden ornaments, and the pearls ; and
at home of all places thou dost not wear them.

But if thou really wishest to please thy hus-
band, there are ways of pleasing him, by gentle-
ness, by meekness, by propriety. For believe
me, O woman, even if thy husband be infinitely
debased,' these are the things which will more
effectually win him, gentleness, propriety, free-
dom from pride and expensiveness and extrava-
gance. For even if thou devise ten thousand
such things, thou wilt not restrain the profligate.
And this they know who have had such hus-
bands. For however thou mayest beautify thy-
self, he being a profligate will go off to a cour-
tesan ; while [the husband] that is chaste and
regular thou wilt gain not by these means, but
by the opposite : yea by these thou even causest
him pain, clothing thyself with the reputation of
a lover of the world. P'or what if thy husband
out of respect, and that as a sober-minded man,
does not speak, yet inwardly he will condemn
thee, and will not conceal " ill-will ' and jealousy.
Wilt thou not drive away all pleasure for the
future, by exciting ill-will against thyself?

[15.] Possibly you are annoyed at hearing
what is said, and are indignant, saying, ' He
irritates husbands still more against their wives.'
I say this, not to irritate your husbands, but I
wish that these things should be done by you
willingly, for your own sakes, not for theirs;
not to free them from envy but to free you from
the parade of this life.

Dost thou wish to appear beautiful? I also
wish it, but with beauty which God seeks, which


* da\diiOV.

* KaTw^cpTjc.


* or, " conceal,** irepiaT€A«iTai,


498


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVII


"the King desires."' (Ps. xlv. ii.)' Whom
wouldst thou have as a Lover? God or men?
Shouldest thou be beautiful with that beauty, God
will " desire thy beauty " ; but if with the other
apart from this. He will abominate thee, and thy
lovers will be profligates. For no man who loves
a married woman is good. Consider this even in
regard to the adorning that is external. For the
other adorning, I mean that of the soul, attracts
God ; but this again, profligates. Seest thou that
I care for you, that I am anxious for you, that
ye may be beautiful, really beautiful, splendid,
really splendid, that instead of profligate men,
ye may have for your Lover God the Lord of
all? And she who has Him for her Lover, to
whom will she be like? She has her place
among the choirs of Angels. For if one who
is beloved of a king is accounted happy above
all, what will her dignity be who is beloved of
God with much love? Though thou put the
whole world [in the balance against it], there is
nothing equivalent to that beauty.

This beauty then let us cultivate ; with these
embeUishments let us adorn ourselves, that we
may pass into the Heavens, into the spiritual
chambers, into the nuptial chamber that is
undefiled. For this beauty is liable to be de-
stroyed by anything ; and when it lasts well,
and neither disease nor anxiety impair it (which
is impossible), it does not last twenty years.
But the other is ever blooming, ever in its
prime. There, there is no change to fear ; no
old age coming brings a wrinkle, no undermining
disease withers it ; no desponding anxiety dis-
figures it ; but it is far above all these things.
But this [earthly beauty] takes flight before it
appears, and if it appears it has not many
admirers. For those of well-ordered minds do
not admire it ; and those who do admire it,
admire with wantonness.

[i6.] Let us not therefore cultivate this
[beauty], but the other : let us have that, so that
with bright torches we may pass into the bridal
chamber. For not to virgins only has this been
promised, but to virgin souls. For had it be-
longed merely to virgins, those five would not
have been shut out. This then belongs to all
who are virgins in soul, who are freed from
worldly imaginations : for these imaginations
corrupt our souls. If therefore we remain un-
polluted, we shall depart thither, and shall be
accepted. " For I have espoused you," he says,
" to one husband, to present you a chaste virgin
unto Christ." (2 Cor. xi. 2.) These things he
said, not with reference to Virgins, but to the
whole body of the entire Church. For the
uncorrupt soul is a virgin, though she have a
husband : she is a virgin as to that which is
Virginity indeed, that which is worthy of ad-


' See Horn. xiv. [8.] pp. 436, 437.


miration. For this of the body is but tl
accompaniment and shadow of the other : whi
that is the True Virginity. This let us cultivat
and so shall we be able with cheerful coui
tenance to behold the Bridegroom, to enter :
with bright torches, if the oil do not fail us,
by melting down our golden ornaments a
procure such oil as makes our lamps brigh
And this oil is lovingkindness.

If we impart what we have to others, if v
make oil therefrom, then it will protect us, ar
we shall not say at that time, " Give us oil, fi
our lamps are going out" (Matt. xxv. 8), m
shall we beg of others, nor shall we be shut o
when we are gone to them that sell, nor shall v
hear that fearful and terrible voice, while we a
knocking at the doors, " I know you not
(Matt. xxv. 12.) But He will acknowledge i
and we shall go in with the Bridegroom, ar
having entered into the spiritual Bride-chamb
we shall enjoy good things innumerable.

For if here the bride-chamber is so brigl
the rooms so splendid, that none is weary
observing them, much more there. Heaven
the chamber,^ and the bride-chamber^ belt
than Heaven ; then we shall enter. But if tl
Bride-chamber is so beautiful, what will tl
Bridegroom be?

And why do I say, ' Let us put away 0
golden ornaments, and give to the needy
For if ye ought even to sell yourselves, if
ought to become slaves instead of free wom«
that so ye might be able to be with that Brie
groom, to enjoy that Beauty, [nay] merely
look on that Countenance, ought you not w
ready mind to welcome all things ? We look
and admire a king upon the earth, but when [
see] a king and a bridegroom both, much m<
ought we to welcome him with readiness. Tr
these things are a shadow, while those are
reality. And a King and a Bridegroom
Heaven ! To be counted worthy also to
before Him with torches, and to be near H:
and to be ever with Him, what ought we not
do ? What should we not perform ? What sho
we not endure? I entreat you, let us conce
some desire for those blessings, let us long
that Bridegroom, let us be virgins as to the t
Virginity. For the Lord seeks after the
ginity of the soul. With this let us enter i
Heaven, " not having spot, or wrinkle, or
such thing" (Eph. v. 27) ; that we may att
also to the good things promised, of which r
we all be partakers through the grace and me
of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to
Father together with the Holy Ghost, be gli
power, honor, now and ever, and world with
end. Amen.


3 0aAa/iO«.


s vv^L^v,


rIOMILY XXIX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


499


HOMILY XXIX.


Hebrews xii. 4-6.


'Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against
sin. And ye have forgotten the exhortation which
spealieth unto you as unto children, My son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of Him. For whom the Lord
loveth, He chasteneth : and scourgeth every son
whom He receiveth." 1


[i.] There are two kinds of consolation, ap-
jarently opposed to one another, but yet con-
:ribiiting great strength each to the other ; both
)f which he has here put forward. The one is
vhen we say that persons have suffered much :
'or the soul is refreshed, when it has many wit-
lesses of its own sufferings, and this he intro-
duced above, saying, " Call to mind the former
iays, in which after ye had been illuminated,
It endured a great fight of afflictions." (c. x.
j2.) The other is when we say, "Thou hast
uffered no great thing." The former, when
[the soul] has been exhausted refreshes it, and
■nakes it recover breath : the latter, when it has
jecome indolent and supine, turns it again ^ and
)ulls down pride. Thus that no pride may
pring up in them from that testimony [to their
ufferings], see what he does. "Ye have not
'et " (he says) " resisted unto blood, [striving]
.gainst sin." And he did not at once go on
vith what follows, but after having shown them
ill those who had stood " unto blood," and then
)rought in the glory of Christ, His sufferings,'
le afterwards easily pursued his discourse. This
le says also in writing to the Corinthians, " There
lath no temptation taken you, but such as is
;ommon to man" (i Cor. x. 13), that is, small.
j"or this is enough to arouse and set right the
»ul, when it considers that it has not risen to
he whole [trial], and encourages itself from
vhat has already befallen it.

What he means is this : Ye have not yet sub-
nitted to death ; your loss has extended to
noney, to reputation, to being driven from place
;o place. Christ however shed His blood for
rou, while you have not [done it] for yourselves.
He contended for the Truth even unto death,
ighting for you ; while ye have not yet entered
ipon dangers that threaten death.

"And ye have forgotten the exhortation."

rhat is. And ye have slackened your hands, ye

^ave become faint. " Ye have not yet," he

;iaid, " resisted unto blood, striving against sin."

' or, " acccpteth."

^ £n-i(rTp€'(fr«i, or, " turns, converts to God,"

^ TO Kav;^T]Ma Tov XpiffTOu To. nadrnxaTa, or, "our glory — our

Mast — the sufferings of Christ."


Here he indicates that sin is both very vigorous,*
and is itself armed. For the [expression] " Ye
have resisted [stood firm against]," is used with
reference to those who stand firm.'

[2.] "Which" (he says) " speaketh unto you
as unto sons, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of Him." He has drawn his encour-
agement from the facts themselves ; over and
above he adds also that which is drawn from
arguments, from this testimony.

" Faint not " (he says) " when thou art re-
buked of Him." It follows that these things
are of God. For this too is no small matter of
consolation, when we learn tliat it is God's work
that such things have power," He allowing
[them] ; even as also Paul says ; " He said
unto me. My grace is sufficient for thee : for
My strength is made perfect in weakness."
(2 Cor. xii. g.) He it is who allows [them].

" For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,
and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth."
Thou canst not say that any righteous man is
without afiliction : even if he appear to be so,
yet we know not his other afllictions. So that
of necessity every righteous man must pass
through affliction. For it is a declaration of
Christ, that the wide and broad way leads to
destruction, but the strait and narrow one to
life. (Matt. vii. 13, 14.) If then it is possible
to enter into life by that means, and is not by
any other, then all have entered in by the narrow
[way], as many as have departed unto life.

Ver. 7. "Ye endure chastisement"' (he says);
not for punishment, nor for vengeance, nor for
suffering. See, from that from which they sup-
posed they had been deserted [of God], from
these he says they may be confident, that they
have not been deserted. It is as if he had said,
Because ye have suffered so many evils, do you
suppose that God has left you and hates you?
If ye did not suffer, then it were right to sup-
pose this. For if " He scourgeth every son
whom He receiveth," he who is not scourged,
perhaps is not a son. What then, you say, do
not bad men suffer distress? They suffer in-
deed ; how then ? He did not say, Every one


* triioipa iTvfovtrav.

® [There is a paronomasia here, To di'Ti*toT<(7TijT*, irpb? tov<
ecTTwTa? flpriTai, which cannot easily be reproduced in English. —
F. G.]

® TO ToiairTa SvvjfBrivai.

' €1? naiSeiav. eU iratSfiav vnoiJifytTt is the reading of the best
MSS. &c. of St. Chrys. as it is the approved reading of the Epistle.
The later [printed] texts have the later reading d ir. vir.


50O


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIX.


who is scourged is a son, but every son is
scourged. For in all cases He scourges His
son : what is wanted then is to show, whether
any son is not scourged. But thou wouldest not
be able to say : there are many wicked men also
who are scourged, such as murderers, robbers,
sorcerers, plunderers of tombs. These however
are paying the penalty of their own wickedness,
and are not scourged as sons, but punished as
wicked : but ye as sons.

[3.] Then again [he argues] from the general
custom. Seest thou how he brings up arguments
from all quarters, from facts in the Scripture,
from its words, from our own notions, from ex-
amples in ordinary Ufe? (Ver. 8.) " But if ye be
without chastisement " [&c.] . Seest thou that
he said what I just mentioned, that it is not
possible to be a son without being chastened?
For as in families, fathers care not for bastards,
though they learn nothing, though they be not
distinguished, but fear for their legitimate sons,
lest they should be indolent, [so here]. If then
not to be chastised is [a mark] of bastards, we
ought to rejoice at chastisement, if this be [a
sign] of legitimacy. " God dealeth with you as
with sons " ; for this very cause.

Ver. 9. " Furthermore, we have had fathers
of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave
them reverence." Again, [he reasons] from
their own experiences, from what they them-
selves suffered. For as he says above, " Call to
mind the former days " (c. x. 32), so here also,
"God" (he saith) "dealeth with you as with
sons," and ye could not say. We cannot bear it :
yea, " as with sons " tenderly beloved. For
if they reverence their " fathers of the flesh,"
how shall not you reverence your heavenly
Father?

However the difference arises not from this
alone, nor from the persons, but also from the
cause itself, and from the fact. For it is not on
the same grounds that He and they inflict chas-
tisement : but they [did it] with a view to
" what seemed good to them," that is, fulfilling
[their own] pleasure oftentimes, and not always
looking to what was expedient. But here, that
cannot be said. For He does this not for any
interest of His own but for you, and for your
benefit alone. They [did it] that ye might be
useful to themselves also, oftentimes without
reason ; but here there is nothing of this kind.
Seest thou that this also brings consolation?
For we are most closely attached to those
[earthly parents], when we see that not for any
interests of their own they either command or
advise us : but their earnestness is, wholly and
solely, on our account. For this is genuine love,
and love in reality, when we are beloved though
we be of no use to him who loves us, — not that
he may receive, but that he may impart. He


chastens. He does everything. He uses all dili-
gence, that we may become capable of receiving
His benefits. (Ver. 10.) " For they verily" (he
says) " for a few days chastened us after their
own pleasure, but He for our profit, that we
might be partakers of His holiness."

What is "of his holiness " ? It is, of His
purity, so as to become worthy of Him, accord-
ing to our power. He earnestly desires that ye
may receive, and He does all that He may give
you : do ye not earnestly endeavor that ye may
receive ? "I said unto the Lord " (one says)
" Thou art my Lord, for of my good things
Thou hast no need." (Ps. xvi. 2.)

"Furthermore," he saith," we have had fathers
of our flesh which corrected us and we gave them
reverence : shall we not much rather be in sub-
jection to the Father of spirits, and live ? " (" To
the Father of spirits," whether of spiritual gifts,
or of prayers, or of the incorporeal powers.)
If we die thus, then " we shall live. For they
indeed for a few days chastened us after their
own pleasure," for what seems [so] is not always
profitable, but " He for our profit."

[4.] Therefore chastisement is " profitable " ;
therefore chastisement is a " participation of holi-
ness." Yea and this greatly: for when it casts
out sloth, and evil desire, and love of the things
of this life, when it helps the soul, when it causes
a light esteem of all things here (for affliction
[does] this), is it not holy? Does it not draw
down the grace of the Spirit ?

Let us consider the righteous, from what
cause they all shone brightly forth. Was it not
from affliction? And, if you will, let us enumerate
them from the first and from the very beginning ;
Abel, Noah himself; for it is not possible that he
being the only one in that so great multitude 01
the wicked, should not have been afflicted ; foi
it is said, " Noah being " alone " perfect in his
generation, pleased God." (Gen. vi. 9.) Foi
consider, I beseech you, if now, when we have
innumerable persons whose virtue we may emu-
late, fathers, and children, and teachers, we art;
thus distressed, what must we suppose he suf I
fered, alone among so many? But should Ij
speak of the circumstances of that strange anc |
wonderful rain? Or should I speak of Abraham I
his wanderings one upon another, the carrying
away of his wife, the dangers, the wars, the
famines ? Should I speak of Isaac,' what fearfu :
things he underwent, driven from every place ;
and laboring in vain, and toiling for others ? Oi
of Jacob ? for indeed to enumerate all his [afflic
tions] is not necessary, but it is reasonable t(

' The common texts substitute Jacob for Isaac here, oinittingA
following clause where Jacob is mentioned (as they also in the pre
ceding sentence have temptations" instead of "families"); t
correct the apparent inaccuracies of the text. But Mr. P'ield snow
from other passages of St. Chrys. that he really means Isaac, haviBt
in view Gen. xxvi. 18-22, 27,


lOMILY XXIX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


501


ring forward the testimony, which he himself
gave] when speaking with Pharaoh ; " Few and
vil are my days, and they have not attained to
he days of my fathers." (Gen. xlvii. 9.) Or
Kould I speak of Joseph himself? Or of Moses?
)r of Joshua ? Or of David ? Or of Elijah ? Or
f Samuel ? Or wouldest thou [that I speak] of
11 the prophets? Wilt thou not find that all
lese were made illustrious from their afflic-
ons? Tell me then, dost ^/wu desire to be-
ome illustrious from ease and luxury? But thou
anst not.

Or should I speak of the Apostles ? Nay but
ley went beyond all. And Christ said this, " In
le world ye shall have tribulation." (Johnxvi.
3.) And again, " Ye shall weep and lament,
ut the world shall rejoice." (John xvi. 20.)
ind, that " Strait and narrow is the way' that
ladeth unto life." (Matt. vii. 14.) The Lord
f the way said, that it is " narrow and strait " ;
nd dost thou seek the " broad " [way] ? How

this not unreasonable? In consequence thou
lit not arrive at life, going another [way], but

destruction, for thou hast chosen the [path]
hich leads thither.

Wouldst thou that I bring before you those
that live] in luxury ? Let us ascend from the
ist to the first. The rich man who is burning
1 the furnace ; the Jews who live for the belly,

whose god is their belly" (Phil. iii. 19), who
ere ever seeking ease in the wilderness, were
estroyed ; as also those in Sodom, on account
f their gluttony ; and those in the time of
foah, was it not because they chose this soft
nd dissolute life? For "they luxuriated," it
lys, " in fullness of bread." (Ezek. xvi. 49.)
t speaks of those in Sodom. But if " fullness
f bread " wrought so great evil, what should we
ly of other delicacies? Esau, was not he in
ase ? And what of those who being of " the
3ns of God " (Gen. vi. 2), looked on women,
nd were borne down the precipice ? And what

those who were maddened by inordinate lust ?
nd all the kings of the nations, of the Babylo-
ians, of the Egyptians, did they not perish
liserably ? Are they not in torment ?

[5.] And as to things now, tell me, are they
ot the same ? Hear Christ saying, " They that

ear soft clothing are in kings' houses " (Matt.
i. 8), but they who do not [wear] such things,

■e in Heaven. For the soft garment relaxes

fen the austere soul, breaks it and enervates

: yea, even if it meet with a body rough and

ird, it speedily by such deUcate treatment makes

soft and weak.

For, tell me, for what other reason do you

ippose women are so weak? Is it from their

:x only ? By no means : but from their way of

' St. Chrys. seems to have read this text without the words


living, and their bringing up. For their avoiding
exposure,'' their inactivity, their baths, their un-
guents, their multitude of perfumes, the delicate
softness of their couches, makes them in the end
such as they are.

And that thou mayest understand, attend to
what I say. Tell me ; take from a garden a
tree from those standing in the uncultivated' part
and beaten by the winds, and plant it in a moist
and shady place, and thou wilt find it very un-
worthy of that from which thou didst originally
take it. And that this is true, [appears from
the fact that] women brought up in the country
are stronger than citizens of towns : and they
would overcome many such in wrestling. For
when the body becomes more effeminate, of
necessity the soul also shares the mischief, since,
for the most part, its energies are affected in
accordance with the [body]. For in illness we
are different persons owing to weakness, and
when we become well, we are different again.
For as in the case of a string when the tones ■•
are weak and relaxed, and not well arranged,
the excellence of the art is also destroyed, being
obliged to serve the ill condition of the strings :
so in the case of the body also, the soul receives
from it many hurts, many necessities.'' For when
it needs much nursing, the other endures a bitter
servitude.

[6.] Wherefore, I beseech you, let us make
it strong by work, and not nurse it as an invalid."
My discourse is not to men only but to women
also. For why dost thou, O woman, continually
enfeeble' [thy body] with luxury and exhaust
it ? ' Why dost thou ruin thy strength wth fat ?
This fat is flabbiness, not strength. Whereas, if
thou break off from these things, and manage
thyself differently, then will thy personal beauty
also improve according to thy wish, when strength
and a good habit of body are there. If however
thou beset it with ten thousand diseases, there
will neither be bloom of complexion, nor good
health ; for thou wilt always be in low spirits.
And you know that as when the air is smiling it
makes a beautiful house look splendid, so also
cheerfulness of mind when added to a fair coun-
tenance, makes it better : but if [a woman] is in
low spirits and in pain she becomes more ill-
looking. But diseases and pains produce low
spirits ; and diseases are produced from the
body too delicate through great luxury. So that
even for this you will flee luxury, if you take my
advice.

' But, you will say, luxury gives pleasure.'
Yes, but not so great as the annoyances. And
besides, the pleasure goes no further than the


2 " to the heat," aKiarpofttia, ^ avayxat,

3 €v rij ipTiftiu, " dry and open part? " * vo<ni\tviitti€if,
* (hBoyyoi,

' ((cn-Aui/ei? . . . ef iTTjAof, lit. " washed out," and " faded,"
when colors are washed out of dresses.


502


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIX.


palate and the tongue. For when the table has
been removed, and the food swallowed, thou wilt
be like one that has not partaken, or rather
much worse, in that thou bearest thence oppres-
sion, and distension, and headache, and a sleep
like death, and often too, sleeplessness from re-
pletion, and obstruction of the breathing, and
eructation. And thou wouldest curse bitterly
thy belly, when thou oughtest to curse thy im-
moderate eating.

[7.] Let us not then fatten the body, but
hsten to Paul saying, " Make not provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof." (Rom. xiii.
14.) As if one should take food and throw it
into a drain, so is he who throws it into the
belly : or rather it is not so, but much worse.
For in the one case he uses * the drain without
harm to himself: but in the other he generates
innumerable diseases. For what nourishes is a
sufficiency which also can be digested : but what
is over and above our need, not only does not
nourish, but even spoils the other. But no man
sees these things, owing to some prejudice and
unseasonable pleasure.

Dost thou wish to nourish the body? Take
away what is superfluous ; give what is sufficient,
and as much as can be digested. Do not load
it, lest thou overwhelm it. A sufficiency is both
nourishment and pleasure. For nothing is so
productive of pleasure, as food well digested :
nothing so [productive of] health : nothing [so
productive of] acuteness of the faculties, nothing
tends so much to keep away disease. For a
sufficiency is both nourishment, and pleasure,
and health ; but excess is injury, and unpleasant-
ness and disease. For what famine does, that
also satiety does ; or rather more grievous evils.
For the former indeed within a few days carries
a man off" and sets him free ; but the other eat-
ing into and putrefying the body, gives it over
to long disease, and then to a most painful
death. But we, while we account famine a thing
greatly to be dreaded, yet run after satiety, which
is more distressing than that.


Whence is this disease? Whence this mad-
ness ? I do not say that we should waste ourselves
away, but that we should eat as much food as
also gives us pleasure, that is really pleasure, and
can nourish the body, and furnish it to us well
ordered and adapted for the energies of the
soul, well joined and fitted together. But when
it comes to be water-logged^ by luxury, it can-
not in the flood-wave, keep fast the bolts' them-
selves, as one may say, and joints which hold
the frame together. For the flood-wave coming
in, the whole breaks up and scatters.

" Make not provision for the flesh " (he says)
"to fulfill the lusts thereof." (Rom. xiii. 14.)
He said well. For luxury is fuel for unreasonable
lusts ; though the luxurious should be the mosi
philosophical of all men, of necessity he must
be somewhat affected by wine, by eating, he
must needs be relaxed, he must needs endure
the greater flame. Hence [come] fornications
hence adulteries. For a hungry belly cannoi
generate lust, or rather not one which has usee
just enough. But that which generates unseenil)
lusts, is that which is relaxed* by luxury. Anc
as land which is very moist and a dung-hil'
which is wet through and retains much damp-
ness, generates worms, while that which has
been freed from such moistness bears abundant
fruits, when it has nothing immoderate : even i:
it be not cultivated, it yields grass, and if it be
cultivated, fruits : [so also do we] .

Let us not then make our flesh useless, 01
unprofitable, or hurtful, but let us plant in r
useful fruits, and fruit- bearing trees ; let us no
enfeeble them by luxury, for they too put fortl
worms instead of fruit when they are becomi
rotten. So also implanted desire, if thou moistei
it above measure, generates unreasonable pleas
ures, yea the most exceedingly unreasonable
Let us then remove this pernicious evil, that wi
may be able to attain the good things promisee
us, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to thi
Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glor
now and ever and world without end. Amen.


^ «pY«^<T(U*


* irAaJuxra, " wet and soft.*


lOMILY XXX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


503


HOMILY XXX.

Hebrews xii. 11-13.


No chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous,'
but grievous,'' nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which
are ' exercised thereby. Wherefore lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees : and make
straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame
be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed."

[i.] They who drink bitter medicines, first
ubmit to some unpleasantness, and afterwards
;el the benefit. For such is virtue, such is vice.
n the latter there is first the pleasure, then the
espondency : in the former first the despond-
ncy, and then the pleasure. But there is no
quality; for it is not the same, to be first
rieved and afterwards pleased, and to be first
leased and afterwards grieved. How so? be-
ause in the latter case the expectation of com-
ig despondency makes the present pleasure
:ss : but in the former the expectation of com-
ig pleasure cuts away the violence of present
espondency; so that the result is that in the
ne instance we never have pleasure, in the
itter we never have grief. And the difference
oes not lie in this only, but also in other ways,
.s how? That the duration is not equal, but
ir greater and more ample. And here too, it
I still more so in things spiritual.

From this [consideration] then Paul under-
ikes to console them ; and again takes up the
ommon judgment of men, which no one is able
) stand against, nor to contend with the com-
lon decision, when one says what is acknowl-
dged by all.

Ye are suffering, he says. For such is chastise-
lent ; such is its beginning. For " no chasten-
ig for the present seemeth to be joyous but
rievous." Well said he, " seemeth not." Chas-
sement he means is not grievous but " seemeth "
" All chastisement " : not this and that, but
all," both human and spiritual. Seest thou that

argues from our common notions ? " Seemeth "
lie says) " to be grievous," so that it is not
really so] . For what sort of grief brings forth
y? So neither does pleasure bring forth de-
jondency.

Nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the
eaceable fruits of righteousness to them which
kve been exercised thereby." Not " fruit " but

fruits," * a great abundance.

' " of joy.'*_ _ * "of grief."

^ [The Revision has here correctly " have been exercised," and
IS so commented upon by St. Chrys. below. — F. G.]

* Kopirov?. [At tne head of the homily the word is in the singu-
r, as in the text of Hebrews; it is here commented upon as if in
c [jlural. — F. G.]


"To them" (he says) "which have been
exercised thereby." What is " to them which
have been exercised thereby " ? To them that
have endured for a long while, and been patient.
And he uses an auspicious' expression. So then,
chastisement is exercise, making the athlete strong,
and invincible in combats, irresistible in wars.

If then "all chastisement" be such, this also
will be such : so that we ought to look for good
things, and for a sweet and peaceful end. And
do not wonder if, being itself hard, it has sweet
fruits ; since in trees also the bark is almost
destitute of all quality,* and rough ; but the fruits
are sweet. But he took it from the common
notion. If therefore we ought to look for such
things, why do ye vex yourselves ? Why, after
ye have endured the painful, do ye despond as
to the good? The distasteful things which ye
had to endure, ye endured : do not then despond
as to the recompense.

He speaks as to runners, and boxers, and
warriors.'^ Seest thou how he arms them, how
he encourages them? "Walk straight," he says.
Here he speaks with reference to their thoughts ;
that is to say, not doubting. For if the chastise-
ment be of love, if it begin from loving care, if
it end with a good result (and this he proves
both by facts and by words, and by all consider-
ations), why are ye dispirited? For such are
they who despair, who are not strengthened by
the hope of the future. " Walk straight," he
says, that your lameness may not be increased,
but brought back to its former condition. For
he that runs when he is lame, galls the sore
place. Seest thou that it is in our power to be
thoroughly healed?

[2.] Ver. 14. " Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord." What he also said above, " Not for-
saking the assembling of yourselves together "
(c. X. 25), he hints at in this place also. For
nothing so especially makes persons easily van-
quished and subdued in temptations, as isolation.
For, tell me, scatter a phalanx in war, and the
enemy will need no trouble, but will take them
prisoners, coming on them separately, and there-
by the more helpless.

" Follow peace with all men, and holiness " '

' These words refer to ver. 13, " Wherefore lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths
for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but
let it rather be healed," which is inserted in the text of the common
editions,

8 "the sanctification." [It is the same word as above and is
rendered in the R. V. " the sanctiiication." — F. G.J


504


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX


(he says). Therefore with the evil-doers as well?
" If it be possible," he says, " as much as lieth
in you, live peaceably with all men." (Rom.
xii. i8.) For thy part (he means) "live peace-
ably," doing no harm to religion : but in what-
ever thou art ill-treated, bear it nobly. For the
bearing with evil is a great weapon in trials.
Thus Christ also made His disciples strong by
saying, " Behold I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves : be ye therefore wise as ser-
pents, and harmless as doves." (Matt. x. i6.)
What dost Thou say? Are we "among wolves,"
and dost Thou bid us to be "as sheep," and "as
doves " ? Yea, He says. For nothing so shames
him that is doing us evil, as bearing nobly the
things which are brought upon us : and not
avenging ourselves either by word or by deed.
This both makes us more philosophical ourselves
and procures a greater reward, and also benefits
them. But has such an one been insolent? Do
thou bless [him]. See how much thou wilt gain
from this : thou hast quenched the evil, thou
hast procured to thyself a reward, thou hast
made him ashamed, and thou hast suffered
nothing serious.

[3.] " Follow peace with all men, and holi-
ness." What does he mean by "holiness"'?
Chaste, and orderly living in marriage. If any
person is unmarried (he says) let him remain
pure, let him marry : or if he be married, let
him not commit fornication, but let him live
with his own wife : for this also is " holiness."
How? Marriage is not "hoUness," but marriage
preserves the holiness which [proceeds] from
Faith, not permitting union with a harlot. For
"marriage is honorable" (c. xiii. 4), not holy.
Marriage is pure : it does not however also
give holiness, except by forbidding the defile-
ment of that [holiness] which has been given by
our Faith.

"Without which" (he says) "no man shall
see the Lord." Which he also says in the
[Epistle] to the Corinthians. " Be not deceived :
neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor idolaters,
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor covetous persons, nor thieves, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God." (i Cor. vi. 9, 10.)
For how shall he who has become the body of a
harlot, how shall he be able to be the body of
Christ?

[4.] Ver. 15. "Looking diligently^ lest any
man come short of the grace of God ; lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled : lest there be any for-
nicator or profane person." Dost thou see how
everywhere he puts the common salvation into
the hands of each individual ? " Exhorting one


" sanctiAcation,


* as 1 Thess. iv. 3, &c.


another daily" (he says) "while it is called
To-day." (c. iii. 13.) Do not then cast al
[the burden] on your teachers ; do not [cast]
all upon them who have the rule over you : yt
also (he means) are able to edify one another
Which also he said in writing to the Thessa-
lonians, " Edify one another, even as also ye do.'
(i Thess. v. II.) And again, "Comfort onf
another with these words." (i Thess. iv. 18.)
This we also now exhort you.

[5.] If ye be willing, ye will have more sue
cess with each other than we can have. For y
both are with one another for a longer time, am
ye know more than we of each other's affair;
and ye are not ignorant of each other's fail
ings, and ye have more freedom of speech, an^
love, and intimacy ; and these are no smal' [ad
vantages] for teaching, but great and opportun
introductions for it : ye will be more able tha
we both to reprove and to exhort. And not thi
only, but because I am but one, whereas ye ar
many; and ye will be able, however many, t
be teachers. Wherefore I entreat you, do nc
"neglect this gift." (i Tim. iv. 14.) Eao
one of you has a wife, has a friend, has a servan'
has a neighbor ; let him reprove him, let hin
exhort him.

For how is it not absurd, with regard to [bodily
nourishment, to make associations for messin
together, and for drinking together, and to hav
a set day whereon to club with one another, a
they say, and to make up by the associatio
what each person being alone by himself fall
short of — as for instance, if it be necessary t
go to a funeral, or to a dinner, or to assist
neighbor in any matter — and not to do this fc
the purpose of instruction in virtue ? Yea, I en
treat you, let no man neglect it. For great i
the reward he receives from God. And tha
thou mayest understand, he who was entrustej
with the five talents is the teacher : and he wit I
the one is the learner. If the learner shoul I
say, I am a learner, I run no risk, and shoul
hide the reason,' which he received of God, tha
common and simple [reason], and give no ad
vice, should not speak plainly, should not re
buke, should not admonish, if he is able, bi
should bury [his talents] in the earth (for trul
that heart is earth and ashes, which hides th
gift of God) : if then he hides it either from ir
dolence, or from wickedness, it will be no At
fense to him to say, ' I had but one talent
Thou hadst one talent. Thou oughtest then t
have brought one besides, and to have double
the talent. If thou hadst brought one in add;
tion, thou wouldst not have been blamed. Fc
neither did He say to him who brought the two
Wherefore hast thou not brought five ? But H

• Toi* X^oi', includes " word," and *' doctrine."


fiOMILY XXX.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


505


iccounted him of the same worth with him who
jrought the five. Why ? Because he gained as
nuch as he had. And, because he had received
ewer than the one entrusted with the five, he
vas not on this account negHgent, nor did he
ise the smallness [of his trust, as an excuse]
or idleness. And thou oughtest not to have
ooked to him who had the two ; or rather, thou
lughtest to have looked to him, and as he hav-
ng two imitated him who had five, so oughtest
hou to have emulated him who had two. For
f for him who has means and does not give,
here is punishment, how shall there not be the
reatest punishment for him who is able to ex-
ort in any way, and does it not ? In the former
ase the body is nourished, in the latter the soul ;
lere thou preventest temporal death, here eter-
al.

[6.] But I have no [skill of] speech,' you
ly. But there is no need of [skill of] speech
or of eloquence. If thou see a friend going
ito fornication, say to him, Thou art going after
1 evil thing; art thou not ashamed? Dost thou
Dt blush ? This is wrong. ' Why, does he
3t know' (you say) 'that it is wrong?' Yes,
jt he is dragged on by lust. They that are
ck also know that it is bad to drink cold water,
jvertheless they need persons who shall hinder
;hem from it]. For he who is suffering, will
5t easily be able to help himself in his sick-
There is need therefore of thee who art
health, for his cure. And if he be not per-
aded by thy words, watch for him as he goes
ray and hold him fast; peradventure he will
ashamed.

And what advantage is it ' (you say) , ' when
does this for my sake, and because he has
en held back by me ? ' Do not be too mi-
ite in thy calculations. For a while, by what-
er means, withdraw him from his evil practice ;
him be accustomed not to go off to that pit,
lether through thee, or through any means
latever. When thou hast accustomed him not
go, then by taking him after he has gained
iath a litde thou wilt be able to teach him
,t he ought to do this for God's sake, and not
man's. Do not wish to make all right at
ce, since you cannot : but do it gently and by
rees.

If thou see him going off to drinking, or to
es where there is nothing but drunkenness,
in also do the same ; and again on the other
id intreat him, if he observe that thou hast
failing, to help thee and set thee right. For
this way, he will even of himself, bear reproof,
en he sees both that thou needest reproofs as
1, and that thou helpest him, not as one that
' done everything right, nor as a teacher, but

Uyoir.


as a friend and a brother. Say to him, I have
done thee a service, in reminding thee of things
expedient : do thou also, whatever failing thou
seest me have, hold me back," set me right. If
thou see me irritable, if avaricious, restrain me,
bind me by exhortation.

This is friendship ; thus " brother aided by
brother becomes a fortified city." (Prov. xviii.
19.) For not eating and drinking makes friend-
ship : such friendship even robbers have and
murderers. But if we are friends, if we tnily
care for one another, let us in these respects
help one another. This leads us to a profitable
friendship : let us hinder those things which lead
away to hell.

[7.] Therefore let not him that is reproved
be indignant : for we are men and we have fail-
ings ; neither let him who reproves do it as ex-
ulting over him and making a display, but pri-
vately, with gentleness. He that reproves has
need of greater gentleness, that thus he may
persuade [them] to bear the cutting. Do you
not see surgeons, when they burn, when they
cut, with how great gentleness they apply their
treatment ? Much more ought those who reprove
others to act thus. For reproof is sharper even
than fire and knife, and makes [men] start. On
this account surgeons take great pains to make
them bear the cutting quietly, and apply it as
tenderly as possible, even giving in^ a httle, then
giving time to take breath.

So ought we also to offer reproofs, that the
reproved may not start away. Even if therefore,
it be necessary to be insulted, yea even to be
struck, let us not decline it. For those also who
are cut [by the surgeons] utter numberless cries
against those who are cutting them ; they how-
ever heed none of these things, but only the
health of the patients. So indeed in this case
also we ought to do all things that our reproof
may be effectual, to bear all things, looking to
the reward which is in store.

" Bear ye one another's burdens," saith he,
"and so fulfill the law of Christ." (Gal. vi. 2.)
So then, both reproving and bearing with one
another, shall we be able to fulfill edification.
And thus will ye make the labor light for us, in
all things taking a part with us, and stretching
out a hand, and becoming sharers and partakers,
both in one another's salvation, and each one in
his own. Let us then endure patiently, both
bearing " one another's burdens," and reprov-
ing : that we may attain to the good things
promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom
to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and for ever and world
without end. Amen.


' ai'axoiTiffOl'.


* iviiS6vrti,


5o6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX


HOMILY XXXI.


Hebrews xii. 14.


" Follow peace with all men, and holiness,^ without which
no one shall see the Lord."


[i.] There are many things characteristic of
Christianity : but more than all, and better than all,
Love towards one another, and Peace. There-
fore Christ also saith, " My peace I give unto
you." (John xiv. 27.) And again, " By this shall
all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye love
one another." (John xiii. 35.) Therefore Paul
too says, " Follow peace with all men, and holi-
ness," that is, purity,^ " without which no man
shall see the iLord."

" Looking diligently lest any man fail of the
grace of God." As if they were traveling to-
gether on some long journey, in a large com-
pany, he says, Take heed that no man be left
behind : I do not seek this only, that ye should
arrive yourselves, but also that ye should look
diligently after the others.

" Lest any man " (he says) " fail of the grace
of God." (He means the good things to come,
the faith of the gospel, the best course of life :
for they all are of "the Grace of God.") Do
not tell me. It is [but] one that perisheth. Even
for one Christ died. Hast thou no care for him
"for whom Christ died"? (i Cor. viii. 11.)

" Looking diligently," he saith, that is, search-
ing carefully, considering, thoroughly ascertain-
ing, as is done in the case of sick persons, and
in all ways examining, thoroughly ascertaining.
" Lest any root of bitterness springing up trou-
ble you." (Deut. xxix. 18.) This is found in
Deuteronomy ; and he derived it from the meta-
phor of plants. " Lest any root of bitterness,"
he says ; which he said also in another place
when he writes, " A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump." (i Cor. v. 6.) Not for his sake
alone do I wish this, he means, but also on ac-
count of the harm arising therefrom. That is to
say, even if there be a root of this kind, do not
suffer any shoot to come up, but let it be cut off,
that it may not bear its proper fruits, that so it
may not defile and pollute the others also. For
he saith, " Lest any root of bitterness springing
up trouble you ; and by it many be defiled."

And with good reason did he call sin " bit-
ter " : for truly nothing is more bitter than sin,
and they know it, who after they have committed


* or, " the sanctification."^

» atiivoTTiTa, properly a disposition and conduct which creates
respect or reverence: to specially (here as in other places) chastity.
See Horn. xxx. [3], above, p. 504.


it pine away under their conscience, who endui
much bitterness. For being exceedingly bitte
it perverts the reasoning faculty itself. Such
the nature of what is bitter : it is unprofitable.

And well said he, "root of bitterness." I
said not, " bitter," but " of bitterness." For it
possible that a bitter root might bear sw£
fruits ; but it is not possible that a root ai
fountain and foundation of bitterness, shoii
ever bear sweet fruit ; for all is bitter, it Y
nothing sweet, all are bitter, all unpleasant,
full of hatred and abomination.

" And by this " (he says) " many be defilec
That is. Cut off the lascivious persons.

[2.] Ver. 16. " Lest there be any fornicate
or profane person, as Esau, who for one mor
of meat sold his birthright."^

And wherein was Esau a " fornicator "? 1
does not say that Esau was a fornicator. " L
there be any fornicator," he says, then, " foil
after holiness : lest there be any, as Esau, p:
fane " ; that is, gluttonous, without self-contr
worldly, selling away things spiritual.

" Who for one morsel of meat sold his bir
right," who through his own slothfulness s<
this honor which he had from God, and foi
little pleasure, lost the greatest honor and glc
This was suitable to them. This [was the ci
duct] of an abominable, of an unclean pers
So that not only is the fornicator unclean,
also the glutton, the slave of his belly. For
also is a slave of a different pleasure. Ht
forced to be overreaching, he is forced to
rapacious, to behave himself unseemly in
thousand ways, being the slave of that pass*
and oftentimes he blasphemes. So he accoun
" his birthright " to be nothing worth. Thai
providing for temporary refreshment, he w
even to the [sacrifice of his] " birthright."
henceforth " the birthright " belongs to us,
to the Jews. And at the same time also thi
added to their calamity, that the first is becc
last, and the second, first : the one, for coi
geous endurance ; the other last for indolenc

[3.] Ver. 1 7. " For ye know " (he says) " 1
that afterward, when he would have inher
the blessing, he was rejected. For he found
place of repentance, though he sought it c
fully with tears." What now is this? Doth
indeed exclude repentance? By no me-
' But how, you say, was it that " he found


' irpuTsr^ta, " birthright privileges.'


iOMILY XXXI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


507


)lace of repentance " ? ' For if he condemned
limself, if he made a great waiUng, why did he
' find no place of repentance " ? Because it was
lot really a case of repentance. For as the grief
)f Cain was not of repentance, and the murder
)roved it ; so also in this case, his words were
jot those of repentance, and the murder after-
rards proved it. For even he also in intention
lew Jacob. For " The days of mourning for my
ather," he said, " are at hand ; then will I slay
ny brother Jacob." (Gen. xxvii. 41.) "Tears"
lad not power to give him " repentance." And
the Apostle] did not say " by repentance "
imply, but even " with tears, he found no place
)f repentance." Why now? Because he did
lot repent as he ought, for this is repentance ;
le repented not as it behoved him.

For how is it that he [the Apostle] said this ?
rlow did he exhort them again after they had
)ecome "sluggish" (c. vi. 12)? How, when
hey were become "lame"? How, when they
vere "paralyzed"', (ver. 13) ? How, when
hey were "relaxed"' (ver. 12) ? For this
s the beginning of a fall. He seems to me to hint
t some fornicators amongst them, but not to
Irish at that time to correct them : but feigns
gnorance that they might correct themselves.
•"or it is right at first indeed to pretend igno-
ance : but afterwards, when they continue [in
in], then to add reproof also, that so they may
lot become shameless. Which Moses also did
n the case of Zimri and the daughter of Cosbi.

" For he found " (he says) " no place of re-
lentance," he found not repentance ; or that he
iinned beyond ^ repentance. There are then sins
)eyond repentance. His meaning is. Let us not
all by an incurable fall. So long as it is a matter
»f lameness, it is easy to become upright : but if
ve turn out of the way, what will be left? For
t is to those who have not yet fallen that he
hus discourses, striking them with terror, and
ays that it is not possible for him who is fallen,
o obtain consolation ; but to those who have
alien, that they may not fall into despair, he
ays the contrary, speaking thus, " My little chil-
ren, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ
le formed in you." (Gal. iv. 19.) And again,
' Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, are
alien from Grace." (Gal. v. 4.) Lo ! he tes-
ifies that they had fallen away. For he that
tandeth, hearing that it is not possible to obtain
)ardon after having fallen, will be more zealous,
nd more cautious about his standing : if however
hou use the same violence towards one also
ho is fallen, he will never rise again. For by
ifhat hope will he show forth the change ?

But he not only wept (you say), but also


* [irapoAudc'i/Tas . . . irap<iftfvov%, as in ver. la.]
■ liii^ova, " committed sins too great for repentance."


" sought earnestly." He does not then exclude
repentance ; but makes them careful not to fall.

[4.] As many then as do not believe in Hell,
let them call these things to mind : as many as
think to sin without being punished, let them
take account of these things. Why did Esau
not obtain pardon? Because he repented not
as he ought. Wouldest thou see perfect repent-
ance? Hear of the repentance of Peter after
his denial. For the Evangelist in relating to us
the things concerning him, says, " And he went
out and wept bitterly." (Matt. xxvi. 75.)
Therefore even such a sin was forgiven him,
because he repented as he ought. Although the
Victim had not yet been offered, nor had The
Sacrifice as yet been made, nor was sin as yet
taken away, it still had the rule and sovereignty.

And that thou mayest learn, that this denial
[arose] not so much from sloth, as from His be-
ing forsaken of God, who was teaching him to
know the measures of man and not to contradict
the sayings of the Master, nor to be more high-
minded than the rest, but to know that nothing
can be done without God, and that " Except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain who
build it" (Ps. cxxvii. i) : therefore also Christ
said to him alone, " Satan desired to sift thee as
wheat," and I allowed it not, " that thy faith
may not fail." (Luke xxii. 31, 32.) For since it
was likely that he would be high-minded, being
conscious to himself that he loved Christ more
than they all, therefore " he wept bitterly " ; and
he did other things after his weeping, of the
same character. For what did he do? After
this he exposed himself to dangers innumerable,
and by many means showed his manliness and
courage.

Judas also repented, but in an evil way : for he
hanged himself. Esau too repented, as I said ;
or rather, he did not even repent ; for his tears
were not [tears] of repentance, but rather of
pride and wrath. And what followed proved
this. The blessed David repented, thus saying,
" Every night will I wash my bed : I will water
my couch with my tears." (Ps. vi. 6.) And
the sin which had been committed long ago,
after so many years, after so many generations
he bewailed, as if it had recently occurred.

[5.] For he who repents ought not to be
angry, nor to be fierce, but to be contrite, as
one condemned, as not having boldness, as one
on whom sentence has been passed, as one who
ought to be saved by mercy alone, as one who
has shown himself ungrateful toward his Bene-
factor, as unthankful, as reprobate, as worthy of
punishments innumerable. If he considers these
things, he will not be angry, he will not be indig-
nant, but will mourn, will weep, will groan, and
lament night and day.

He that is penitent ought never to forget his


5o8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX^


sin, but on the one hand, to beseech God not to
remember it ; while on the other, he himself
never forgets it. If we remember it, God will
forget it. Let us exact punishment from our-
selves ; let us accuse ourselves ; thus shall we
propitiate the Judge. For sin confessed becomes
less, but not confessed worse. For if sin add to
itself shamelessness and ingratitude, how will he
who does not know that he sinned before be at
all able to guard himself from falling again into
the same [evils] ?

Let us then not deny [our sins], I beseech
you, nor be shameless, that we may not unwil-
lingly pay the penalty. Cain heard God say,
" Where is Abel thy brother ? And he said, I
know not; am I my brother's keeper?" (Gen.
iv. 9.) Seest thou how this made his sin more
grievous ? But his father did not act thus. What
then? When he heard, " Adam, where art thou ? "
(Gen. iii. 9), he said, " I heard Thy voice, and
I was afraid, because I am naked, and I hid my-
self." (Gen. iii. 10.) It is a great good to
acknowledge our sins, and to bear them in mind
continually. Nothing so effectually cures a fault,
as a continual remembrance of it. Nothing
makes a man so slow to wickedness.

[6.] I know that conscience starts back, and
endures not to be scourged by the remembrance
of evil deeds ; but hold tight thy soul and place
a muzzle on it. For like an ill-broken ' horse,
so it bears impatiently [what is put upon it],
and is unwilling to persuade itself that it has
sinned : but all this is the work of Satan.'' But
let us persuade it that it has sinned ; let us per-
suade it that it has sinned, that it may also re-
pent, in order that having repented it may
escape torment. How dost thou think to obtain
pardon for thy sins, tell me, when thou hast not
yet confessed them ? Assuredly he is worthy of
compassion and kindness who has sinned. But
thou who hast not yet persuaded thyself [that
thou hast sinned], how dost thou think to be
pitied, when thou art thus without shame for
some things?'

Let us persuade ourselves that we have sinned.
Let us say it not with the tongue only, but also
with the mind. Let us not call ourselves sinners,
but also count over our sins, going over them
each specifically.* I do not say to thee. Make
a parade of thyself, nor accuse thyself before
others : but be persuaded by the prophet when
he saith, " Reveal thy way unto the Lord." (Ps.
xxxvii. 5.) Confess these things before God.
Confess before the Judge thy sins with prayer ;
if not with tongue, yet in memory, and be worthy
of mercy.

If thou keep thy sins continually in remem-
brance, thou wilt never bear in mind the wrongs


• «rt Tiffti'.

* itvr' tUoi, see above, p. 413.


of thy neighbor. I do not say, if thou art p
suaded that thou art thyself a sinner ; this dc
not avail so to humble the soul, as sins the
selves [taken] by themselves, and examin
specifically." Thou wilt have no remembran
of wrongs [done thee], if thou hast these thir
continually in remembrance ; thou wilt feel
anger, thou wilt not revile, thou wilt have
high thoughts, thou wilt not fall again into \
same [sins], thou wilt be more earnest towa?
good things.

[7.] Seest thou how many excellent [effec
are produced from the remembrance of our si;
Let us then write them in our minds. I kn
that the soul does not endure a recollect
which is so bitter : but let us constrain i
force it. It is better that it should be gnav
with the remembrance now, than at that ti
with vengeance.

Now, if thou remember them, and continu;
present them before God (see p. 448), and p
for them, thou wilt speedily blot them out ; '■
if thou forget them now, thou wilt then be
minded of them even against thy will, when tl
are brought out publicly before the whole woi
displayed before all, both friends and enemi
and Angels. For surely He did not say to Dai
only, " What thou didst secretly, I will mj
manifest to " (2 Sam. xii. 12) all, but even to
all. Thou wert afraid of men (he said) and
spected them more than God ; and God see
thee, thou caredst not, but wert ashamed bef
men. For it says," " the eyes of men, this
their fear." Therefore thou shalt suffer puni
ment in that very point ; for I will reprove th
setting thy sins before the eyes of all. For t
this is true, and that in that day the sins of
all are [to be] publicly displayed, unless we n
do them away by continual remembrance, h'l
how cruelty and inhumanity are publicly
posed, " I was an hungered " (He says) " and
gave Me no meat." (Matt. xxv. 42.) WI
are these things said? Is it in a comer? Is
in a secret place ? ' By no means. When the
" When the Son of Man shall come in His glor
(Matt. xxv. 31, 32), and "all the nations" :
gathered together, when He has separated '
one from the other, then will He speak in 1
audience of all, and will " set " them " on ]
right hand " and " on " His " left " (Matt. »
33) : "I was an hungered and ye gave Me
meat."

See again the five virgins also, hearing bef( !
all, " I know you not." (Matt. xxv. 12.) l!
the five and five do not set forth the number I
five only, but those virgins who are wicked ;i I
cruel and inhuman, and those who are not su .

^ Kar' elios.

B This seems to be alleged as a citation from Holy Scripture, I

it does not appear what passage St. Chrysostom had in view. ii

' ct' napaPvartf. I


Homily XXXI.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


509


So also he that buried his one talent, heard be-
bre all, even of those who had brought the five
ind the two, "Thou wicked and slothful servant."
Matt. XXV. 26.) But not by words alone, but
)y deeds also does He then convict them : even
is the Evangelist also says, " They shall look on
rlim whom they pierced." (John xix. 37.)
"or the resurrection shall be of all at the same
ime, of sinners and of the righteous. At the
lame time shall He be present to all in the
udgment.

[8.] Consider therefore who they are who
hall then be in dismay, who in grief, who
iragged away to the fire, while the others are
rowned. "Come" (He says), " ye blessed of
vly Father, inherit the kingdom which hath
)een prepared for you from the foundation of
he world." (Matt. xxv. 34.) And again, " De-
»art from Me into the fire which hath been pre-
lared for the devil and his angels." (Matt. xxv.

•[ Let us not merely hear the words but write

hem also before our sight, and let us imagine

,1 Urn to be now present and saying these things,

nd that we are led away to that fire. What

eart shall we have ? What consolation ? And

\ rhat, when we are cut asunder ? And what when

re are accused of rapacity? What excuse shall

re have to utter? What specious argument?

, lone : but of necessity bound, bending down,

„ re must be dragged to the mouths of the fur-

', ace, to the river of fire, to the darkness, to the

,. ever-dying punishments, and entreat no one.

'or it is not, it is not possible. He says, to pass

, cross from this side to that : for " there is a

,j reat gulf betwixt us and you" (Luke xvi. 26),

( nd it is not possible even for those who wish it

:l

k

n


to go across, and stretch but a helping hand :
but we must needs burn continually, no one aid-
ing us, even should it be father or mother, or any
whosoever, yea though he have much boldness
toward God. For, it says, " A brother doth not
redeem; shall man redeem ? " (Ps. xlix. 8.)

Since then it is not possible to have one's
hopes of salvation in another, but [it must be]
in one's self after the lovingkindness of God,
let us do all things, I entreat you, so that our
conduct may be pure, and our course of life the
best, and that it may not receive any stain even
from the beginning. But if not, at all events,
let us not sleep after the stain, but continue
always washing away the pollution by repent-
ance, by tears, by prayers, by works of mercy.

What then, you say, if I cannot do works of
mercy?* But thou hast " a cup of cold water "
(Matt. X. 42), however poor thou art. But thou
hast "two mites" (Mark xii. 42), in whatever
poverty thou art ; but thou hast feet, so as to
visit the sick, so as to enter into a prison ;
but thou hast a roof, so as to receive strangers.
For there is no pardon, no, none for him who
does not do works of mercy.

These things we say to you continually, that
we may effect if it be but a little by the contin-
ued repetition : these things we say, not caring
so much for those who receive the benefits, as
for yourselves. For ye give to them indeed
things here, but in return you receive heavenly
things : which may we all obtain, in Christ Jesus
our Lord, with whom to the Father be glory,
together with the Holy Ghost, now and ever,
and world without end. Amen.


1 iXtTrjuotrvyrjV cpya^cadai.


\\]


k


W


!M


19


5IO


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI


HOMILY XXXII.


Hebrews xii. 18-24.


" For ye are not come unto a fire * that might be touched
and that burned, and unto blackness, and darkness,
and tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the
voice of words, which voice they that heard entreated
that the word should not be spoken to them any
more.2 (For they could not endure that which was
commanded. And if so much as a beast touch the
mountain, it shall be stoned.* And so terrible was
the -sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake.) But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and
unto the city of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusa-
lem; and to an innumeraljle company of Angels, to
the general assembly,* and Church of the first-born
which are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge
of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect:
and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant :
and to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better
things than' that of Abel."

[i.] Wonderful indeed were the things in
the Temple, the Holy of Holies ; and again
awful were those things also that were done at
Mount Sina, " the fire, the darkness, the black-
ness, the tempest." (Cf. Deut. xxxiii. 2.) For,
it says, " God appeared in Sina," and long ago
were these things celebrated." The New Cove-
nant, however, was not given with any of these
things, but has been given in simple discourse
by God.^

See then how he makes the comparison in
these points also. And with good reason has
he put them afterwards. For when he had per-
suaded them by innumerable [arguments], when
he had also shown the difference between each
covenant, then afterwards, the one having been
already condemned, he easily enters on these
points also.

And what says he ? " For ye are not come
unto a fire that might be touched, and that
burned, and unto blackness, and darkness, and
tempest, and the sound of a trumpet, and the
voice of words ; which they that heard entreated
that the word should not be spoken to them any


1 op«t is omitted in Mr. Field's text, as by some [all — F. G.]
critical editors of the New Test. It is not referred to by St. Chrys.

* ** that not a word more should be spoken to them.

* [The words ^ 0oA65t KaTaTo^evOrftreTaL are omitted by St.
Chrys., as by all critical editors of the N. T., and arc not given in
thek. v.— F. G.l

* wavrtyvpfi.. See next column. This word is connected with
the preceding ij.v(>ia<rir ayye'Awf by St. Chrys. as appears from his
interpretation. So the Latin Vulgate has ei tnultorutn tniUittm
angelorutn /requentiam, et ecclesiam primitivorum, &c. [The
English edition translates " to myriads of angels in festive gather-
ing." Whether i7avT\yvptt. should be connected with the preceding
or following clause is merely a question of punctuation. It is joined
to the latter both in the A. V. and the R. V. — F. G.]

■ ** in comparison of."

' ^ficTo, e.g. Ps. xviii., Ixviii., Habak. iii. as well as Ex. xix.
^ irapa Ocou. The reading of the common edition is Xpi^Tov:
which wu that of Mutianut.


These things, he means, are terrible ; and i
terrible that they could not even bear to he;
them, that not even " a beast " dared to go u
(But things that come hereafter' are not sue
For what is Sina to Heaven? And what tl
" fire which might be touched " to God wl
cannot be touched ? For " God is a consumii
fire." — c. V. 29.) For it is said, "Let n
God speak, but let Moses speak unto us. Ar
so fearful was that which was commande
Though even a beast touch the mountain,
shall be stoned ; Moses said, I exceedingly fe
and quake." (Ex. xx. 19.) What wonder
respects the people? He himself who enten
into " the darkness where God was," saith, "
exceedingly fear and quake." (Ex. xx. 21.)

[2.] " But ye are come unto Mount Sion at
unto the city of the living God, the heaven
Jerusalem : and to an innumerable company (
angels and to the general assembly and Chun
of the first-born which are written in Heave
and to God the Judge of all, and to the spiri
of just men made perfect, and to Jesus tl
Mediator of the New Covenant, and to tl
blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better [thing
than that of Abel."

Instead of " Moses," Jesus. Instead of tl
people, "myriads of angels."

Of what " first-born " does he speak ? Of tl
faithful.

"And to the spirits of just men made perfect
With these shall ye be, he says.

" And to Jesus the mediator of the New Co\
nant, and to the blood of sprinkling that spea
eth better [things] than that of Abel." E
then the [blood] "of Abel" speak? "Ye:
he saith, " and by it he being dead yet spes
eth." (c. xi. 4.) And again God says, "T
voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto M<
(Gen. iv. 10.) Either this [meaning] or th;
because it is still even now celebrated : 1
not in such way as that of Christ. For t
has cleansed all men, and sends forth a vo
more clear and more distinct, in proportion
it has greater testimony, namely that by facts,

Ver. 25-29. "See that ye refuse not H
that speaketh. For if they escaped not, w
refused him that spake' on earth, much mt
shall not we escape, if we turn away from H
that speaketh from heaven. Whose voice th
shook the earth : but now hath He promisi


• Ta fiera TciuTtt.

* XyiuLMiiovra., " that made a revelatiiw,":, see above, ]p. ^


[OMILY XXXII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


5"


lying, Yet once more I shake not the earth
nly, but also heaven. And this word, Yet
nee more, signifieth the removing of those
lings that are shaken, as of things that are
lade, that those which cannot be shaken may
!main. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom
hich cannot be moved, let us have grace
hereby we ' serve God acceptably with rever-
nce and godly fear. For our God is a con-
iming fire."

[3.] Fearful were those things, but these are
ir more admirable and glorious. For here
lere is not " darkness," nor " blackness," nor
tempest." It seems to me that by these words
e hints at the obscurity of the Old [Testa-
lent], and the overshadowed and veiled^ char-
;ter of the Law. And besides the Giver of the
aw appears in fire terrible, and apt to punish
lose who transgress.

But what are " the sounds of the trumpet " ?
robably it is as though some King were com-
g. This at all events will also be at the sec-
id coming. "At the last trump" (i Cor. xv.
) all must be raised. But it is the tmmpet
His voice which effects this. At that time
sn all things were objects of sense, and sights,
d sounds ; now all are objects of understand-

and invisible.
And, it says, "there was much smoke." (See
xix. 18.) For since God is said to be
and appeared thus in the bush. He indi-
es the fire even by the smoke. And what is
le blackness and the darkness " ? He again
)resses its fearfulness. Thus Isaiah also says ;
nd the house was filled with smoke." (Isa.
4.) And what is the object of " the tem-
t"? The human race was careless. It was
efore needful that they should be aroused
ese things. For no one was so dull as not
lave had his thoughts raised up, when these
[gs were done, and the Law ordained.'
Moses spake, and God answered him by a
;e " (Ex. xix. 19) : * for it was necessary that
oice of God should be uttered. Inasmuch
e was about to pronmlgate His Law through
as, therefore He makes him worthy of confi-
I'.e. They saw him not, because of the thick
luess : they heard him not, because of the
less of his voice. What then ? " God
ered by a voice," addressing the multitude : '
d his name shall be called.'


i reading of St. Chrys. here and below (Horn, xxxiu.) is
roftcv, but elsewhere he concurs with nearly all the critical
L the A. V, and the R. V. in reading XaTpeiiw/ief . — F. G.]
J wvttrKt.atTijLKvov Kat wyKeKaXvixfjiivov,

■fAOfcrOV/AcVu)!'.

T Chrys. says this referring to, without expressly citing, the
JilMarwi' of the text.
ilUfYopCtf.

^' ovona aiiTov (caA^ffeToi. Mr. Field with hesitation adopts
: reading of the Catena xaXetreTat, in the sense here given.
ISS. have KaActrai and (excepting one) not any stop after it.
lys. probably has in view the fact of Moses being called up to
Tof the Mount, Ex. xix. 20.


"They entreated " (he says) "that the word
should not be spoken to them any more." '

From the first therefore they were themselves
the cause of God's being manifested through the
Flesh.* Let Moses speak with us, and "Let
not God speak with us." (Ex. xx. 9.) They
who make comparisons elevate the one side the
more, that they may show the other to be far
greater. In this respect also our [privileges] •
are more gentle and more admirable. For they
are great in a twofold respect : because while
they are glorious and greater, they are more
accessible. This he says also in the Epistle to
the Corinthians : " with unveiled countenance "
(2 Cor. iii. 18), and, "not as Moses put a veil
over his face." (2 Cor. iii. 13.) They, he
means, were not counted worthy of what we
[are]. For of what were they thought worthy?
They saw " darkness, blackness " ; they heard
" a voice." But thou also hast heard a voice,
not through darkness, but through flesh. Thou
hast not been disturbed, neither troubled, but
thou hast stood and held discourse with the
Mediator.

And in another way, by the " darkness " he
shows the invisibleness." " And darkness " (it
says) " was under His feet." (Ps. xviii. 9.)

T/ien even Moses feared, but now no one.

As the people then stood below, so also do
we. They were not below, but below Heaven.
The Son is near to God, but not as Moses."

There was a wilderness, here a city.

[4.] " And to an innumerable company of
angels." Here he shows the joy, the delight, in
place of the " blackness " and " darkness " and
" tempest."

" And to the general assembly and church of
the first-born which are written in Heaven, and
to God the Judge of all." They did not draw
near, but stood afar off, even Moses : but " ye
are come near."

Here he makes them fear, by saying, "And
to God the Judge of all " ; not of the Jews alone,
and the faithful, but even of the whole world.

" And to the spirits of just men made per-
fect." He means the souls of those who are
approved.

" And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Cove-
nant : and to the blood of sprinkling," that is,
of purification, "which speaketh better things


' " that not a word more should be spoken to them."

* Ta TjfitTtpa. *" TO aoparov.

" This passage, Mr. Field observes, is difficult and probably cor-
rupt. St. Chrysostom seems to mean, that we are like the people in
that we are still here below, not in heaven: for they were " below "
only in the sense of being below in reference to the mountain and '
heaven to which Moses had been called up. At the same time as
being sons of God we are near to Him with a special neariiess — a
spiritual and so most intimate nearness — of the soul, not like that
bodily nearness with which Moses was called to draw near.

If, however, " the Son " be understood of the Only-Bcgotten, it
may be supposed that there is some latent connection of thought,
as, that in His nearness His people also arc brought near to th«
Fattier in a manner far more intimate than was granted to Moses.


512


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX


than that of Abel." And if the blood speaks,
much more does He who, having been slain,
lives. But what does it speak ? " The Spirit
also " (he says) "speaketh with groanings which
cannot be uttered." (Rom. viii. 26.) How
does He speak ? Whenever He falls into a sin-
cere mind. He raises it up and makes it speak.

[5.] " See that ye refuse not Him that speak-
eth " ; that is, that ye reject' [Him] not. " For
if they escaped not who refused Him that spake ^
on earth." Whom does he mean? Moses, I
suppose. But what he says is this : if they,
having " refused Him " when He gave laws " on
earth, did not escape," how shall we refuse Him,
when He gives laws from Heaven ? He declares
here not that He is another ; far from it. He
does not set forth One and Another, but He
appears terrible, when uttering His Voice " from
Heaven."^ [It is He Himself then, both the one
and the other : but the One is terrible. For he
expresses not a difference of Persons but of the
gift. Whence does this appear ? " For if they
escaped not," he says, " who refused Him that
spake on earth, much more shall not we escape,
if we turn away from Him that speaketh from
heaven." What then ? Is this one different from
the other ? How then does he say, " whose
voice then shook the earth " ? For it was the
" voice " of Him who " then " gave the Law, which
" shook the earth. But now hath He promised,
saying. Yet once more I shake not the earth
only, but also heaven. And this word Yet once
more, signifieth the removing of those things
which are shaken, as of things that are made."
All things therefore will be taken away, and will
be compacted anew for the better. For this is
what he suggests here. Why then dost thou
grieve when thou sufferest in a world that abideth
not ; when thou art afflicted in a world which
will very shortly have passed away ? If our rest
were [to be] in the latter period of the world,
then one ought to be afflicted in looking to the
end.

" That " (he says) " those which cannot be
shaken may remain." But of what sort are
" 'those things which cannot be shaken " ? The
things to come.

[6.] Let us then do all for this, that we may
attain that [rest], that we may enjoy those good
things. Yea, I pray and beseech you, let us be
earnest for this. No one builds in a city which
is going to fall down. Tell me, I pray you, if


* airoYVwTC.

' XPvi'-'^'r^iovTa, The word is used of God's speaking. See
above, Horn, xxiii. [i], p. 469. St. Chrysostom's argument seems
to oblige us to understand in the next clause something equivalent
to " you say," which words have been inserted for clearness' sake.
The supposition that Moses was meant by rbi- xP»?^ifliTt^o»'T(i is men-
tioned only to be rejected. [The words " you say " arc omitted in
this edition as unnecessary. xP^'**^'"^^"*''''' docs not refer so much
to God's speaking as to Moses ' speaking by God's direction. — F. G.]

' Comp. St, Iren. pp. 330, 338, 403, O. T.


any one said that after a year, this city woi
fall, but such a city not at all, wouldest thou ha
built in that which was about to fall ? So I a!
now say this. Let us not build in this world ;
will fall after a little, and all will be destroy*
But why do I say. It will fall? Before its i
we shall be destroyed, and suffer what is fearft
we shall be removed from them.

Why build we upon the sand ? Let us bu
upon the rock : for whatsoever may happen, tl
building remains impregnable, nothing will
able to destroy it. With good reason. For
all such attacks that region is inaccessible, j
as this is accessible. For earthquakes, and fit
and inroad of enemies, take it away from
even while we are alive : and oftentimes desti
us with it.

And even in case it remains, disease speet
removes us, or if we stay, suffers us not to en
it fairly. For what pleasure [is there], wh
there are sicknesses, and false accusations, ;
envy, and intrigues? Or should there be ni
of these things, yet oftentimes if we have
children, we are disquieted, we are impatient,
having any to whom we may leave houses
all other things ; and thenceforward we
away as laboring for others. Yea oftentimes
the inheritance passes away to our enemies,
only after we are gone, but even while we
What is more miserable then than to toil
enemies, and ourselves to be gathering sins
gether in order that they may have rest ?
many are the instances of this that are see:
our cities. And yet [I say no more] le
should grieve those who have been despo
For I could have mentioned some of them
by name, and have had many histories to
and many houses to show you, which have
ceived for masters the enemies of those
labored for them : nay not houses only,
slaves also and the whole inheritance have o
times come round to enemies. For sucl!
things human.

But in Heaven there is nothing of this to
— lest after a man is dead, his enemy si
come, and succeed to his inheritance,
there there is neither death nor enmity
tabernacles of the saints are permanent ab(
and among those saints is exultation, joy,
ness. For " the voice of rejoicing " (it is
is " in the tabernacles of the righteous."
cxviii. 15.) They are eternal, having no:
They do not fall down through age, they d
change their owners, but stand continue
their best estate. With good reason. For
is nothing corniptible, nor perishable thei
all is immortal, and undefiled. On this bi i'
let us exhaust all our wealth. We have n<
of carpenters nor of laborers. The hands
poor build such houses ; the lame, the blin


Eft

th(
till


HOMII-Y XXXII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


513


maimed, they build those houses. And wonder
not, since they procure even a kingdom for us,
and give us confidence towards God.

[7.] For mercifulness ' is as it were a most
} excellent art, and a protector of those who
labor at it. For it is dear to God, and ever
stands near Him readily asking favor for
whomsoever it will, if only it be not wronged
by us ; And it is wronged, when we do it by
extortion. (See p. 481.) So, if it be pure,
it gives great confidence to those who offer it
up. It intercedes even for those who have
offended, so great is its power, even for those
who have sinned. It breaks the chains, disperses
the darkness, quenches the fire, kills the worm,
drives away the gnashing of teeth. The gates
of heaven open to it with great security : And
as when a Queen is entering, no one of the
guards stationed at the doors dares to inquire
who she is, and whence, but all straightway re-
ceive her ; so also indeed with mercifulness. For
she is truly a queen indeed, making men like
God. For, he says, " ye shall be merciful, as
^our Heavenly Father is merciful." (Luke vi. 36.)
, She is winged and buoyant, having golden
] )inions, with a flight which greatly delights the
a mgels. There, it is said, are " the wings of a
s, love covered with silver, and her back with the
;! 'ellowness of gold." (Ps. Ixviii. 13.) As some
fjj love golden and living, she flies, with gentle
a x)k, and mild eye. Nothing is better than that
ye. The peacock is beautiful, but in compari-
;ee on of her, is a jackdaw. So beautiful and worthy
i k f admiration is this bird. She continually looks
;-o pwards ; she is surrounded abundantly with
ai tod's glory : she is a virgin with golden wings,
ti ecked out, with a fair and mild countenance.
-a be is winged, and buoyant, standing by the
,ie )yal throne. When we are judged, she sud-
enly flies in, and shows herself, and rescues us
om punishment, sheltering us with her own
d ings.

God would have her rather than sacrifices.

uch does He discourse concerning her : so

i e loves her. " He will relieve " (it is said)

the widow" and "the fatherless" (Ps. cxlvi.

and the poor. God wishes to be called from

"The Lord is pitiful and merciful,^ long-

ffering, and of great mercy " (Ps. cxiv. 8), and

le. The mercy of God is over all the earth.

e hath saved the race of mankind (see Ps.

Iv. 9) : For unless she had pitied us, all things

luld have perished. " When we were enemies "

Jee Rom. v. 10), she "reconciled" us, she

Jought innumerable blessings ; she persuaded

: Son of God to become a slave, and to empty

,,;'^ mself [of His glory] .^ (Phil. ii. 7.)


-.ib T.


;eb»


or, '* charity," i^irfftotrvvr}. See above, p. 509.

[iAeij^wi', akin to (Aejj^oaui'T), which St. Chrysostom is here
.nbtng.] ^ Ktvonrai itLvrbv,


Let US earnestly emulate her by whom we
have been saved ; let us love her, let us prize
her before wealth, and apart from wealth, let us
have a merciful soul. Nothing is so character-
istic of a C'hristian, as mercy. There is nothing
which both unbelievers and all men so admire,
as when we are merciful. For oftentimes we
are ourselves also in need of this mercy, and
say to God " Have mercy upon us, after Thy
great goodness." (Ps. li. i.) Let us begin first
ourselves : or rather it is not we that begin first.
For He has Himself already shown His mercy
towards us : yet at least let us follow second.
For if men have mercy on a merciful man, even
if he has done innumerable wrongs, much more
does God.

[8.] Hear the prophet saying, " But I " (his
words are) " am like a fruitfiil olive tree in the
house of God." (Ps. Hi. 8.) Let us become
such : let us become "as an olive tree " : let us
be laden on every side with the commandments.
For it is not enough to be as an olive tree, but
also to be fruitful. For there are persons who
in doing alms give little, [only once] in the
course of the whole year, or in each week, or
who give away a mere chance matter. These
are indeed olive trees, but not fruitful ones, but
even withered. For because they show com-
passion they are olive trees, but because they do
it not liberally, they are not fruitful olive trees.
But let us be fruitful.

I have often said and I say now also : the
greatness of the charity * is not shown by the
measure of what is given, but by the disposi-
tion of the giver. You know the case of the
widow. It is well continually to bring this
example [forward], that not even the poor man
may despair of himself, when he looks on her
who threw in the two mites. Some contrib-
uted even hair in the fitting up of the temple,
and not even these were rejected. (Ex. xxxv.
23.) But if when they had gold, they had
brought hair, they [would have been] accursed :
but if, having this only, they brought it, they
were accepted. For this cause Cain also was
blamed, not because he offered worthless things,
but because they were the most worthless he had.
"Accursed " (it is said) " is he which hath a male,
and sacrificeth unto God a corrupt thing." (Mai.
i. 14.) He did not speak absolutely, but, "he
that hath" (he says) and spareth [it]. If then
a man have nothing, he is freed from blame, or
rather he has a reward. For what is of less
value than two farthings, or more worthless than
hair? What than a pint of meal? But nevertheless
these were approved equally with the calves and
the gold. For "a man is accepted according to
that he hath, not according to that he hath not."


* i\«rfiiotrvvTi^,


5H


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI:


(2 Cor. viii. 1 2.) And, it says, " according as thy
hand hath, do good." (Prov. iii. 27.)

Wherefore, T entreat you, let us readily empty
out what we have for the poor. Even if it be
little we shall receive the same reward with them
who have cast the most ; or rather, more than
those who cast in ten thousand talents. If we
do these things we shall obtain the unspeakable


treasures of God ; if we not only hear, but pra
tice also, if we do not praise [charity], butal:
show [it] by our deeds. Which may we ;
attain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom
the Father together with the Holy Ghost, 1
glory, might, honor, now and for ever and wor
without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXIII.

Hebrews xii. 28, 29.


" Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be
moved, let us have grace [or gratitude,] ' whereby
we serve ^ God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear. For our God is a consuming fire."

[i.] In another place he says the same, " for
the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal " (2 Cor. iv.
18) ; and from this makes an exhortation with
regard to the evils which we endure in this pres-
ent life ; and here he does this, and says, let us
continue steadfast ; " let us have thankfulness,"
i.e., let us give thanks unto God. For not only
we ought not to be discouraged at present things,
but even to show the greatest gratitude to Him,
for those to come.

"Whereby we serve God acceptably," that is
to say, ' for thus is it possible to serve God accept-
ably,' by giving him thanks in all things. " Do
all things " (he says) " without murmurings and
disputings." (Phil. ii. 14.) For whatever work
a man does with murmuring, he cuts away and
loses his reward ; as the Israelites — how great
a penalty they paid for their murmurings.
Wherefore he says, "Neither murmur ye." (i
Cor. X. 10.) It is not therefore possible to
"serve" Him "acceptably" without a sense of
gratitude to Him for all things, both for our trials,
and the alleviations of them. That is, let us utter
nothing hasty, nothing disrespectful, but let us
humble ourselves that we may be reverential.
For this is " with reverence and godly fear."

C. xiii. I, 2. " Let brotherly love continue.
Be not forgetful of hospitality,' for hereby some
have entertained angels unawares." See how
he enjoins them to preserve what they had :
he does not add other things. He did not say,
" Be loving as brethren," but, " Let brotherly


* X'^^**' «xw^"'. St. Chrys. understands the expression in this
tense; which it has elsewhere: as in Luke xvii. 9: 2 Tim. i. 3.

3 Kinptvotitv is the reading of all the MSS., the common texts
have Aarpet'uifjLCl'.

* <t>t\oieviaif see below, [5]. [Neither the A. V. " to entertain
strangers, nor the R. V. to show love to strangers," have hit
upon the natural meaning of i^iKo^tvia^ adopted throughout by St.
Chrys. — F. q.J


love continue." And again, he did not sa
" Be hospitable," as if they were not, but, " 1
not forgetful of hospitality," for this was like
to happen owing to their afflictions.

Therefore* (he says) " some have entertaint
angels unawares." Seest thou how great w
the honor, how great the gain !

What is "unawares"?" They entertaim
them without knowing it. Therefore the r
ward also was great, because he entertained thei
not knowing that they were Angels. For if
had known it, it would have been nothing wond(
ful. Some say that he here alludes to Lot al:

[2.] Ver. 3-5. " Remember them that are
bonds, as bound with them, them which sufl
adversity as being yourselves also in the bo<
Marriage is honorable in all,* and the bed unt
filed ; but whoremongers and adulterers God ^
judge. Let your conversation be without covetci
ness : being content with such things as ye hav

See how large is his discourse concern
chastity. " Follow peace," he said, " and
ness ; Lest there be any fornicator or prof 1
person " (c. xii. 14) ; and again, " Fomi
tors and adulterers God will judge." (c.
16.) In every case, the prohibition is
a penalty. " Follow peace with all men,"
says, " and holiness, without which no man s
see the Lord : But fornicators and adulte'
God will judge."

And having first set down " Marriage is he
able in all men, and the bed undefiled,'
shows that he rightly added what follows,
if marriage has been conceded, justly is
fornicator punished, justly does the aduL
suffer vengeance.

Here he strips for' the heretics. He die lot
say again. Let no one be a fornicator ; |>iit
having said it once for all, he then went c fas

* Sia TovTo, or 5ia Taiirij?, " thereby." " f\aBov. . ■

^ [The R. V. puts this and the following clause in the i §m-

tive, '* IjCt marriage be had in honor among all." TheGrfnw

simply the adjective and noun which would naturally be co K^^

by the simple copula. — F. G.j ' inrobvt-rQ r**-


Homily XXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


515


with a general exhortation, and not as directing
himself against them.

" Let your conversation be without covetous-
ness," he says. He did not say, Possess noth-
ing, but, " Let your conversation be without
covetousness " : that is, let it show forth the
philosophical character of your mind.' [And it
will show it, if we do not seek superfluities, if we
keep only to what is necessary.] '■' For he says
above also, " And ye took joyfully the spoil-
ing of your goods." (c. x. 34.) He gives
these exhortations, that they might not be cove-
tous.

" Being content " (he says) " with such things
as ye have." Then here also the consolation ;
(ver. 5) "For He" (he says) "hath said, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee " ; (ver. 6)
" so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper,
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me."
Again consolation in their trials.

[3.] Ver. 7. "Remember them which have
the rule over you." This he was laboring to say
above : therefore " Follow peace with all men."
(c. xii. 14.) He gave this exhortation also
to the Thessalonians, to " hold them in honor
exceedingly." (i Thess. v. 13.)

"Remember" (he says) "them which have
the rule over you,' who have spoken unto you
the word of God, whose faith follow, considering
jj the end of their conversation." What kind of
following is this ? Truly the best : for he says,
beholding their life, " follow their faith." For
from a pure Ufe [cometh] faith.

Or else by "faith," he means steadfastness.

How so ? Because they believe in the things to

"ome. For they would not have shown forth a

ire life, if they had questioned about the things

come, if they had doubted. So that here

.0 he is applying a remedy to the same [evil].*

Ver. 8, 9. "Jesus Christ the same yester-

'liiy and to-day and for ever. Be not carried

out with divers and strange doctrines. For it

Ljood that the heart be established with grace,

t with meats, which have not profited them

it have been occupied therein."

In these words, " Jesus Christ the same yester-

y and to-day and forever," "yesterday" means

i the time that is past : " to-day," the present :

or ever," the endless which is to come. That

to say : Ye have heard of an High Priest, but

it an High Priest who fails. He is always the

ine. As though there were some who said, ' He

- not, another will come,' he says this, that He

>ho was " yesterday and to-day," is " the same

for ever." For even now the Jews say, that


•t


' [J'he R. V. translates, " Be ye free from the love of money,"
uh the margin, " Let your turn of mind be free." — K. G.] _
rt ^ [This passage is omitted in Field's text, though conuined in
" Benedictine, and should of course be omitted here. — F. G.]

* iiyovu-ivuiv, " spiritual leaders and guides."

• ri avrit depa-ntvti, " unchastity."


another will come ; and having deprived them-
selves of Him that is will fall into the hands of
Antichrist.

" Be not carried about with divers and strange
doctrines." Not " with strange doctrines " only,
but neither with " divers ones."

" For it is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace, not with meats which
have not profited them that have been occupied '
therein." Here he gendy hints at those who
introduce the observance of " meats." For by
Faith all things are pure. There is need then
of Faith, not of " meats."

For (ver. 10) " we have an altar whereof they
have no right to eat which serve' the Taber-
nacle." Not as the Jewish [ordinances], are
those among us, as it is not lawful even for the
High Priest to partake of them. So that since
he had said, " Do not observe," ' and this seemed
to be [the language] of one who is throwing
down his own building, he again turns it round.
What, have not we then observances as well (he
says) ? [Yea we have], and we observe them
very earnestly too, not sharing them even with
the priests themselves.

[4.] Ver. II, 12. "For the bodies of those
beasts whose blood is brought into the sanctuary
by the High Priest for sin, are burned without
the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might
sanctify the people with His own blood, suf-
fered " (he says) " without the gate." Seest thou
the type shining forth ? " For sin," he says, and
"suffered without the gate." (Ver. 13) "Let
us go forth therefore to Him without the camp,
bearing His reproach," that is, suffering the
same things ; having communion with Him in
His sufferings. He was crucified without as a
condemned person : neither let us then be
ashamed to "go forth out" [of the world].

Ver. 14, 15. " For we have here no contin-
uing city " (he says) " but we seek one to
come. By Him therefore let us offer the sacri-
fice of praise to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips giving thanks to His Name."

"By Him," as by an High Priest, according to
the flesh.' "Giving thanks"' (he says) "to His
Name." (See p. 5 14.) Let us utter nothing blas-
phemous, nothing hasty, nothing bold, nothing
presumptuous, nothing desperate. This is "with
reverence and godly fear." (c. xii. 28.) For a
soul in tribulations becomes desponding, and
reckless.'" But let not us [be so]. See here he
again says the same thing which he said before,
" not forsaking the assembling of ourselves to-
gether," for so shall we be able to do all things


^ 01 iTepiiraTri<ravT€i, i.e. " that have walked in them *
in the observance of rules respecting them."

* " perform the service of."

' napaTTjpf'iTe, sec Gal. iv. lo.

* His human nature.

" [R. v. '* which make confession." — F. G.]
^ anavaiffxvi'Ttl, '* loses respect."


'lived


5i6


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIIl.


with reverence. For oftentimes even out of
respect for men, we refrain from doing many
evil things.

Ver. 1 6. "But to do good and to communi-
cate forget not." I speak not [merely] with
reference to the brethren present, but to those
absent also. But if others have plundered your
property, display your hospitality out of such
things as ye have. What excuse then shall we
have henceforward, when they, even after the
spoiling of their goods, were thus admonished ?
[5.] And he did not say, " Be not forgetful "
of the entertaining of strangers,' but " of hos-
pitality " : * that is, do not merely entertain
strangers, but [do it] with love for the strangers.
Moreover he did not speak of the recompense
that is future, and in store for us, lest he should
make them more supine, but of that already
given. For " thereby some " (he says) " have
entertained angels unawares."

But let us see in what sense "Marriage is
honorable in all and the bed undefiled." Be-
cause (he means) it preserves the believer in
chastity. Here he also alludes to the Jews,
because they accounted the woman after child-
birth' polluted: and "whosoever comes from
the bed," it is said, " is not clean."* Those
things are not polluted' which arise from nature,
O ungrateful and senseless Jew," but those
which arise from choice.' For if " marriage is
honorable" and pure, why forsooth dost thou
think that one is even polluted by it?

" Let your conversation " (he says) " be with-
out covetousness " : since many after having ex-
hausted ' their property, afterwards wish to re-
cover it again under the guise of alms, therefore
he says, " Let your conversation be without
covetousness " ; that is, that we should be [de-
sirous only] of what is necessary^ and indispen-
sable. What then (you say) if we should not
have a supply even of these ? This is not possi-
ble ; indeed it is not. " For He hath said," and
He doth not lie, " I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. So that we boldly say. The Lord
is my Helper, and I will not fear what man shall
do unto me." Thou hast the promise from
Himself: do not doubt henceforward. He
has promised ; make no question. But this,
" I will never leave thee," he says not concern-
ing money only, but concerning all other things


> St. Chrys. here reverts to ver. j, and goes over again the portion
on which he has already commented.
* " Love of the stranger," ii>i\o^evia.
' rni/Aex": Edd. Ti)>' «oir>)v. . », , .

« See Lev. xv. 18. . " 3««*"P«


also. " The Lord is my Helper, and I will not
fear what man shall do unto me " ; with good
reason.

This then also let us say in all temptations ;
let us laugh at human things, so long as we have
God favorable to us. For as, when He is oui
enemy, it is no gain, though all men should be
our friends, so when He is our friend, though
all men together war against us, there is nc
harm. " I will not fear what man shall do untc

me."

[6.] "Remember them which have the rul
over you, who have spoken unto you the wor
of God." In this place I think that he
speaking about assistance also."" For this
[implied in the words] " who have spoken unt
you the word of God."

"Whose faith follow considering the end
their conversation." What is, " considering " ?
Continually revolving, examining it by you
selves, reasoning, investigating accurately, testir
it as you choose. " The end of their conversi
tion," that is, their conversation to the end : fi
" their conversation " had a good end.

"Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to-d.
and for ever." Do not think that then inde«
He wrought wonders, but now works no wo:
ders. He is the same. This is, " rememb
them that have the rule over you." "

"Be not carried about with divers andstran.
doctrines." " Strange," that is, different frc
those ye heard from us ; [" Divers "] that is,
all sorts : for they have no stability, but are c
ferent [one from another]. For especia
manifold ^ is the doctrine of meats.

" For it is a good thing that the heart be est:
Hshed with grace ; not with meats." These :
the " divers," these the " strange "" [doctrine?
especially as Christ has said, " not that wh
entereth into the mouth defileth the man,
that which cometh out." (Matt. xv. ii.) /
observe that he does not make bold to say I
openly, but as it were by a hint.'' " For it i
good thing that the heart be estabhshed
grace, not with meats."

Faith is all. If that establishes [it], the h«
stands in security. It follows that Faith es«
lishes: consequently reasonings shake.
Faith is contrary to reasoning.

" Which " (he says) " have not profited tl
that have been occupied therein." For v
is the gain from the observance '" [of them],
me. Does it not rather destroy? Does it
make such an one to be under sin? If H


' sec L«V. XV. 10. I ' — ,

« rSt. Chrys. might seem here to be casting contempt upon the
laws of the Old Dispensation; but he probably means that while
they were fitting enough as parts of the temporary ceremonial law,
they have no such foundation in nature as to remain of any lorce
under the Christian Dispensation. — F. G.]

• <e'i<?a.''.''"TWs'word is used commonly by St. Chrys. for giv-
ine away one's whole property in charity, and probably that is its
mJaning here. " "l« XP"« "M^"-


■0 ,Vi,o«pca-. see i Tim. v. .7, &c. " «K.«to,pov

12 That is, Remember them, because of the continual pn

and working of Christ in His Church.

" or " intricate and complicated, iroAvirAoicoi'.

»" foreign to us." „„ . " " .."Y/x"

w ,rapaTvp.|<r«; see Gal. IV. 10, "Ye observe (irapaTiip^

days," &c.


I


Homily XXXIII.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


517


necessary to observe [them], we must guard
ourselves.'

" Which " (he says) " have not profited them
that have been occupied therein." That is, who
have ahvays dihgently kept them.

There is one observance, abstaining from sin.
For what profit is it, when some are so polluted,
as not to be able to partake of the sacrifices ?
So that it did not save them at all; although
they were zealous about the observances. But
because they had not faith, even thus they prof-
ited nothing.

[7.] In the next place he takes away = the
sacrifice from the type, and directs his discourse
to the prototype, saying, " The bodies of those
beasts whose blood is brought into the sanctuary
by the High Priest, are burned without the
camp." Then those things were a type of these,
and thus Christ, suffering "without," fulfilled all.
Here he makes it plain too that He suffered
voluntarily, showing'' that those things were not
accidental, but even the [Divine] arrangement
itself was of a suffering " without." [He suf-
fered] without, but His Blood was borne up
into Heaven. Thou seest then that we partake
of Blood which has been carried into the Holy
Place, the True Holy Place ; of the Sacrifice of
which the Priest alone had the privilege. We
therefore partake of the Truth [the Reality]. If
then we partake not of " reproach " [only] but
of sanctification,* the " reproach " is the cause of
the sanctification. For as He was reproached,
so also are we. If we go forth " without " there-
fore, we have fellowship with Him.

But what is, " Let us go forth to Him " ? Let
us have fellowship with Him in His sufferings ;
let us bear His reproach. For He did not sim-
ply bid us dwell " outside the gate," but as He was
reproached as a condemned person, so also we.
And " by Him let us offer a sacrifice to God."
Of what kind of sacrifice does he speak? "The
fruit of lips giving thanks to His Name." They
[the Jews] brought sheep, and calves, and gave
them to the Priest : let " us " bring none of these
things, but thanksgiving. This " fruit " let " our
lips " put forth.

" For with such sacrifices God is well pleased."
Let us give such a sacrifice to Him, that He may
offer [it] to The Father. For in no other way
it is offered except through the Son, or rather
also through a contrite mind. All these things
[are said] for the weak. For that the thanks
belong to the Son is evident : since otherwise,
how is the honor equal? "That all men" (He
says) " should honor the Son even as they honor


'(TTiTTapaTripeiaOaL: potius stbi cavendnm estt is Mr. Field's
translation; '* to be guarded," as we say.

3 UiKvvi; OTI OVK tKelva dirAuf ^iv, aKXa ffai auTi) ^ oiKovotlia
ftal TTadous V.

* ayta(T^ou, The effect of the sprinkling with blood. Sec c. ix.
", '3> &c.; X. 10, 14.


the Father." (John v. 23.) Wherein is the
honor equal? "The fruit of our lips giving
thanks to His Name."'

[8.] Let us bear all things thankfully, be it
poverty, be it disease, be it anything else what-
ever : for He alone knows the things expedient
for us. " For we know not what we should pray
for as we ought." (Rom. viii. 26.) We then
who do not know even how to ask for what is
fitting, unless we have received of • the Spirit,
let us take care to offer up thanksgiving for all
things, and let us bear all things nobly. Are we
in poverty? Let us give thanks. Are we in sick-
ness? Let us give thanks. Are we falsely ac-
cused ? Let us give thanks : when we suffer afflic-
tion, let us give thanks.

This brings us near to God : then we even
have God for our debtor. But when we are in
prosperity, it is we who are debtors and liable to
be called to account. For when we are in pros-
perity, we are debtors to God : and oftentimes
these things bring a judgment upon us, while
those are for a payment of sins.' Those [afflic-
tions] draw down mercy, they draw down kind-
ness : while these on the other hand lift up even
to an insane pride, and lead also to slothfulness,
and dispose a man to fancy great things con-
cerning himself; they puff up. Therefore the
prophet also said, "It is good for me, Lord,
that Thou hast afflicted ^ me, that I may learn
Thy statutes." (Ps. cxix. 71.) When Hezekiah
had received blessings and been freed from ca-
lamities, his heart was lifted up on high ; when
he fell sick, then was he humbled, then he be-
came near to God. "When He slew them,"
it says, " then they sought Him diligently, and
turned, and were early in coming to' God."
(Ps. Ixxviii. 34.) And again, " When the be-
loved waxed gross and fat, then he kicked."
(Deut. xxxii. 15.) For "the Lord is known
when He executeth judgments." (Ps. ix. 16.)

[9.] Affliction is a great good. " Narrow is
the way" (Matt. vii. 14), so that affliction'"
thrusts us into the narrow [way]. He who is
not pressed by affliction cannot enter. For he
who afflicts himself in the narrow [way], is he
who also enjoys ease ; but he that spreads him-
self out," does not enter in, and suffers from be-
ing so to say wedged in.'^ See how Paul enters
into this narrow way. He " keeps under " his
" body " (i Cor. ix. 27), so as to be able to enter.
Therefore, in all his afflictions, he continued giv-
ing thanks unto God. Hast thou lost thy prop-
erty? This hath lightened thee of the most of thy
wideness. Hast thou fallen from glory ? This is


" That is, " to the Name of the Son."
" eViAa^tuMeda, " taken hold of."
' (KTi<m, see above, Horn. v. [6.] p. 391,
' or, " humbled." » ip»»,f<„, ,p4j.

SA.*.!, l.lerally "pressing " : probably St. Chrys. had in mind
a word of the text which he does not cite, t«I)Aihm«it) i oiot.


5i8


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


another sort of wideness. Hast thou been falsely
accused? Have the things said against thee, of
which thou art nowise conscious to thyself been
believed? "Rejoice and leap for joy." For
"blessed are ye" (He says) "when men re-
proach you, and say all manner of evil against
you, falsely, for My sake. Rejoice and be ex-
ceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven."
(Matt. V. II, 12.)

Why dost thou marvel, if thou art grieved,
and wish to be set free from temptations ? Paul
wished to be set free, and oftentimes entreated
God, and did not obtain. For the " thrice for
this I besought the Lord," is oftentimes ; " and
He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for
thee, for My strength is made perfect in weak-
ness." (2 Cor. xii. 8, 9.) By " weakness," he
here means " afflictions." What then? When
he heard this he received it thankfully, and says,
"Wherefore I take pleasure in infirmities" (2
Cor. xii. 10) ; that is, I am pleased, I rest in
my afflictions. For all things then let us give
thanks, both for comfort, and for affliction.'
Let us not murmur : let us not be unthankful.
" Naked came I out of my mother's womb,
naked also shall I depart." (Job i. 21.) Thou
didst not come forth glorious, do not seek
glory. Thou wast brought into life naked, not
of money alone, but also of glory, and of honor-
able name.

Consider how great evils have oftentimes
arisen from wealth. For " It is easier " (it is


said) " for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven." (Matt. xix. 24.) Seest
thou to how many good things wealth is a hin-
drance, and dost thou seek to be rich? Dost
thou not rejoice that the hindrance has been
overthrown ? So narrow is the way which leadeth
into the Kingdom. So broad is wealth, and full
of bulk and swelling out. Therefore He says,
"Sell that thou hast " (Matt. xix. 21), that that
way may receive thee. Why dost thou yearn
after wealth ? For this cause He took it away
from thee, that He might free thee from slavery.
For true fathers also, when a son is corrupted
by some mistress, and having given him much
exhortation they do not persuade him to part
from her, send the mistress into banishment.
Such also is abundance of wealth. Because the
Lord cares for us, and delivers us from the harm
[which arises] therefrom, He takes away wealth
from us.

Let us not then think poverty an evil : sin is
the only evil. For neither is wealth a good
thing by itself: to be well-pleasing to God is
the only good. Poverty then let us seek, this
let us pursue : so shall we lay hold on heaven,
so shall we attain to the other good things.
Which may we all attain by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and ever and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XXXIV.


Hebrews xiii. 17.


"Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
yourselves. For they watch for your souls, as they
that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief,^ for this is unprofitable for you."

[i.] Anarchy^ is an evil, and the occasion of
many calamities, and the source of disorder and
confusion. For as, if thou take away the leader
from a chorus, the chorus will not be in tune and
in order ; and if from a phalanx of an army thou
remove the commander, the evolutions will no
longer be made in time and order, and if from a
ship thou take away the helmsman, thou wilt sink
the vessel ; so too if from a flock thou remove


1 [See above, pp. 442, 459, 460, 517. St. Chrysostom in his
bitter banishment nnished his last prayer " with his usual thanks-
eiving, * Glory to God for all things,' and sealed it with a final
Amen." Dr, Bright, Hist, of Church, between A .D. 313 and 451,
chapter ix. end, p. 255 and Dr. Bright's note b. on the same page.]

' " lamenting." artvai,ov7t^.

3 It will be observed that St. Chrysostom uses "rulers" (op-
XoM-cf) and the cognate words, of spiritual rulers.


the shepherd, thou hast overthrown and de-
stroyed all.

Anarchy then is an evil, and a cause of ruin.
But no less an evil also is the disobedience to
rulers. For it comes again to the same. For i
people not obeying a ruler, is like one which has
none ; and perhaps even worse. For in the
former case they have at least an excuse fo>
disorder, but no longer in the latter, but an
punished.

But perhaps some one will say, there is also i
third evil, when the ruler is bad. I myself to«
know it, and no small evil it is, but even a fiu
worse evil than anarchy. For it is better to b
led by no one, than to be led by one who i
evil. For the former indeed are oftentime
saved, and oftentimes are in peril,* but the latte


* " suffer," iKKvtvvtvaiv,


Homily XXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


519


will be altogether in peril, being led into the pit
[of destruction].

How then does Paul say, "Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit yourselves " ?
Having said above, " whose faith follow, consid-
ering the end of their conversation" (c. ver. 7),
he then said, " Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit yourselves."

What then (you say), when he is wicked
should we obey?

Wicked ? In what sense ? If indeed in regard
to Faith, flee and avoid him ; not only if he be
a man, but even if he be an angel come down
from Heaven ; but if in regard to life, be not
over-curious. And this instance I do not allege
from my own mind, but from the Divine Scrip-
ture. For hear Christ saying, " The Scribes and
the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat." (Matt, xxiii.
2.) Having previously spoken many fearful
things concerning them. He then says, "They
sit on Moses' seat : all therefore whatsoever
they tell you observe, do ; but do not ye after
their works." (Matt, xxiii. 2, 3.) They have
(He means) the dignity of office, but are of
unclean life. Do thou however attend, not to
their life, but to their words. For as regards
their characters, no one would be harmed
[thereby]. How is this? Both because their
characters are manifest to all, and also because
though he were ten thousand times as wicked,
he will never teach what is wicked. But as
respects Faith, [the evil] is not manifest to all,
and the wicked [ruler] will not shrink from
teaching it.

Moreover, " Judge not that ye be not judged "
(Matt. vii. 1) concerns life, not faith : surely what
follows makes this plain. For "why" (He
says) " beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that
is in thine own eye?" (Matt. vii. 3.)

"All things therefore" (He says) "which
they bid you observe, do ye " (now to " do " be-
longs to works not to Faith) " but do not ye after
their works." Seest thou that [the discourse]
is not concerning doctrines, but concerning life
and works?

[2.1 Paul however previously commended
them,' and then says, " Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit yourselves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that shall
give account."

Let those who rule also hear, and not only
those who are under their rule ; that as the
subjects ought to be obedient, so also the rulers
ought to be watchful and sober. What sayest
thou ? He watches ; he imperils his own head ;
he is subject to the punishments of thy sins,
and for thy sake is amenable to what is so fear-


^ i.c. the rulers, see ver. 7.


ful, and art thou slothful, and affectedly indiffer-
ent, and at ease ? Therefore he says, " That
they may do this with joy, and not with grief:'
for this is unprofitable for you."

Seest thou that the despised ruler ought not
to avenge himself, but his great revenge is to
weep and lament? For neither is it possible
for the physician, despised by his patient, to
avenge himself, but to weep and lament. But
if [the ruler] lament (he means), God inflicts
vengeance on thee. For if when we lament for
our own sins we draw God to us, shall we not
much rather [do this], when we lament for the
arrogance and scornfulness of others? Seest
thou that he does not suffer him to be led on
to reproaches? Seest thou how great is his
philosophy? He ought to lament who is de-
spised, is trodden under foot, is spit upon.

Be not confident because he does not avenge
himself on thee, for lamenting is worse than
any revenge. For when of himself he profits
nothing by lamenting, he calls on the Lord :
and as in the case of a teacher and nurse, when
the child does not listen to him, one is called
in who will treat him more severely, so also in
this case.

[3.] Oh ! how great the danger ! What should
one say to those wretched men, who throw them-
selves upon so great an abyss of punishments ?
Thou hast to give account of all over whom thou
nilest, women and children and men ; into so
great a fire dost thou put thy head.' I marvel if
any of the rulers can be saved, when in the face
oP such a threat, and of the present indifference,
I see some still even running on, and casting
themselves upon so great a burden of authority.

For if they who are dragged by force * have
no refuge or defense, if they discharge duty ill
and are negligent ; since even Aaron was dragged
by force, and yet was imperiled ; ' and Moses
again was imperiled, although he had often-
times dechned ; and Saul having been entrusted
with another kind of rule, after he had declined
it, was in peril, because he managed it amiss ;
how much more they who take so great pains
to obtain it, and cast themselves upon it ? Such
an one much more deprives himself of all excuse.
For men ought to fear and to tremble, both
because of conscience, and because of the bur-
den of the office ; and neither when dragged to it
should they once for all decline, nor, when not
dragged cast themselves upon it, but should even
flee, foreseeing the greatness of the dignity ; and


* trrtyaiovrts. It will be observed that St. Chrys. dwells much
on this word; and also that he understands the "do this" of
" watching for souls *': not as the English version might lead us to
understand it, of the '* giving account.

3 irpbt.

* Those who are ordained against their will by actual force; as
frequently occurred in the age of St. Chrysostom.

^ KtvhvvfVM seems here as elsewhere in writers of this age to
imply actual suffering as well as danger; so in this discourse* [i.]


520


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


when they have been seized, they ought again to
show their godly fear.^ Let there be nothing
out of measure. If thou hast perceived it be-
forehand, retire ; convince thyself that thou art
unworthy of the office. Again, if thou hast
been seized, in like manner be thou reverential,^
always showing rightmindedness.'

[4.] Ver. 18. "Pray for us" (he says);
" for we trust we have a good conscience among
all,* willing to live honestly."

Thou seest that he used these apologies, as
writing to persons grieved with him, as to those
who turned away, who were disposed as towards
a transgressor, not enduring even to hear his
name? Inasmuch then as he asked from those
who hated him what all others ask from those
who love them [their prayers for him], therefore
he here introduces this ; saying, " We trust that
we have a good conscience." For do not tell
me of accusations ; our conscience, he says, in
nothing hurts ' us ; nor are we conscious to our-
selves that we have plotted against you. " For
we trust," he says, " that we have a good con-
science among all," not among the Gentiles
only, but also among you. We have done noth-
ing with deceitfulness,° nothing with hypocrisy :
for it was probable that these [calumnies] were
reported respecting him. " For they have been
informed concerning thee " (it is said) " that
thou teachest apostasy." (Acts xxi. 21.) Not
as an enemy, he means, nor as an adversary I
write these things, but as a friend. And this he
shows also by what follows.

Ver. 19. " But I beseech you the rather to
do this, that I may be restored to you the
sooner." His thus praying was [the act] of one
who loved them greatly, and that not simply,
but with all earnestness, that so, he says, I may
come to you speedily. The earnest desire to
come to them is [the mark] of one conscious
to himself of nothing [wrong], also the entreat-
ing them to pray for him.

Therefore having first asked their prayers, he
then himself also prays for all good things on
them. (Ver. 20) " Now the God of peace,"
he says (be ye not therefore at variance one
with another), "that brought again from the
earth the Shepherd of the sheep " (this is said
concerning the resurrection) " the Great [Shep-
herd] " (another addition : here again he con-
firms to them even to the end, his discourse
concerning the Resurrection) "through the
blood of the everlasting covenant, our Lord


' tiiKaSttav, That is, by submitting to the will of God thus
manifested, and receiving ordination.

' have a godly fear. • tvyvutLotrvvijv.

* iv na<Ttv, sec below. [The construction of tv nSurt with what
follows, *' in all things willing (wishing) to live honestly,** both in
the A. v. and the R. V. is undoubtedly correct: but St. Chrysostom
has taken it as connected with the preceding clause. — F. G.]

' JcaTa|3AaiTTCt.

* icanj]\tiat^ see St. Chrys, on 3 Cor. ii. 17,


Jesus Christ," (ver. 21) "make you perfect in
every good work, to do His will, working in
you' that which is well-pleasing in His sight."

Again he bears high testimony to. them. For
that is made " perfect " which having a begin-
ning is afterwards completed. And he prays
for them which is the act of one who yearns for
them. And while in the other Epistles, he prays
in the prefaces, here he does it at the end.
" Working in you," he says, " that which is well-
pleasing in His sight through Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen."

[5.] Ver. 22. "And I beseech you, brethren,
suffer the word of exhortation, for indeed I
have written a letter unto you in few words."
Seest thou that what he wrote to no one [else],
he writes to them ? For (he means) I do not
even trouble you with long discourse.

I suppose that they were not at all unfavorably
disposed towards Timothy : wherefore he also
put him forward.' For (ver. 23) " know ye,"
he says, " that our brother Timothy is set at
liberty,' with whom, if he come shortly, I will
see you." "Set at liberty," he says; from
whence? I suppose he had been cast into
prison : or if not this, that he was sent away
from Athens. For this also is mentioned in
the Acts.'"

Ver. 24, 25. "Salute all them that have the
rule over you, and all the saints. They of Italy
salute you. Grace be with you all. Amen."

[6.] Seest " thou how he shows that virtue is
born '^ neither wholly from God, nor yet from
ourselves alone ? First '^ by saying, " make you
perfect in every good work " ; Ye have virtue
indeed, he means, but need to be made com-
plete. What is " good work and word " ? " So
as to have both life and doctrines right. " Ac-
cording to His will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in His sight."

"In His sight," he says. For this is the-
highest virtue, to do that which is well-pleasing ^
in the sight of God, as the Prophet also says,
" And according to the cleanness of ray hands '
in His eye-sight." (Ps. xviii. 24.)

And having written thus much, he said this 1
was little, in comparison with what he was going
to say. As he says also in another place, " As i
I wrote to you in few words : whereby when ye 1
read, ye may understand my knowledge in the •
mystery of Christ." (Eph. iii. 3, 4.)


' [The R. V. here follows the reading iv rjtilv adopted by many
critical authorities. — F. G.]

* By saying that he would come with Timothy, as if Timothy <
were his superior; see the further comment, in the next section.

* or, " released,'* " gone,** or, " come away,'* dn-oAeXu/jieVoi'.
10 See Acts xvii. 16: xviii. 5. ** ytytvjitLtvriv ...<«.
" St. Chrys. here recurs to ver. at.
" Here as elsewhere St. Chrys. does not expressly mention an '

"secondly," but after treating the remaining verses recurs totbti
subject in speaking on the words " Grace be with you": and thcrS'
indicates a second evidence.

" See a Thess. ii. 17. " Stablish you in every good word ■
work." Probably St. Chrys. had this in his mind.


Homily XXXIV.]


HOMILIES ON HEBREWS.


521


And observe his wisdom. He says not, " I
beseech you, suffer the word of" admonition,
but " the word of exhortation," ' that is, of con-
solation, of encouragement. No one, he means,
can be wearied at the length of what has been
said (Did this then make them turn away from
him ? By no means : he does not indeed wish
to express this) : that is, even if ye be of little
spirit, for it is the peculiarity of such persons
not to endure a long discourse.

" Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at
liberty, with whom if he come shortly I will see
you." This is enough to persuade them to sub-
mit themselves, if he is ready to come with his
disciple.

" Salute them that have the rule over you, and
all the saints." See how he honored them, since
he wrote to them instead of to those [their
rulers].

" They of Italy salute you. Grace be with
you all. Amen." Which was for them all in
common.

But how does " Grace " come to be " with " us ?
If we do not do despite to the benefit, if we do
not become indolent in regard to the Gift. And
what is " the grace " ? Remission of sins, Cleans-
ing : this is " with " us. For who (he means) can
keep the Grace despitefully, and not destroy it?
For instance ; He freely forgave thee thy sins.
How then shall the " Grace be with " thee,
whether it be the good favor, or the effectual
working of the Spirit? If thou draw it to thee
by good deeds. For the cause of all good things
is this, the continual abiding with us of the
"grace " of the Spirit. For this guides us to all
[good things], just as when it flies away from
us, it ruins us, and leaves us desolate.

[7.] Let us not then drive it from us. For
on ourselves depends, both its remaining, and
its departing. For the one results, when we
mind heavenly things ; the other, when [we
mind] the things of this life. "Which the world"
(He says) " cannot receive because it seeth Him
not, neither knoweth Him." (John xiv. 17.)
Seest thou that a worldly soul cannot have Him ?
We need great earnestness that so there He may
be held fast by us, so as to direct all our affairs,
and do them in security, and in much peace.

For as a ship sailing with favorable winds is
neither to be hindered nor sunk, so long as it
enjoys a prosperous and steady breeze, but also
causes great admiration according to the march
of its progress, both to the mariners, and to the
passengers, giving rest to the one, and not forcing
them to toil on at their oars, and setting the
others free from all fear, and giving them the
most delightful view of her course ; so too a soul
strengthened by the Divine Spirit, is far above


all the billows of this life, and more strongly than
the ship, cuts the way bearing on to Heaven,
since it is not sent along by wind, but has all
the pure sails filled by the Paraclete Himself:
and He casts out of our minds all that is slack-
ened and relaxed.

For as the wind if it fall upon a slackened
sail, would have no effect ; so neither does the
Spirit endure to continue in a slack soul ; but
there is need of much tension, of much vehe-
mence, so that our mind may be on fire, and
our conduct under all circumstances on the
stretch, and braced up. For instance when we
pray, we ought to do it with much intentness,'
stretching forth the soul toward Heaven, not
with cords, but with great earnestness. Again
when we do works of mercy, we have need of
intentness, lest by any means, thought for our
household, and care for children, and anxiety
about wife, and fear of poverty entering in, should
slacken our sail. For if we put it on the stretch
on all sides by the hope of the things to come, it
receives well the energy ^ of the Spirit ; and
none of those perishable and wretched things
will fall upon it, yea, and if any of them should
fall, it does it no harm, but is quickly thrown
back by the tightness, and is shaken off and falls
down.

Therefore we have need of much intentness.
For we too are sailing over a great and wide
sea, full of many monsters, and of many rocks,
and bringing forth for us many storms, and
from the midst of serene weather raising up a
most violent tempest. It is necessary then if we
would sail with ease, and without danger, to
stretch the sails, that is, our determination : for
this is sufficient for us. For Abraham also, when
he had stretched forth his affections towards
God and set before Him his fixed resolution,*
what else had he need of? Nothing : but " he
believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness." (Gen. xv. 6.) But Faith [comes]
of a sincere will.' He offered up his son, and
though he did not slay him, he received a recom-
pense as if he had slain him, and though the
work was not done the reward was given.

Let our sails then be in good order,^ not grown
old (for everything " that is decayed and waxen
old is nigh to vanishing away"') (c. viii. 13),
not worn into holes, that so they may bear the
energy of the Spirit. " For the natural man," '
it is said, " receiveth not the things of the
Spirit." (i Cor. ii. 14.) For as the webs of
spiders could not receive a blast of wind, so
neither will the soul devoted to this life, nor the
natural man ever be able to receive the grace of
the Spirit : for our reasonings differ nothing


' tension.

* ivipyttav.

* fTTpoatpco'tt'.]

^ [n-j>oaip€VCWf.]


* Ka0apa.


K


522


WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


from them,' preserving a connection in appear-
ance only but destitute of all power.

[8.] Our condition, however, is not such, if
we are watchful : but whatever may fall upon
[the Christian], he bears all, and is above all,
stronger than any whirlpool.'' For suppose there
be a spiritual man, and that innumerable ca-
lamities befall him, yet is he overcome by none
of them. And what do I say ? Let poverty come
upon him, disease, insults, revilings, mockings,
stripes, every sort of infliction, every sort of
mocking, and slanders, and insults : yet, as
though he were outside the world, and set free
from the feelings of the body, so will he laugh
all to scorn.

And that my words are not mere boasting, I
think many [such] exist even now ; for instance,
of those who have embraced the life of the desert.
This however, you say, is nothing wonderful.
But I say that of those also who live in cities,


^ the cobwebs.


iAiyyo?.


there are such men unsuspected. If thou wish
however, I shall be able to exhibit some among
those of old. And that thou mayest learn, con-
sider Paul, I pray thee. What is there fearful
that he did not suffer, and that he did not submit
to ? But he bore all nobly. Let us imitate him,
for so shall we be able to land in the tranquil
havens with much merchandise.

Let us then stretch our mind towards Heaven,
let us be held fast by that desire, let us clothe
ourselves with spiritual fire, let us gird ourselves
with its flame. No man who bears flame fears
those who meet him ; be it wild beast, be it
man, be it snares innumerable, so long as he is
armed with fire, all things stand out of his way,
all things retire. The flame is intolerable, the
fire cannot be endured, it consumes all.

With this fire let us clothe ourselves, offering
up glory to our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and ever and world
without end. Amen.


S||anb bt to <@oIk.


INDEXES


HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF JOHN.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abraham, supposed by the Samari-
tans to have offered Isaac on
mount Gerizim, 1 13; Christ
talked with, 116; who the real
seed of, 194; wrongly compared
with Christ, 198; how he saw
Christ's day, 198.

Adam, said to die from the moment
of the Fall, because under sen-
tence, 97.

Adulterers, salvation of, impossible,

234-

Adultery, the woman taken in, not
mentioned by St. Chrysostom,
187.

Advice, to be welcomed from any, by
Christ's example, 174.

Affliction, the best trial of faith, 125.

Affronts here, to be borne, from
thought of heaven, 291, 293;
from thought of our Christian
membership, 294; of imperious
women often borne by their lov-
ers, 294.

Age, adds dignity to virtue, 332.

Agony, the, expressed the weakness
of nature, 318.

Agreement, not always good, 206.

Alms, win praise of God and Angels,
256.

Almsgiving, wins forgiving, 29, 47; a
pure sacrifice, 46; must not come
from dishonest gain, 47; indis-
pensable to our entering the
kingdom, 83; a seal to the char-
itable, 86; will win treasure in
heaven, 89; the way to true
honor, 118, 143; to gain present
delight and the future crown,
147 ; the meat that perisheth not,
158; to be practiced throughout
life, 219; the measure of God's
mercy to us, ib.; necessary to
life, yet easy, and sobering, 220;
brings contentment, 244 ; cleanses
from sin, 270; better none, than
with covetousness, ih. ; duty of,
enjoined, 284; neglect of, leads
to hell, 285 ; due to Christ, 285 ;
blessing of here and hereafter,
286; cleanses and heals the soul,
302; the best winding sheet for
the dead, 321; profits both the


dying and the dead, 322; raised
Dorcas to life, ib.

Altar, awfulness of the Christian, 167;
danger of approaching in sin,
ib. ; danger of profaning it with
gifts from unjust gains, 270.

I Am, implies absolute being, 53.

Ancestry, nobility of, no protection
to the bad, 75, 108; availed not
the Jews, 108.

Andrew, St., praise of his zeal and
modesty in coming to Christ, 64,
65 ; of his zeal in his brother's
conversion, 67; his faith in the
miracle of the loaves, 152.

Angel of counsel, a title of Christ,
53 (note).

Angels, learn from revelations given
to the Church, 2; worshiped
Christ in His human nature, 39;
have appeared in brightness, 40;
act under command, 41; have a
well-ordered polity, 42 ; how men
become like them, ib. ; are holy,
49; have not seen God in His
Essence, but only in Christ, 52;
their ministry to Christ a proof
of His Deity, 73; behold but
understand not the mystery of
Regeneration, 88; their troub-
ling the water of Bethesda a
type of the work of the Spirit,
126; work without weariness,
127; their happiness in wanting
nothing, 298.

Anger, not to be retained, 19; absurd-
ity of, 20; brings remorse, ib.;
deformity of, 92; with servants,
reproved, 93; its mischief and
pitiableness, 1 75 ; a madness and
foretaste of hell, ib. ; appeased
by penitent sorrow, 219.

Antichrist, his characteristic, to glo-
rify himself, 148 ; why more
clearly predicted by St. Paul
than by Christ, ib.

Antioch, its covetousness and luxury,
280.

Apostles, the, mission of, 42; did not
all witness all, 61 ; preached
Christ absent, 63; why greater
than Christ's kinsmen and coun-
trymen, 75; did not believe at


first, because not confirmed by
the Spirit, 82; taught high doc-
trines gradually, 106; traveled
without provision, 108; modera-
tion of, 109; their reverence for
Christ, 117; zeal of, seen in the
Samaritan woman, 118; their
love for Christ in urging him to
eat, 119; slowness to understand
his meaning : but forbore to ask,
ib. ; reaped where the Prophets
had sown, 120; their task the
easier, ib. ; their inspiration im-
mediate and complete, 135; their
humble fare, 152; their distance
from their Master in respect of
grace, ib. ; their love for their
Master shown on the sea, 155;
witnessed some miracles alone,
ib. ; disclaimed acting of them-
selves, 238; retired with Christ
during the feasts, 242 ; spoke
like Judas at Bethany, but with
different intent, ib.; understood
not the mystery of the ass's colt,
245 ; their mutual love, 266;
struck dumb hearing of persecu-
tion, 286; yet started not back,
and comforted by Christ's Om-
niscience, 286, 287 [see Disci-

Applause, in Church, 10.

Arius, heresy of, refuted by Christ's
indwelling in His disciples, 304.

Article, the, why added in the phrase,
" The Word," 7, 8; omission of,
sometimes unimportant, 17, 18;
distinguishes Christ from all, 64.

" As," expressing agreement not com-
parison, 41 ; said of the Father
and the Son implies their equal-
ity, of men not so, 303, 304.

Asa, his gout a punishment for sin,
«32-

Babel, an example of mischievous
agreement, 206.

Baptism, promise at, 4; gift of the
Spirit in, 36 ; regeneration in,
37; superior to natural birth, 88;
not needful to Christ, 59; but
Christ to it, 60; benefits of, 89,
126; an obligation to holiness.


526


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


89; danger of delaying, 90; in
what sense an earthly thing, 93,
112; how connected with the
Cross, 94; sin after, not unpar-
donable, 96; buries sin, 121;
gifts of, typified in the miracle
of Bethesda, 126; way prepared
for the use of water under the
law, 126; the only cure of sin,
190 ; cleanses from sin, 270;
the work of all Three Persons of
the Trinity, 289.

Baskets, the twelve, of fragments in
number proved its truth, 153.

Basilides, 30 (note).

" Because," refers to the event, not
the cause, 252.

Beasts, spare their own kind, 130.

Bethabara, why mentioned by John,
38.

Bethlehem, the Messiah expected
from, 70, 71.

Bethesda, the miracle of, was to pre-
pare the Jews for the regenera-
tion of holy Baptism, 84.

Bibles, splendid copies of, written in
gold letters, on fine parchment,
a chirm against the Devil, 114;
unfolds the spectacle of the spir-
itual combat, ib.

Birds, teach their young to fly by de-
grees, 45.

Blind man, the, his courage and truth-
fulness, 204, 208, 2og; becomes
a disciple, 209; bore reproach
and suffering for the truth, 210.

Blindness, never cured until Christ,
200 ; a judgment on the Jews,
212; sensible and spiritual com-
pared, 213.

Blood, the, of Christ, the soul's nour-
ishment, 1 66; the terror of De-
mons, ib.

Body, the, chastised for the soul's
health, 131 ; of Christ includes
all, 166; how worketh on the
soul, 167.

Boldness, its virtue and reward, 58;
comes by hearing, 210.

Books, scarcity of, 38 ; generally neg-
lected at Antioch, or only kept
for show and ornament, 1 14 ;
written in letters of gold, on fine
parchments, ii.

Bosom, of the Father, implies Unity
of Essence, 52; and Coeternity,

53-

Branches, signify our need of Grace,
and of union with Christ, 279;
the fruitless perish, 280; are true
disciples, ib.

Bread of life, said only of Christ's
Godhead, 161; of His doctrines,
and of His Body, 165.

Brethren, of Christ, did not profit by
their relation to Him, 75; be-
lieved not, from envy, 174.

Brightness of the Father's glory, why
said of Christ, 17, 28; of Moses's
face, 40; of Angels, ib.

Brotherly affection best shown in spir-
itual aid, 67,

Burdens, duty of bearing one an-
other's, 253.


Burial, the, so ordered as to give tes-
timony to the Resurrection, 319,
320; a reproof to costly funerals,
321; was done in ignorance of
the Resurrection, ib.

Business, no excuse for neglecting
public worship, 38.

Caiaphas, his shameless boldness,
241 ; prophesied ignorantly and
instrumentally, ib.

Cain, offered not his best, 47 ; ruined
by envy, 130.

Callosity, similar in soul and body,
196.

"Can, cannot," sometimes express
choice, not power, 252.

Cana, marriage at, 73 ; miracle at, the
first absolutely, ib.

Canaan, woman of, 42; an example
of perseverance rewarded, 77.

Capernaum, corruption of, 80; why
Christ's "own country," 1 23;
carnal-mindedness of, after the
miracle of the loaves, 156.

Carefulness, a slavery, 298.

Catechumen, position of, contrasted
with that of the faithful, 89.

Change of pastors and flocks con-
demned, 44.

Charity, wins forgiveness, 29; unites
the brethren, 54; to be substi-
tuted for luxury, 215; may be
exercised by the poor, 216; the
means of entertaining Christ, ib.

Chastisement, the right use of, 132.

Chastity, consists in self-restraint and
subduing, not wanting passion,

Children, need spiritual instruction,
lO; should receive right impres-
sions, ib. ; pass over the real, to
admire false show, 301.

Christ, His humility, 13, 204; His
condescension, 26; known to
Patriarchs, 30; always in the
world, 31; his forgiveness, 36;
both God and Man by unity of
Person, 38; His authority, 41;
His mean appearance, 45; in
what sense both before and after
John's Baptism, 46; the Foun-
tain of Grace, 47; His fullness,
48; how superior to Moses, 49;
His acts brought grace and truth,
50 ; alone of all, hath seen God
in His Essence, 52; one with the
Father, because " in His Bosom,"
ib.; clearness of His teaching
shown in the word " declared,"
53; inferior to the Baptist in ex-
ternals, 55; why mixed unknown
among the people, 57; His dig-
nity compared to John's, ib. ;
why came to John again after
His Baptism, 59; object of His
coming into the world greater
than John's, ib. ; needed not
Baptism for Himself, but for us,
ib. ; received His disciples from
John, 63; distinguished from all
by use of the article, 64; asked
question of the disciples to en-
courage them, 65; how bade


them to house, ib. ; first revealed
His divinity by predictions, 6!S;
showed His authority in chanj;-
ing names, ib.; His wisdom in
the time and place of calling 1 1 is
disciples, 69, 70; convinced Na-
thanael by His foreknowledge ,
71; how to be welcomed liv
those to whom he came, 72;
proved His Deity by the minis-
try of Angels, 73; used to give
present proof of some prcpht-
cies, so to gain credit to others,
ib.; invited to Cana as a ccni-
mon guest, ib.; did no miraeles
in His childhood, 74; nor till
after His Baptism, 80; rebuked
His Mother at Cana, to clear His
miracles, and to instruct her, 74;
His care to show respect for her,
75, 77; was not bound to certain
seasons, but Himself appointed
His hour, 76; made the wine at
Cana without a new creation,
yet proved Himself Creator liy
His power over matter, 77; His
care to provide evidence for His
miracles, 78, 125, 129; improved
upon nature, 78; changes men's
disposition as the water at Cana,
ib. ; how manifested His glory at
Cana, 80; why went to Caper-
naum from Cana, ib.; Baptized
just before the Passover, ib.;
cleansed the temple twice, at the
first and last Passover, ib.; His
care to show respect for the law,
81; refused a sign to the Jevs,
because insensible, ib. ; used dark
sayings to the dull hearers, 82;
why used often the sign of Jonas,
ib. ; knew and trusted not false
disciples, 83 ; his condescension
to Nicodemus, 84; His usual au-
thority abated, ib.; often speaks
obscurely to rouse His hearers to
attention, 85; His care to lead
Nicodemus to higher thoughts,
87 ; but permits him not to pry
into mysteries, 90; His Flesh was
of the Virgin, 91; His perfect
knowledge signified by Seeing
and Hearing, 92, 103; his per-
fect gentleness, 92, 1 75 ; why dealt
most in the lower doctrines, 93;
foretold his Passion darkly : its
benefits plainly, 94, 95; His love
contrasted with man's ingrati-
tude, 95 ; His twofold Advent
to redeem and to judge, 96; de-
lays judgment to admit repent-
ance, 97; rejected by those who
chose to continue in sin, 98; His
different dealings with Nathanael
and Nicodemus, 99; why fre-
quented crowded places, ib.;
why not baptizing till death of
John, ICX3; needed not the sup-
port of John's testimony, 103;
His credibihty arising from His
knowledge, 104; referred to His'
Father and the Prophets to ccfti-
vince the Jews, ib.; one with
God, because speaking God'»


GOSPEL OF JOHN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


527


words, ib. ; Self-sufficient un-
measured by the Spirit, 105; did
not Himself baptize, as reported
to the Pharisees, 107; His care
to act as a man in general, ib. ;
yet to speak as God, ib. ; went to
the Samaritans when driven out
by Jews, and yet as if in passing,
ib. ; His frugality in traveling on
foot, lo8; His carelessness of
food, ib, ; His humility in going
alone, 109; His stay at Samaria
was for rest, ib. ; abrogated the
law of meats in speaking to the
Samaritan woman, 109; shows
Himself greater than Jacob, 112;
often prophesied concerning par-
ticular persons, 113; shows His
Divine knowledge in rebuking
the woman of Samaria, ib. ; cared
not to answer, but to lead men
to the Truth, 114; unfolds the
doctrine of spiritual worship to
the Samaritan woman, 115; iden-
tifies Himself with the Church,
116; expected by the Samaritans,
from the writings of Moses, ib.;
condescended to the ignorance
of Samaritan woman, 117; our
salvation His meat, 119; leads
on the disciples to enquire, ib. ;
acknowledged to be the true
Saviour by the Samaritans, 123;
avoided Ilis own country, not to
increase its guilt, ib. ; most re-
ceived by those most under re-
proach, ib. ; goes again to Cana
to confirm the believers there,
ib. ; first object of His miracles
to save souls, 124; why attended
the feasts, 125; rewarded per-
severance in the paralytic at
Bethesda, 126; did not require
faith before sight from strangers,
129; His reasons for concealing
Himself, 130; used differenX
modes of defense, ib. ; why dwelt
on the sins of some whom He
cured, not of others, 132; claimed
not the merit of His own cure,
132; showed His Omniscience
in His words to the paralytic,
ii. ; defends His healing on the
sabbath by revealing His Equal-
ity with the Father, 133; appealed
at need now to His Humanity,
now to His Deity, ib, ; did really
make Himself equal to the Fa-
ther, 134, 152; had shown it by
breaking the sabbath, 133, 145;
has power to act, but not apart
from the Father, 1 34 ; used lower
expressions of His Deity to per-
suade the indisposed, 135; but
joined with them such as imply
His Godhead, 136: differs from
the Father only in His Sonship,
137; His Equality with God
proved by His being Judge, ib. ;
used lower expressions of Him-
self to conciliate the Jews, ib.;
but the higher to guard us from
heresy, 138; His honor con-
nected with His Father's essen-


tially, ib. ; why spoke of being
"sent," 139; His condescension
led men to receive the higher
doctrines, ib. ; appeal to his rais-
ing the dead, ib. ; why spoke
much of the Judgment, ib. ; to
be Judge, because Son of God,
140; His care in propounding
the Judgment and the Resur-
rection, 140, 141 ; confirms His
future predictions by His past,
140; shows His agreement with
the Jewish Prophets, 141 ; His
unanimity and identity with the
Father, ib. ; His Will and the
Father's one, ib.; addressed His
words to men's suspicions, ib.;
proves His justice, speaking hu-
manly, from His self-denial, ib. ;
did not remind of sin, but blotted
it out, 142; His witness of Him-
self, in what senses, true and not
true, 143; replies to the secret
objections of the Jews, 144; His
threefold witness, ib. ; refutes the
Jews by their own faith in John,
ib. ; yet inconstancy to him, 145 ;
the witness of His works, ib. ;
His doctrine of the Deity, 146;
appeals to the witness of Scrip-
ture, ib.; His commands, and
mammon's, 147; His motive for
reasoning with the Jews was to
save them, 148; rejected for An-
tichrist, ii. ; why spoke not
clearly of Antichrist, 149; ap-
pealed to God's witness in that
of Moses, ib. ; why told not in
what place Moses prophesied of
Him, ib.; avoided contention,
150; teaches us to retire from
the bustle of life, 151; showed
His freedom from the Law, by
absenting Himself from a Pass-
over, ib.; His diligence in in-
structing the disciples, ib. ; His
preparation for His miracles, ib. ;
why He employed things created
in His miracles, 152, 153; gave
thanks for our example, and to
show His submission to God, 153;
why performed His greater mira-
cles without. His lesser with,
prayer, ib. ; by fleeing from the
multitude, teacheth contempt of
the world, 154; why left the dis-
ciples alone, 155; showed His
Power on the sea, but only for a
moment, ib. ; why repeated His
miracles, ib. ; several reasons for
what He did on the sea, 156;
His passage of the sea superior
to that of Moses, 156; His timely
severity, 157; really requires
good works, 158; rebuked inat-
tention in Martha, ib. ; " sealed,"
that is, certified by the Father,
159; referred unbelievers to the
Father, 160; in what sense the
Bread of Life, 161; His Will
one with the Father's, 162; de-
clared not His Birth to unbe-
lievers, 164, 165; His "Draw-
ing" implies man's coming, 164;


spoke mysteriously of His Flesh
to rouse attention, 165; taught
in synagogues, to show His agree-
ment with Jehovah, 169; eating
His Flesh, how a hard saying,
ib. ; how detained the Twelve,
170; His wisdom in reproving
Judas secretly, 171 ; would not
flatter the Twelve, ib. ; proved
His Godhead and Manhood now
in seeking, now in avoiding, the
Jews, 173; unbelief and envy of
His brethren, ib. ; why He went
up to Jerusalem secretly, 174,
176; His foreknowledge of His
time, 175; acted as a man, to
prove His Incarnatian, and to
train others, 176; the power of
His teaching, 177; His doctrine.
His and not His, because one
with the Father's, 177; used
lowly expressions of Himself, not
to offend the Jews, 178; declared
His Equality to show His agree-
ment with the Father, ib. ; His
prudence and humility in reason-
ing with the Jews from the Law,
179; rebukes the Jews, both by
their ignorance and by their
knowledge, 181, 188; foreshow-
eth His death, 182; His fore-
knowledge of the Jews' vain re-
pentance, ib.; referred to the
Scriptures, 183; answered not
the careless, 185; how the Light
of the World, 187; judgeth not
yet, 188; began to speak boldly,
ib. ; of the same substance with,
and equal to, the Father, 189;
His hour, that is. His Crucifixion,
was of His own appointing, 1 90;
manifested to the Jews after Ills
Passion, 191 ; why He forbore
judging the Pharisees, ib. ; makes
Himself known in punishment,
ib.; condescended, that men
might believe, 192; benefit of
meditating on His humble birth
and education, ib.; sought not
to triumph in argument, but to
save, 194; relaxes the Law, ib.;
signified His Power by " His
Father's House," ib.; showed
most boldness after miracles,
195; one with the Father in
Power, Substance, and Truth,
194, 195; love of, the proof of
our knowing God, 196; His care
to show His own power in heal-
ing the blind man, 204; why al-
ways retired after miracles, 204;
defended by the blind man, 210;
His meekness in praying for His
murderers, 219; His mercy in
receiving sinners, an example to
us, 221; delivered men from
prison, ib.; His washing men's
feet was to set an example of
mercy, ib. ; why abode in Judea
towards His Passion, 222; His
meekness in replying to mali-
cious questions, 223; His works
His chief and sufficient witness,
ib. ; His Hand and His Flock,


5^8


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


one with the Father's, ib. ; His
coequality in Power, 224; de-
layed doing, to show the truth
of. His miracle, 227; His care to
clear it from suspicion, 228; His
condescension, to raise men's
faith, 229; His love of Lazarus,
231 ; why would not raise Laza-
rus from a distance, 223; spoke
for men's salvation, not His own
honor, 236; condescended in
preaching, not to give offense,
ii. ; declared His Generation
from, and Equality with, the
Father, 237; His humiliation
was worthy of His Divine Love,
ib. ; so prayed at the grave of
Lazarus as to show He needed
not prayer, 238; why prayed at
raising Lazarus, ib. ; showed His
power in deeds, humility in
words, ib. ; identity of His Will
with the Father's, ib. ; His mod-
eration in not claiming honor,
239; gave no real offense to the
power of the Romans, ib, ; wept
for the Jews' hardness, 240; re-
tires from Jewry, 241 ; His care
to save Judas, 243; His royal
riding into the City, 245; waited
for the Jews, before He would
call the Gentiles, 246; how pre-
pared the disciples for His death
and theirs, 248; His shrinking
from death proved His Human-
ity, and fits Him to be our pat-
tern, 249; His Victory, 250; like
the Sun, will reappear shortly,
251; withdrew often, to avoid
offense, and returned to declare
His Power, 252; One with the
Father, because seen by Isaiah,
ib. ; His condescension in speak-
ing of His knowledge, 255; His
care always to show Himself In-
separable from God, ib.; our
pattern of suffering in the flesh,
256; His forbearance with Judas,
257; His unceasing love for "His
own," ib.; taught humble-mind-
edness by the washing, ib.; by
doing all Himself, 258; signified
cleansing of the conscience by
washing, 259; adopts the disci-
ples' confession of Him, 260;
shames our pride, by washing
the feet of Judas, ib. ; taught
patience with servants, by His
own with Judas, 261; His full
knowledge of His coming Pas-
sion, ib. ; strove for Judas to the
end, 262; comforts the disciples,
263; was " troubled " on account
of Judas, ib. : did not expose
him openly, 265; His care for
the poor, and His own poverty,
ib.; His Glory at, and after, the
Crucifixion, ib,; why He dis-
coursed after the Supper, 266;
comforted the disciples with the
New Commandment, 266, 272:
by promises of Heaven, 268 ; by
reading their hearts, ib.; how
the Way, the Truth, and the


Life, 269; His independent au-
thority to be followed by self-
mortification, 273; left us free to
practice or not virginity, but re-
quired almsgiving, ib.; present
with His disciples by the Spirit,
275; His presence not visionary,
276: promised to the obedient,
ib.; His foreknowledge of His
Passion, ib.; His speaking to
men's thoughts, 277; His readi-
ness for death, ib. ; familiarizes
the disciples with His Passion,
ib.; why discoursed of His
Power in the Garden, 279; His
love for man, 280; speaks at
once with authority and conde-
scension, ib.; enjoins persever-
ance, 281 ; why always exalts
love, 682; His agreement with
the Father, ib.; proof of His
love for I lis disciples, ib.; His
miracles without parallel, 283;
thinking of Him, our support in
trial, 284; His righteousness
proved by His Ascension, 287;
by His victory over Satan, ib.;
His knowledge the same as that
of the Spirit, 288; leaves the
inward operations to the Spirit,
289; prepared His disciples for
belief in the Spirit, ib. ; by " go-
ing " showed that he would not
perish, 291; alludes to His Res-
urrection as a birth, 291; power
of His Name, 292; answers to
the thoughts of the disciple, ib.;
His Power shown in the manner
of His expiring, 294; used prayer
in temptation for our sakes, 296;
teaches us to be earnest in prayer,
ib, ; His Freedom and Glory in
the Crucifixion, ib. ; His care to
prepare them for the calling of
the Gentiles, ib.; His eternal
authority, 297; was to be glori-
fied in His Human Nature, 298;
His prayer for His Own, showed
His love for them, 300, 303; in
what sense received them from
the Father, 300; glorified in the
disciples as well as the Father,
ib.; in what sense not in the
world, 300, 301 ; lost none but
the willful, 301 ; mingled explana-
tion with command, to suit their
infirmity, ib.; speaks of the fu-
ture as past, 303; His great love
in dying for us, 304; His last
discourse summed up in love,
305; goes willingly and with
pains to His Passion, 306; His
prayer was a discourse for the
sake of the disciples, 307; His
habit of passing the night abroad,
ib,; His readiness in giving up
Himself, 307, 308; His Divine
power over the soldiers, 307;
His care to save His disciples,
ib,; led to Annas by way of
triumph, 308; was questioned as
if seditious, 309; appealed to
His enemies' witness, ib,; His
Straightforwardness and care to


remove every pretext, ib.; His
thought for Peter, 310; ate the
Passover by anticijiation, ib,;
His behavior before Pilate, 31 1;
nature of His Kingdom a proof
of His Deity, ib,; His humility
and meekness our example, 311,
313; His longsuffering with His
enemies, 313, 314; why Me made
no defense before Pilate, 314;
never " made Himself a King " a
outwardly, 315; teaches to re- I
turn good for evil, ib, ; His care |
for His Mother, 318; His self- I
possession on the Cross, ib, ;
showed human weakness in the J
Agony, Divine power on the 1
Cross, ib. ; taught filial affection J
on the Cross, ib. ; revealed Him- \
self risen by His Voice, 324;
would not be touched, because
changed, and about to ascend,
ib. ; declares His superiority in
honor, ib.; reason of His first
reappearance to His disciples,
ib.; why He bade Peace, 325;
gave a foretaste of the Spirit in
breathing on the disciples, ib.;
His lovingkindness in the case
of St. Thomas, 327; His second j
appearance, ib.; the Spiritual '
nature of His Body after His
Resurrection, 328; preserved the (
marks of Crucifixion, to per-
suade the disciples, ib,; many
signs followed His Resurrection,
ib. ; appeared to the disciples
only by condescension, and for
short intervals, ib, ; awfulness of
His Form after His Rising, 329;
showed greater Power in His
miracles after His Rising, ib, ;
ate with the disciples to show
Himself alive, ib.; His coming
hereafter, our Ijliss in seeing Him
then, ib. ; love of Him conquers
the world, 330.
Christians, how sanctified, 48; duties
of, high as tlieir privileges, 50,
53; to imitate Christ by love of
the brethren, 54; their duties as
members one of another, 53, 54;
indifference of, a stuml)lingblock
to heathens, 61 ; taught by the
zeal of heathens to study and to
defend the truth, 62; should show
their joy in Christ by works of
love, 72; united only by common
holiness, 89; their ingratitude
towards Christ, 95 ; a ridicule to
heathens and heretics, because
ignorant of Holy Scripture, 105;
inattention of, rebuked by the
woman of Samaria, no; their
neglect of Holy Scripture and
Christian doctrine, 114; exhorted
to judge themselves, 121; must
not demand miracles to supjiort
their faith, 125; to retire fre-
quently to solitude, after the ex-
ample of Christ, 151; must needs
believe a Resurrection, 163; made
one with Christ by partaking of
Him, 166; specially bound to


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS,


529


forgiveness of injuries, 174, 186;
intended to be the teachers,
leaven, salt, light of the world,
181; sin of, worse than of hea-
thens, 250.

^rysostom, St., why varied his preach-
ing, 79 ; preached two days in the
week, 87 ; his despair of his hear-
ers, 105 ; an admirer of holy vir-
ginity, 206.

Church, the, wedded to God by a
Voice, and teaching, 102; signi-
fied by *' the true worshipers,"
116; consists by the Water and
the Blood, 319.

Churches, no worldly thoughts to in-
trude there, 8; spiritual surgeries,
9; behavior in, 10; attended for
form's sake : preparation for,
commended, 38; weariness of the
congregation, no; good effect of
attending, 192; neglect of, 2IO;
presiding over, a great matter,
2l6; frequented from curiosity,
306; attendance at useless, with-
out good works, ib.

Circumcision, was before the Law,
and of equal obligation, 1 79 ;
performed on the sabbath, ih.

"ity of God, compared with earthly
cities, 203.

Uamor, Paul against, 92.

;iay made by Christ, proves Him
Creator, 201.

Clothing, costliness in, condemned, 95.

'oat, the, without seam, a type of
Christ's nature, 317]

Comforter, the, proved a distinct Per-
son from the Son, but of the same
Substance, 274; came not, be-
cause not needed, before Christ's
Sacrifice, ib. ; indwelling of,
promised, ib. ; so called by rea-
son of our afflictions, 276; cred-
ible, because the Spirit of Truth,
284.

Coming of Christ, means the Incar-
nation, 36 ; why said to be after
the Baptist, 45 ; expected by St.
Chrysostom, 121; its suddenness,
ib.

ommandments, keeping them the
test of Christian love, 275, 276.

ommunion, of Christians, depends
on holiness, 89; joins men to the
Body of Christ, 166; absolute
necessity of, 168; to be under-
stood spiritually, 169.

ompany of wicked men dangerovis
and offensive, 206.

anception of the Blessed Virgin, ac-
credited in the Old Testament,
92.
Dncubinage, sanctioned by heathen

philosophers, 50.
mdescension, lessens not greatness,

38-

rafession, a way to pardon, 29; not
needful to Christ, 59; best made
by good works, 72; Nathanael's
and Peter's contrasted, 72, 73.

)nscience, cleansing of, signified by
Christ washing the disciples' feet,
259; a foretaste of judgment or


of reward, 333; convicted Ahab
to his good, ib.

Consubstantiality of the Father and
the Son, 254.

Consubstantiality and Condignity of
the Father and the Son, 272.

Contention to be avoided by Chris-
tians, after the example of Christ,

Continence, a higher path than mar-
ried life, 318.

Conversation on religious matters rec-
ommended, lo.

Conversion, may be sudden, 6; of
sinners by Christ, 42; efficacy of,
50; of the penitent thief, a kind
of shaking the rocks, 317.

Corinthian, the, adulterer recovered
by timely rebuke, 130, 131.

Covetousness, a hindrance to hearing
the Word, 8; its power, 31; sep-
arates the brethren, 54; a betray-
ing of Christ, 172; a subject for
mourning, 240; examples of its
evil effects in Judas and others,
243; the worst idolatry, ib.; be-
gins in envy, ib. ; ruins the merit
of almsgiving, 270; without ex-
cuse, 273; its general spread and
mischiefs, 280; spoils our charity
and other virtues, 333.

Created things, have had a beginning,
1 1 ; implied in " Earth " and
"Man," 12; the Word proved
not one of them, 12, 13; not to
be worshiped, 19 ; not " the
Life "nor "the Light," 24; ac-
knowledged Christ their Master,
41 ; described as willing, because
independent of our will, 9:;
work on the sabbath, by continu-
ance, 133.

Creation, an attribute of God, 18;
lessens nothing in God, 23; was
an act of grace, 49; works of,
require faith as much as things
spiritual, 87; superiority of the
new, 88.

Cross, the, a Baptism, 89 ; how con-
nected with Baptism, 94; opened
the door to the Gentiles, 246;
God's glory in, 249; foretold by
Jacob, 251; being accursed, was
to prevent any future remem-
brance of Jesus, 315; borne by
Christ as a symbol of victory,
317; buried, and discovered in
after times, ib.

Crucifixion, the, glory of, 42; why
foretold obscurely, 94; virtue of,
exceeded that of its type, the
brazen serpent, ib.; the fountain
of life, 95 ; the beginning of
Grace, 184: and of Glory, ib.;
the time of, ordered by Christ
Himself, not the Jews, 190; the
beginning of Christ's Glory, 265.

Cup of the Lord's Supper, the, shown
in the Blood from His Side, 319.

Curiosity, in divine mysteries a device
of .Satan, 27; leads away from the
faith without satisfying, 85; may
be too much and too little, 327 ;
condemned in St. Thomas, id.


Diemon, of the Gnostics, 30.

Uancers, preferred to Christ, 61;
power of, to inilame the mind,
66; encouragement of, sinful, 1 54.

Daniel, 40, 61.

Darkness, used for death and error,
24; for sin, »'*.,' caused byworld-
liness, 3 1 ; preferred to light, 97 ;
by those who willfully continue in
sin, 98; signifies error and sin,
l88; put for sin, 277.

Day of Christ, what, 198.

Dead, prayers for the, 43 (note) ; to
be honored not by mourning, but
by good imitation, 231 ; to be
clothed in almsgiving, not rich
robes, 321 ; memory of, a benefit
to the living, 322.

Death, overcome by Christ, 24; the
cause of victory, 293; and im-
mortality, ib. ; its awfulness to the
unprepared, 306; to be neither
feared nor sought, 318; the fear
of, intended for a safeguard to
life, 332.

Deceit, folly of, 150.

"Declared," hath, implies Christ's
clearness in teaching, 53.

Dedication, great national Feast of
the, 222.

Despair, condemned, 295.

Despondency, useful if leading to re-
pentance, 286 ; increased by
dwelling on the cause, 291 ; com-
pared to childbirth, ib.

Devil, the, tempts to curiosity in
Divine mysteries, 28 ; fell by
pride, 57 ; his versatility in at-
tack, 79; afraid of the Bible,
114; does not make war on his
own kind as malicious men, 130;
flies from the mysteries, 167;
called a wolf, a lion, a serpent, a
dragon, 215; the works of Christ
attributed to, because more than
human, 219; ruler of the wicked
only in the world, 277.

Devils, the authors of suicide, 332.

Disciples of John, some jealous of
Christ, 64; two zealous in seek-
ing him, 65 ; why questioned by
our Lord, ib. ; their question
with a certain Jew, 100 (note) ;
their jealousy of Christ's disci-
ples, lot ; vainglory of, 102;
slow to believe in Jesus Christ,
104.

Disciples of Christ, began to believe
at Cana, 80; slow to believe the
doctrines of the Resurrection and
Incarnation, 82; because not at
first informed by the Spirit, ib. ;
the more perfect, attracted by
Christ's teaching, the grosser sort
by His miracles, 83; object of
their baptism the same as of
John's, 100 ; moderation of, 109;
their reverence for Christ, 117;
their manner of discoursing with
Christ, 151; their faith in sitting
down without question at the
miracle of the loaves, 152; their
love for Christ, 155; witnessed
more miracles than the people,


530


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


a. ; in what sense some " went
back," 1 70; faith of, still imper-
fect, 228; their fear of the Jews,
it. ; understood nothing perfectly
of the Resurrection, 245 ; still
ignorant of Christ's Equality,
248; " clean," because free from
Jewish error, 259; their confes-
sion of Christ, 260; taught not
to contend for greatness, by the
washing, ib. ; gradually prepared
for the Resurrection, 276, 277;
understood not high doctrines
until inspired, 276; their imper-
fect faith in Christ and the Res-
urrection, ib. ; their courage after
Pentecost, 279; how taught to
rejoice in persecution, 283; cred-
ible, because eye-witnesses, 284;
slow, because unwilling, to be-
lieve in His death, 291 ; still im-
perfect, though professing knowl-
edge, 292; not taught perfectly,
but assured of peace, 293; in
what sense not of the world,
303 ; sanctified by the Word, and
by the Sacrifice, ib. ; their unity,
through faith, 304; to be known
in the world by their mutual love,
ib. ; their glory given by Christ,
ib.; why took no part in the
burial, 320; their hasty return
home, 323; their mission, 325;
received somewhat of grace by
His breathing on them, ib. ; their
candor in telling all their faults,
327 ; returned to their trade
after Christ's Resurrection, 328;
knew Him not at first on the
lake, 329; awe-struck by Christ's
risen form, ib.

Disease, produced by sin, 131.

Discontent, comes of ambition, 231.

Dives, judged, because not self-judg-
ing, 121; tormented because he
did no actual good, 147; his
impunity in life increased his
punishment, 157.

Divination, forbidden to the Jews, 48.

Docetae, 39 (note).

Doctrine of Christ and of the Father
one, 177; of men, aims at repu-
tation, ib.

Doctrines, growth of, harder than of
natural seed, 62; general neglect
of, condemned, 114; the higher
cannot be received without faith,
115; the true, sanctify the soul,

303-
Domestics, patience with, taught by

Christ's with Judas, 261.
Door of the fold, the Scriptures, 213.

Earthly things, their fleeting nature
typified in the water at Cana, 78 ;
how said of Holy Baptism, 93,
103.

Elijah, how glorified, 40,

Elisha, how glorified, 40.

Empedocles believed the Metempsy-
chosis, 5 (note).

End of the world expected bySt.Chrys.,
121 ; implied a brief period, ib.

Eijvy, evils of, seen in the Jews, 54,


55, 122; of the Jews towards
Christ, contrasted with the good-
will of the Samaritans, 1 22 ;
inexcusable because not from
natural passion, 130; its evils
extend to all times, ib. ; exam-
ples of, ib. ; a war against Christ,
ib. ; hard to heal, ib. ; of Satan
ruined the world : of the Jews
made them murderers of Christ,
173; of the brethren, 174; ex-
amples of its sinfulness, 199, 200.

Equality of the Son with the Father,
13, 14, 22; declared to the Jews,
to show Him Lord of the sab-
bath, 132; proved by His break-
ing the sabbath, 133; by His
doing nothing of Himself, 135;
of Christ with the Father, 199.

Esau ruined by envy, 130.

Essence, of the Father and the Son,
one, 18, 28, 254, 272; of the Son,
simple, 24; the Divine, in Christ,
unchange<i by the Incarnation,
38; and different from His flesh,

39-

Eternity, a subject difficult to contem-
plate, 7 ; of The Word, main-
tained, II, 17, 27; Christ's proved
by the phrase, " was in the be-
ginning," II, 12, 18; by His
being called " Maker of the
ages," II; by His being Maker
of " all things," 17; by His being
" in the Bosom of the Father,"
53; that of the Father involved
m Christ's, 17; of Christ's man-
hood asserted, 53; shown in the
Jewish types, 169.

Evangelists begin from different points,
yet agree, 16; dwell on different
periods, 58; truth of, shown by
their reporting matters of re-
proach, and by their omitting
miracles, 61; conciseness of, 67,
70; omit many particulars, but
not general results, 123; were
careful to correct any misappre-
hensions about Christ, 134; their
candor in relating things appar-
ently discreditable, 173 ; prove
the reality of Christ's death in
different ways, 233 ; candid in
confessing the disciples' igno-
rance, 245; their veracity argued
from their many omissions, 328.

Everlasting life, promised to obedi-
ence, 197.

Excuses of the negligent, 38.

Exhortation, duty of mutual, 1 72.

Eye, the noblest member, 201.

Faith without works insufficient, 19,
27, 37, lo6 ; the only way to
apprehend things spiritual, 87,
93 ; required in studying things
natural, 88 ; without works a
denial of Christ, 97; in heathens
come from purity of intention,
98; in Christ is faith in God, 104;
need of, 115; without a sign, ex-
emplified in the Samaritans, 123;
of the nobleman of Cana, imper-
fect, because after the miracle.


124; of the centurion (Matt. viii.
5) more perfect, because before
\t,ib.; tried Ijyaflliction, 125; be-
fore sight, not required of stran-
gers who had not seen Christ,
129; of the paralytic at Bethes-
da, 132; requires some greatness
of soul, 162 ; must be founded
on Holy Scripture, 184; the con-
dition of receiving the Promises,
ib.; God's work, 202; the blinil
man had it, ib. ; Naaman had it
not, ib. ; produced in some Jews,
by Christ's condescension, but
imperfectly, 192 ; of the blind
man in going to .Siloam, 204;
most needed in things invisil)le,
205 ; the truest way to glorify
God, 208; steps by which it was
called forth in the blind man,
212; of the lepers, ib. ; with
righteousness, its power, 234 ;
triumphed in the Apostles, ib. ;
nothing without holiness, ib. ; its
object, the unseen, 327.

False Christs called strangers, 214;
wherein differing from the True,
ib. ; their evil designs, ib.

Fasting, a way to pardon, 29, 142.

Fatalism inconsistent with a belief in
the Resurrection, 163.

Father, His Eternity involved in the
Son's, 1 7 ; unbegotten, 28 ; the
manner, of His "working," 133;
His witness to Christ, 146, 162;
His Will one with the .Son's, 165;
" draweth " us, but not without
our consent, 164 ; can not be
seen by any, known only through
the Son, 271 ; Consubstantiality
of, with the Son, 272; His Great-
ness as the cause, hinders not
the Son's Consubstantiality, 277;
His union with the .Son, as the
Root of the Branches, 279; hated
in the Son, 283.

Fear of God, the, secures the soul,

193-
Feast, the first and last its great days,

183.
Feasts, rulers of, selected for sobriety

78.
Female sex, their superior feeling

323-
Figures used in the Gospels to giv<

spirit and sweetness to the doc

trine, 119; the latest, were thi

most clear, 1 26.
Finery has no power to please long

226.
Fire, a likeness of Christ's fullness, 47

the double, of sin and of hell, 66
Firmness marks Christ as the goo

Shepherd, 217.
Flesh of Christ, the, was of the sub

stance of the Virgin, 91 ; n'

excuse for a carnal mind, be

cause overcome by the .Spirit

277; examples of its subjectior

278.
Following of Christ, lies in imitatin

His actions, 142.
Foreknowledge of Christ, 170, 174.
Forgiveness, how won, 29; must b


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


531


shown to others, that we may
receive it ourselves, 142; of in-
juries : Moses, Noah, Joseph,
examples of, 262; its obligations
on Christians, ib.
•"ornication, worse than idolatry, its
punishment, 234; persons guilty
of, warned from the Church,

235-

freedom, from sin, the only real lib-
erty, 194; consists in having no
wants : of Adam such, 298.

•"ree-will asserted, 24, 29, 35, 36, 42;
argued from the offer of Heaven
and the threat of Hell, 134 ;
shown in our learning and be-
lieving voluntarily, 162; consis-
tent with God's " drawing," 164.

""rugality, the mother of health, 79.

"■uUness of Christ's Grace, 2.

funerals, great folly of expense at,
321 ; vainglorious, ib.; modera-
tion in, a proof of faith in the
Resurrection, 322.

futurity, knowledge of, universally
coveted, 2S8 ; foresight of, be-
longs to God only, 289.

james, attention paid to, i, 38.

jalileans, general dullness of, 70; re-
ceived Christ, but after sight of
miracles, 123.

Jarden, the, why Christ led the dis-
ciples there, 279.

generation, Christ's Eternal, to be re-
ceived humbly, not enquired into,
86; the second, of men in Bap-
tism, how superior to the natural,
88; not understood of Angels, to
be taken on trust by men, ib.

jentiles, fallen state of, 32; readily
accepted the Gospel, JiZ; first vis-
ited by Christ in passing through
Samaria, 107; why called A Dis-
persion, 182; their morality a
reproof to Christians, 186; called
Children by anticipation, 241 ; in
what sense "not of this fold,"
217; their future union, ib.;
shown in the ass's colt, 245; call
of, began from the Cross, 246,
250; signified by " all flesh," 296;
knew a Creator, not His Son,
299.

jiving, grace inferior to " coming,"
said of the Father and the Son,
implies the generation, 304, 311.

jlory, of the Son, surpassing, 40; of
Christ, how revealed, 41 ; of the
Passion, 42; of heaven, 43; how
given to Ciod, 46; of Christ, how
manifested at Cana, 80; to be
gained by renouncing vainglory,
99; of this world and the next
compared, 102; won by humility
and charity, 117, 118; of this
world, a slavery, 154; not men-
tioned in the Lord's Prayer, 157;
to be won by suffering, 298; folly
of losing it, for vanities, ib.

ilory of God, whether the object, or
the consequence of the cure of
the blind men, 201 ; either view
justified, ib.


Gluttony, power of, exemplified in
those who would have made
Christ a King, 153.

Gnostics, opinions of, 30 (note).

GOD, His nature atlmits not number,
7; nor time, 17; impossil>le to
be described, 28; to be named
only from His operations, 7; be-
fore all, 8; incapable of suffering,
12; infinite, 17; attributes of,
ascribed to the Son, 18; inde-
fectible, 23; omnipresent, 25;
unsearchable, 27; not known to
all, 30; to the Son only, 52;
without wants, 35 ; unchangeable,
39; without equal, ib.; seen by
the Prophets only by His con-
descending to certain forms, 5 1 ;
seen in His Essence only by the
Son, 52; seen only in thought,
ib. ; makes things necessary easy,
87; the operations of, in regen-
eration to be taken on trust, 88;
great strength of His love ex-
pressed in "So loved," 95; His
mercy in appointing a day of
trial, 96; to dispense with the
law of the sabliath is for Him
only, 133; "works," by preserv-
ing all things, ib. ; said to " send "
the Son because the Great Cause,
135; Christ's doctrine of His
Spiritual nature, 146; in what
sense " seen " by Isaiah and
others, ib.; witnessed to Christ
at Jordan, at the Transfiguration,
in the Scriptures, 146; the fear
of, the true wisdom, 150; in what
sense said to " prove " men's
faith, and to " search the heart,"
152; allows the wicked only for
a time, 157; His Providence not
fully shown before the Judgment,
162; " draweth " by helping
man's weakness, 164; is most
glorified by our faith, 208; spoke
of Himself condescendingly in
the Old Testament, 237; His
" hearing " Christ signified iden-
tity of will, 239; glorified by the
Cross of Christ, 249 : by the judg-
ment of Satan, 250 : in our obe-
dience, ib. ; known only through
Christ, 271; in what sense "seen"
by men, 272; His Essence in-
visible, ib. ; receives less love and
homage than some harlots, 295;
glorified by man's service, and
by Christ's Incarnation, 297;
known only through the Son,
305 ; to be loved by works, ib.

Godhead of Christ, indirectly declared,
201.

Golden, necklaces worn by servants,

95-

Gold mines, 125, I43.

Golgotha, said to be Adam's place of
burial, 317.

Gospel, its persuasiveness a proof of
its truth, 5; wide spread of, 6;
read on Lord's Day and sabbath,
38; superior to the Law, 48; its
offers universal, 24, 29, 36; re-
jected from the love of sin, 98;


a charm against Satan, 114; why
especially to be studied, 192.

Grace, of Baptism, 36; must be
guarded, ib. ; fullness of, in Christ,
47; shown in the Creation, in
the natural law, 49; in the Law
of Moses, ib.; "given," inferioi
to "coming," 50; of (iod abound-
ed beyond man's transgression,
90; not exhausted by use like the
water of Bethesda, 126; in Christ
was without, in the Apostle with,
measure, 153; prevents and co-
operates with men's will, 164.

Greek Philosophers, mistakes of, con-
cerning the soul and heaven,

234-
Greeks, why at the Passover, 246;
their devotion to their gods, and
contempt of riches, a reproach to
evil Christians, 316.

Habit, power of, 25.

Hand, the emblem of authority, 224.

Hardening of our hearts is of our
own fault, 253.

Harlots, their imperious treatment of
their lovers, 294, 295; their ra-
pacity in spoiling their lovers,

33°-

Harvest of souls, 119; prepared by
the Prophets, reaped by the
Apostles, 120.

Health, the daughter of Abstinence,
78.

Hearers, what their disposition should
be, 2, 8; why to be earnest, 2;
why tranquil, 2; should prepare
themselves, 3, 38; how they be-
come confused, S; the careless,
condemned, ib.; worse than
beasts, 9; should keep what
they hear, 32; should not resent
reproof, 40; state of, to be con-
sidered in teaching and reading
Scripture, 105; should imitate
the woman of Samaria, 1 10.

Hearing and seeing, said of God,
and Christ, imply their exact
knowledge, 92, 103, 136, 141;
the word, requires stillness, 168:
a spiritual mind, 169: earnest
zeal, 183: carefulness, 187: tends
to reverence, 192.

Heathens, conversion of, hindered by
our indifference, 61 ; zeal of, our
reproach, 62; some rejected
Christianity from love of vice,
97; some virtuous but very rare-
ly, 98; did not go to the light
when it came to them, ib.; none
believed but those who before
wished to live well, ib.; doctrines
of, weak and inconsistent, 247;
conversion of, hindered by the
coldness and sins of Christians,
266.

Heaven, the thoughts of, should set
us above the world, 293 : and
little affronts, 294; our real home,

293'
Hell, fire of, prepared for the devil,
66; existence of, denied by some,
96; proved credible by I Cor. v.,


532


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


131 ; threat of, proves human
freedom, 134.

Heralds of Christ's birth, 41.

Heretics err, by not considering the
objects of the speakers in Holy
Scripture, 144; must be refuted
from Holy Scripture, 149; an
objection of, to Christ's answer
to the Jews, 198; barred from
the fold by Scripture, 213; their
misinterpretation of the parable
of the sheepfold, 214; denied the
Resurrection on Heathen princi-
ples of the eternity of matter,
247; to be resisted by knowledge
of the Scriptures, ib,

Herod the Tetrarch, his troops de-
stroyed by Aretas, 44 (note).

High Priest, the, inspired for his
office's sake, 241; chosen annually
through corruption, ib.

High Priesthood, the, trafficked and
made annual under Christ, 241.

Hireling, the, marks of, 215; signifies
the Jewish teachers, 216.

Holiness of Christians and Jews con-
trasted, 48; a relative term, 49;
absolutely necessary to salvation,
106.

Holy Ghost, the, speaks through the
Scriptures, 2, 16, 22; not meant
by the words " in Him was life,"
21; uncreated, 22; given in Bap-
tism, 36; His descent upon Christ
was to declare Him, 59; not
given in John's Baptism, 60;
office of, not to teach, but to re-
call Christ's teaching, 83; supe-
rior to soul, in giving life, 88;
performs the work of God, 91;
power of, shown by the com-
parison of wind, ib. ; His Infinity
declared by John Baptist, 105;
the names of " Fire," and
" Water," used to express His
operations, not His Essence, be-
cause possessing the qualities of
both. III; His grace may be in-
creased, may be quenched by
covetousness and cruelty, 183;
largeness of, intended by the
"Living Water," 184; spake by
the Prophets, ib. ; and triumphed
in the Apostles, but not before
the Crucifixion, ib. ; deserted the
Jews after the Passion, 241 ; His
power in the Apostles, 277, 278;
enables us to overcome the flesh,
and makes men equal to Angels,
278; is " of Truth," because of
the Father, 284; speaks only the
words of Christ, 288; the guide
to truth, ib. ; could not come be-
fore the sacrifice of the Cross,
ib.; His office in Holy Baptism,
289; His dignity in prophecy,
not contrary to Christ's, ib.;
awfulness of His gift in Ordina-
tion, 325.

Honesty, 122.

Honor to be sought of God, not men,
15; like wealth, most had when
despised, ib.; of men, shared
with harlots and dancers, 136;


the greatest, gained by alms-
giving, 143; not taken by Christ
for Himself, 198.

House-building extravagant, 203;
moral deduced from, ib.

" How? " the question of the weak in
faith, as Sarah, 85; the cause of
unbelief, 166.

Human nature suffered in Christ, not
the Divine, 12; of Christ taught
before the Godhead, 13; taken
into God, 38; the Tabernacle of
David, 39; repaired by Christ, 41;
requires the aid of society, 67.

Human way of speaking adopted by
Christ, 218; why, ib.

Humility, the gain of, 106; the cause
of Christ's preference for John,
117; example of in Moses, ib.;
the crown of good works, 118;
the truest greatness, 261 ; taught
by Christ's behavior before Pilate,
311-

"I am," force of the expression, 199.

Idleness really condemned by Christ,
158; the meat which perisheth,
ib.

Ignorance, in St. John, a proof of in-
spiration, 4, & (note), 5; will
be no excuse, 142; weakens the
soul, 279; of some things, de-
sirable, 281.

Impatience rebuked by the paralytic
at Bethesda, 126.

Impossibility, arising from the Es-
sence of God, a proof of power,

I35-

Incarnation, a veil of the Godhead,
26, 40; believed by Patriarchs,
30; lateness of, no objection, ib.;
a "coming" of Christ, 36; the
cause of our Regeneration, 38;
changed not the Son's Essence,
39; a taking of the manhood
into God, ib.; Christ's care to
prove it, 107; because a chief
point in the work of Redemp-
tion, ib.; proved by Christ's
weeping, 233; by the different
accounts of the Passion, ib.

Ingratitude of man towards Christ,
self-condemned, 95.

Injury, if unavenged, recoils on the
doer, 261 ; forgiveness of, shown
in the Old Testament, 262.

Injustice conspicuous in small acts of
parsimony, 221.

Insults, how answered by Christ, 197,
198.

Intention without acts may be sinful,
306.

Isaac, miraculous birth of, was to
prepare for Christ's, 92; type of
Christ, 198; bearing the wood, a
type of Christ on the Cross, 317.

Isaiah's vision, a proof of the Trinity,
2S3.

Jacob predicted a Messiah, 116.

Jacob's ladder, a type of gradual ad-
vance to Heaven, 312.

Jesus, how made both Lord and
Christ, 12 [see Christ].


Jews, the, blindness of, 32; cast off
through pride, 33; their discon-
tent unreasonable, ib,; abused
their privileges, 34; needed a
man for a teacher, 45; nominally
sons of God, really servants,
48; were under Grace, but less
than we, 49; their envy of the
Baptist, 54; why preferred him
to Christ, 55; why questioned
Him, ib.; from their faith in
John, ought to have believed in
Christ, 56; in what sense knew
not Clirist, 57; why believed not
after the descent of the Spirit on
Jesus, 60; malice of, contrasted
with the candor of Nathanael,
71; were not profited by rela-
tionship to Christ, 75; provoked
to hear of Christ's Equality with
God, 81 ; their wickedness in re-
quiring a sign in the temple, ib. ;
sinned by vainglory, 98; weaned
from idolatry by gradual teach-
ing, 106; had been rejected, long
before Christ, 108; their inat-
tention contrasted with the care
of the woman of Samaria, no,
1 14; did not attend to the Word,
and hindered others, no; pre-
ferred to the Samaritans because
purer in faith, 115: and their
spiritual fathers, n6; but in-
ferior to Christians, ib. ; did not
enquire to learn, but to mock,
117; their envy of the paralytic's
cure, 130; their faith hindered
by vainglory, 136, 148; really
believed in John the Bajitist,
144; but only for a season, 145;
rejected God's witness to Christ,
in rejecting that of the Scriptures,
146; convicted of not loving
God, 148; and of excessive pride,
ib.; rejected Christ for Antichrist,
ib. ; how to be accused by M oses,
149; their gluttony made them
affected l)y the miracle of the
loaves, 153, 157, 159; their in-
gratitude and hypocrisy in men-
tioning the Manna, 1 60; incred-
ulous because disappointed of
their lust, 161; fled from Christ's
spiritual doctrine, 164; led astray
by unlawful curiosity, 166; their
rage against Christ was from fear,
176; their wickedness in won-
dering at, not obeying, His word,
177; subverted the Law by their
conduct, 178; confuted out of
the Law itself, ib.; those who
saw most of Christ's miracles
hated Him most, 180; their in-
consistency, ib.; in what sense
knew and knew not Christ, I So,
181 ; not really ignorant, 71, no,
181; how sought Christ "in a
little while," 181 ; their contempt
of Gentiles, 182; their malice in
pretending ignorance, 185, 188;
imperfect faith of some of them,
J92; carried texts of Scripture
on their dress, 193; erred, be-
cause they had not the fear ol


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


533


God, ill.; their insensibility to
the bondage of sin, ib. ; were in
bondage repeatedly, 194; differed
from us, as servants from sons,
ib. ; hindered from lielieving, Ijy
reliance on their descent, 195;
proved children of the devil,
from envy and murder, ib. ; con-
tracted unlawful marriages, 196;
alien from God and from Abra-
ham, ib.; their blasphemy, that
Christ had a devil, 197, 198;
trust in Abraham only, 198;
knew not the Father, ib. ; malice
of, towards the blind man at
Siloam, 205, 207; labor to de-
preciate the miracle, ib.; sub-
tlety and hypocrisy of their tjues-
tions, 208 J neither Moses' nor
Christ's disciples, 209; asked
questions of Christ, not to learn,
but to silence Him, 222; their
wickedness in rejecting the
greater witness of His works,
and demanding words, 223; pro-
voked by Christ's claiming co-
equality with God, 224; thought
to save, but ruined themselves,
by slaying Christ, 239; did not
escape the Romans, 241 ; de-
serted by the Spirit after the
Crucifixion, ib.; their wickedness
in plotting at a Passover, 242;
ruined by covetousness, 243; the
people believed, the rulers re'
jected Christ, 244; design to kill
Lazarus, 245; really understood
Christ's meaning, 25 1 ; but mis-
construed it deliberately, ib. ;
still in darkness, ib.; their un-
belief foretold, 252; opposed
both God and Moses, in Christ,
283 ; their unbelief, worldly pride,
ib. ; absurdity of their scruple to
enter Pilate's palace, 310; in
what sense could not put any to
death, ib.; their madness in pre-
ferring Barabbas, 313; made to
confess their own downfall, 315;
why wished to slay Jesus by
crucifying, ib.; spoiled by suc-
cess from the beginning, 316;
fulfilled the prophecy uncon-
sciously, 317; madness of, pro-
claimed by the Title on the
Cross, ib. ; their obduracy to the
last, 319.

John Baptist, St., spoke as sent from
God, 25 ; why sent to witness to
Christ, 26; inferior to Christ,
ib.; confessed his inferiority, 45;
reverenced by the Jews, 44;
praised by Josephus, ib. ; taught
from heaven, 45; prepared the
Jews for Christ by degrees, ib.;
how " after " Christ, ib. ; in ex-
ternals superior to Christ, 55;
preferred to Christ by the Jews,
ib. ; why questioned by the Jews,
ib.; in his confessing Christ, re-
plied to their secret thoughts,
56; and detected their treachery,
ib.; his dignity compared to
ours, 57; boldness of, 58; object


of his mission inferior to Christ's,
59; gave not the Spirit in his
baptism, 60; did not know Christ
at first, but before His baptism,
ib.; why used repetitions, 63;
how brought the Bride to Christ,
ib. ; called the friend of the
Bridegroom because present with
Christ, 64; why al)le to preach
at all hours, ib. ; some disciples
of, jealous of Christ, ib. ; why
continued to baptize all his life,
100; His death facilitated Christ's
ministry, ib.; witnessed to Christ's
superiority, loi, 102; called him-
self Christ's " friend " to disclaim
jealousy, loi ; his work finished
as Christ's began, 102; his re-
serve in speaking of Christ, 105;
his testimony was that of God,
144; called a torch because his
light was not his own, 145;
proved trustworthy by the acts
of Christ, 225.

John Evangelist, St., his intimacy with
Christ, I ; manner of his appear-
ing, ib. ; truthfulness, i, 36;
birth and occupation, 4; un-
learned, 5; instance of his plain
speaking, 7; the beloved disci-
ple, 117; does not himself relate
the cause of Christ's preference,
ib. ; favored by St. Peter, ib. ;
his humility, ib. ; his care to
correct mistakes, 152; exactness
of, 156; why omits many events
between the Feasts, 173; Christ's
love for him, enabled him to ask,
263 ; why indulged in great
familiarity by Christ, 264; asso-
ciated often with Peter, ib. ; his
forbearance and exactness in
relating the betrayal, 308; in
relating his own conduct and
Peter's at the Palace, ib. ; his
modesty in speaking of his stand-
ing by the Cross, 318; honored
by having the charge of Christ's
mother, ib. ; an eye-witness of
the piercing of the side, 319;
why took no part in the burial,
320; does full credit to Mary's
zeal and to Peter's, 320, 32 1 ;
the first to recognize Christ on
the lake, as St. Peter to hasten
to Him, 329; his modesty in
correcting the mistake of the
disciples concerning himself, 332 ;
his reason for writing his Gospel,
333; his veracity argued by his
choice of subjects, his confidence
in himself, his friendship with
Christ and His mother, ib.

John's Gospel, St., its marvelous
teaching, 5 ; consistency of, ib. ;
translations of, 6; perspicuity of,
ib. ; teaching of, why outlived
other philosophy, ib. ; style of,
ib. ; dwells most on doctrines, 9;
why begins with Christ's eternal
subsistence, 16; unlike Genesis,
ascends at once to the Creator,
21 ; heretical reading in [ch. i.
3], ib.; leads us upwards grad-


ually, 49 ; speaks most of the
time before John's imprisonments,
59; most concerned with Christ's
discourses, 151,

Jonas, sign of, why often given, 82.

Joseph, an example of forgiveness, 262.

Joseph of Arimatha;a, one of the
Seventy Disciples, 320 ; buried
Christ with cost and zeal, but as
a mere man, ib.

Josephus, relates St. John Baptist's
death, 4 (note).

Judas, why reproved secretly by Christ,
171 ; shared in the Apostles' gifts
and miracles, 172; but fell by
covetousness, ib. ; his pretended
zeal for the poor, 242 ; his ob-
duracy to Christ's love, 243; cast
off to Satan by giving of the sop:
his hardness, 264 ; received a
secret rebuke, 265; his wicked-
ness after sharing the salt, and
the washing, 257; was probably
washed first of the disciples, 258;
his insensibihty, 258, 260, 262;
his ingratitude, 261.

Judgment, will be according to men's
deserts, 96 ; delayed to give time
for repentance, 97; will reveal
men's sins to one another, 121;
remembrance of, a help to virtue,
137; most attracts the obstinate
hearer, 139 ; the doctrine of,
carefully propounded by Christ
and St. John, 140; its inexorable
strictness, 154 ; thought of, a
check to sin, 162, 163 ; of the
flood, and of Sodom, 163 ; by
appearance sinful, 179; after the
flesh, is judging unjustly, 188; of
Christ, and of the Father, is One,
189; in what sense the object of
Christ's coming, 212; of others,
to be made with mercy, 220; of
ourselves, a cure for inhumanity,
221 ; only denied by these who
fear it, 247 ; of men worthless,
281 ; the future, proved, by
Christ's victory over Satan, 287.

Jurymen of Antioch, often no better
than the criminals. 306.

Justice must be impartial to rich and
poor, 179.

King, splendors of a, described, 41.

Kingdom of Christ, to be attained
only by zeal, 196; its spiritual
nature, 311.

Knowledge, will not save « ithout holi-
ness, lo6; real and nominal, 180,
i8r ; exact, represented by sight,
because the most perfect sense,

.274-
Knowledge of one another, of the
Shepherd and His sheep, 217;
of the Father and the Son, 134.

Labor, imposed after the fall for dis-
cipline, 126, 127; makes virtue
meritorious, 128.

Lamb of God, why said of Christ, 59;
name of, implied the doctrine
of communion with Christ, 165
(note).


534


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


J


Law, the, of nature, was of God's
grace, 49; not greater than the
sabbath or Circumcision, 1 79.

Law of Moses, the, a gift of Grace,
49 ; Christ's respect for, shown
in cleaning the Temple, 81 ; the
root and groundwork of the Gos-
pel, 116; imposed for restraint
of unruly passions, 127.

Law suits, full of frauds, 306.

Laying down of life, belongs only to
Christ, 218.

Lazarus, not injured by his poverty,
96; reward of, 121 ; suffered no
actual wrong from Dives, 147.

Lazarus, of Bethany, history of,
teaches resignation to sickness
and death, 227; His death proved
by the Jews coming, 229 ; by the
stone, 233; by the grave clothes,
and the stench, ib.; by the Jews
loosing him, 239; his resurrec-
tion proved by his eating with
Christ, 242 ; case of, attracted
the people, 245.

Leah, praised for her choice of her
children's names, 68.

"Life," why said of the Son, 7; im-
plies His Eternity, 18; meaning
of, 19; not applied to the Holy
Spirit, 21; nor to created things,
22 ; implies providence and a
resurrection, 23.

Life, the present, a seed time, 90; a
time of preparation for a better
state. III; eternal, in Christ, un-
derived and original, 168 ; im-
parted to men, by partaking of
His Flesh, ib. ; mercifully short-
ened, 211; will not bear compari-
son with the future, 248; how
far to be hated in this world, 248;
desire of, natural, 249.

" Light," why said of the Son, 7, 24 ;
a name not peculiar to the Holy
Spirit, 21 ; not sensuous, 24 ;
came unsought by men, 98; this
life described as, 202; the future
life, why so called, ib.

Likeness, of the Son to the Father,
14, 26, 28; of God impressed on
the Baptized, 36.

Lord's day, Gospels read on, 38.

Lord's Prayer, the, its character wholly
spiritual, 157.

Love, of our neighbor, the way to
life, 15; of God, to be shown by
acts, not words, 35, 72; of Christ,
towards man marvelous, 97; of
the Father for Christ, 217; more
powerful than miracles, 266;
want of, a stumbling-block to
the heathen, 267; in St. Peter,
257, 332; to be shown by keep-
ing the commandments, 275; by
acts, not words, 280 ; of God and
man inseparable, 282; multiplies
strength, and makes men ubiqui-
tous, 289; the best protection to
rich and poor, 290; the motive
of the Solitaries, ib. ; indepen-
dent of place, ib, ; of enemies,
taught by the Passion, 315; gives
much boldness towards God, 331.


Luxury, the mother of diseases of the
body, 78; and of the soul, 79;
wretchedness of, 127; folly of,
159 ; cured by meditation on
Christ's birth, education, and life,
192; vanity and sinfulness of,
197; hinders almsgiving, 285.

Malice, the most inexcusable vice,
because not from nature, 1 30;
wounds itself and excludes from
life, 142; evils of, 240; its pri-
vate and public evils in the world,
and in the Church, ib.

Mammon, cannot be served with God,
31; a hard master, ib. ; its com-
mands contrary to Christ's, 147;
service of, 215.

Man, created to serve God, 215.

Manes, 30 (note).

Manna, tauntingly mentioned by the
Jews, 160; why mysteriously, by
Christ, 161.

Marcion, 30 (note); his heresy on
the Resurrection, 247 ; heresy
of, refuted by Christ's care for
His Mother, 318 ; his error,
guarded against by Christ, 320.

Martha, rebuked not for inhospitality
but inattention, 158; unequal to
her sister in faith and wisdom,
229; led on by Christ to belief
in the resurrection, ib.; had no
vanity in her grief, 232 ; had
forgotten Christ's lessons, 233.

Mary, St., the Virgin, her opinion of
Christ, 74; her forwardness at
Cana owing to maternal vanity,
ib. ; was saved by her own good-
ness, not her relation to Christ,

75-

Mary Magdalene, her zeal to see
Christ's Body in the tomb, 320,
323, 324; had no idea of the
resurrection, 323; reward of her
perseverance, in seeing Christ
risen, 324.

Mary, of Bethany, not the " Harlot "
mentioned by St. Matthew, 227;
her gravity and earnestness, ib. ;
her faith greater than Martha's,
229; her wisdom and affection-
ateness, 230; her great ardor,
232 ; her improvement in faith,
242.

Material things only comprehended
by the Jews, 213.

Matthew, St., says most of John's im-
prisonment, 59.

Matrimony, advantage of, 67.

Meat, that perisheth, idleness, 158;
that never perisheth, almsgiving,
ib.

Meekness, duty of, 92 ; taught by,
Christ's answer to the Jews, 219;
acquired by penitence, ib.; the
first of virtues, 222 ; of Christ
not confined to words, ib. ; of
Christ before Pilate, our pattern,

3"-

Merchants, activity of, 3.

Mercy, the oil of the Christian's lamp,
46; attracts men to Christ more
than power, 63; a call to repent-


ance, 132 ; may be shown ii
words, 178, 180.

Miracles, revealed Christ's glory, 41 ;
of Christ's childhood proved false
from John's ignorance, 60: and
from the number and rapid fame
of the true, 73; a more important
testimony to Christ than John's
word, 64; of turning water into
wine, how evidenced, 78; Christ's
care to provide sufficient testi-
mony to, 78, 124-128; of Christ,
improved on nature, 78; shown
to the honest, withheld from the
ill-disposed, 80 ; most attracted
the grosser sort, 83; not to be
demanded from God by the faith-
ful, 84; their first object, to save
souls, 124; addressed to unbe-
lievers and the grosser sort, 124,
151 ; clearness of their testimony,
146; not all of them related in
the Gospels, 151; of the loaves,
performed by the Prophets, 152;
some, witnessed by the disciples
only, 155; of stilling the storm
occurred more than once, ib.;
of the loaves, was a warning to
Capernaum, 156; of the manna,
only a type, 160; their power
with the people, 181 ; sight of,
hardened the Pharisees, 186;
when and why performed by ma-
terial means, 202; their effect on
the people, 205 ; the best and
sufficient witness to Christ, 223;
inferior to love, 266.

Mission, of the Apostles, 42.

Moses, his veil, 40 ; his love for Israel,
44; compared to Christ, 49 ; gave
only types, 50; how far saw God,
51; highly privileged in visions,
61; his prophecy of Christ, 116;
will accuse the Jews for not be-
lieving in Christ who had fulfilled
his prophecy, 149; his testimony
to Christ was that of God, ib.;
questioned by God before a mira-
cle, to arouse his attention to it,
151; at the Red Sea, compared
with Christ on the lake, 156.

Moses and Prophets, witnesses to
Christ, 214; the door-keeper of
the fold, ib.

Money, love of, produces uncharita-
bleness, and many sins, 330;
made for use, not hoarding, ib.

Mourning, indecent manner of, at'
Antioch, 230; excess of, con-
demned, 231 ; moderate among
the old Greeks, 230; wherein
honorable, 231; should be for
sinners, not for the dead, ib.;
for the general sin, become*
Christians, 240; for the covetoui,
better than for the dead, ib.;
excess of, ridiculed even by the
world, 322; and a sign of un-
belief, ib.

Mules, white, used by kings, 41.

Multitudes, most moved by miracle*,
181; their faith imperfect, ib.

Mystery, its use in exciting attention,
165.


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


535


Mysteries, the, awfulness of, 167;
danger of approaching of, in sin,
ib.

Names of God, why, many, 7; of
men, anciently taken from things,
68; why given and sometimes
changed by Christ, ib.; dignity
and responsibility of the Chris-
tian, ib.

Nathanael, his exactness and candor,
70; contrasted with the Jews,
71; showed his joy in Christ by
confessing Him, ib.; his confes-
sion, why inferior to Peter's, 72;
less zealous and less timid than
Nicodemus, 98; a lover of truth,
and learned, 185.

Nazareth, why profited not by Christ's
being born there, 75.

Necessary things made easy by God,
87.

Necessity, Christ not subject to, 76.

New Commandment, how a comfort
to the disciples, 266.

Nicodemus, well disposed but fearful,
84, 91; received graciously by
Christ, 84 ; and led on to enquiry,
85; desirous of instruction, ib.;
perplexed by his attempts to
reason, ib.; could not perceive
things spiritual, 86; more zealous
and more fearful than Nathanael,

Night, futurity described as, 202; this

life, why so called, 203.
Nobleman, the, in John iv. different

from the centurion in Matthew,

123; an example of faith, 124;

but imperfect, ib.
Number, not admissible in the Deity, 7.

Obedience, Christ's blessing on, 261.

Obscurity, used to rivet attention,
214.

Officers, the, of the Pharisees, an ex-
ample of candor, and of its re-
ward, 186, 187.

Offenses, danger of causing, 206.

Oil, in the lamps, said of mercy, 46
(note) ; of almsgiving, 82.

Omnipotence, includes not the power
of ceasing to be God, 39.

Oracles of the heathen, not really
prophetic, -68.

Palestine, its scarcity of water, 77.

Parable of the sower, 9, 43; laborers
in the vineyard, 33; the wedding
garment, 37; the sheepfold, 213-

Paralytic of Bethesda, an example of
patience under sickness, 128; of
meekness, ib. ; his cure diflferent
from that in St. Matthew [ix. 2]
in all its circumstances, ib. ; his
ready faith and courage, 1 29 ; his
disease was caused by sin, 131;
suffered longer than he sinned,
131 ; Christ urged his sins to
warn others, 132; his cure was
of grace, not merit, ib. ; his
grateful return and boldness,
32; cure of, 199, 200.


b


Parents, obedience to, how limited,
74; virtue of, aggravates the
children's guilt, 75.

Participation, Christ received not
grace by, 47.

Paschal Lamb, a type of Christ cru-
cified, 319.

Passion of Christ, the, foretold darkly,
its benefits plainly, 95 ; voluntary,
199; a proof that His promise
of life to man should be fulfilled,
217; in what sense the cause of
the Father's love towards Him,
ib. ; proves His Resurrection,
how, 218; His peculiar power
shown therein, ib.; was volun-
tary, ib.; not commanded, but
consented to by the Father, ib.;
was to teach us to suffer pa-
tiently, 315.

Passions, the, restraint of, not their
absence, constitutes virtue, 127;
are some excuse for sin, 14, 1 30;
make us voluntary slaves, 215;
only venial when natural, 278.

Passover, the, when eaten by Christ,
310.

Pastor, character of the true, 44; not
to change places, ib.

Patience, a duty of, 20; a victory, ib.

Patriarchs knew Christ, 30.

Paul of Samosata, forgot Christ's
Eternity, 16; madness of, 29, 59;
account of, 30 (note); his read-
ing of John V. 27, ib.

Paul, St., an instance of God's long-
suffering, 36; humility of, 35;
spoke of the end by anticipation,
121; an example of diligence
without carefulness, 158; over-
came the world by his love of
Christ, 330.

Peace, Christ's, saves from all trouble,
276.

Pearls, why the words of Scripture so
called, 3.

Penitent thief, his sudden change,

3.42-

People, full of folly, 14; weaker in
the mass, 15; most moved by
fear of punishment, 106; fickle-
ness of, after miracles, 156.

Perfection in virtue required, 146.

Persecution, strengthens faith, 279;
foretold by Christ, 284.

Perseverance, makes us worthy to re-
ceive, 77; great example of, in
the Paralytic of Bethesda, 126;
enjoined by Christ, 282; its bless-
edness, 284.

Person, God and Man, one in Christ,
39; Christ's, described sometimes
from His Humanity, sometimes
from His Deity, 94.

Personality of the Son, 28.

Peter, St., first received the faith from
Andrew, 65; praised for his
readiness to hear the Word, 67;
change of his name, 68; his con-
fession more perfect than Na-
thanael's, 72; offended because
ignorant of the Resurrection, 82;
his regard for John, 117; in fear
for himself, because called Satan,


171 ; shadow of, raised a dead
man, 234; his reverence in re-
fusing the washing, 258; his
vehement love in seeking it, ib. ;
his forbearance from asking at
the Supper, 263; recovers his
boldness, 267; taught self-dis-
trust by his fall, 268; contrasted
with Thomas, 269; his conduct
before and after the gift of the
Spirit, 308; his love of Christ
seen in his approaching the pal-
ace, his fear in staying without
it, ib.; his stubbornness in the
denial, 309; his lethargy during
Christ's examination, 309, 310;
his denial related to teach self-
distrust, 310; his zeal at the
sepulcher outstripped St. John's,
321 ; his zeal at the lake, 329;
as the leader of the disciples, re-
ceives the charge of the flock,
331; why thrice questioned, (A/
his martyrdom foretold, 332; ap-
pointed " teacher of the world,"
ib.; his loving question about
John, evaded by Christ, ib.

Pharaoh, an instance of reprobation,
199.

Pharisees, hardened by seeing Christ's
miracles, 186; reproved by the
conduct of their own officers, ib. ;
by Nicodemus, 187; insolence of
their appeal to the Scripture, ib. ;
ignorant, because unwilling to
learn, 189; superficial followers
of Christ, 213; their foolish ob-
stinacy, 239; their folly in seek-
ing His death, who raised the
dead, ib. ; their false pretenses,
ib. [see yeivs\,

Philip, St., his thoughtfulness and
ready obedience to Christ's call,
69; his brotherly love, 70; why
questioned by Christ about the
loaves, 151; his trial compared
to Abraham's, 152; his imperfect
faith the reason of his question,
271.

Philosophers, follies of the ancient, 5;
their uncertainty, ib. ; their doc-
trines exploded, 6; their vain-
glory, ib. ; more zealous against,
than we for, Christ, 62.

Philosophy, of Christianity profitable,
232; of the heathen failed, be-
cause it trusted to reason only,

234-

Piety, an art, 21 1.

Pilate, not hasty or malicious in judg-
ment, 310; less wicked than the
Jews, 311; instructed by Christ,
311,313; desire to rescue Christ,
313; declares his innocence, 314;
his fears of Christ, ib. ; made no
exact enquiry as to the charge of
treason to Gesar, ib. ; his guilt
in giving way against his con-
science : his act was " allowed,"
not enforced, " from above," ib. ;
his cowardice, 315; his guilt in
not enquiring, 316.

Plato, his disciples' enquiries, 5; his
visit to Sicily, 6; style, ib.; in-


536


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


consistency, it.; doctrine of the
Deity, 7.

Pleasure, of sense vain and fleeting,
of labor real and lasting, 127;
danger of resting in, 156.

Pleasures of vice and virtue com-
pared, 330.

Poor, wiser, healthier, happier, than
the rich, 79; better off than the
uncharitable, 96; generally elated
by prosperity, 109.

Possessions, how to be turned to ac-
count, 215.

Poverty, only evil here, 159; its bene-
fits shown by examples, 281 ; the
best estate to prepare for Heaven,
298.

Power, words of, sometimes used for
the will only, 252.

Praise, love of, kept certain rulers
from the faith, 254.

Prayer, a way to pardon, 29; for the
dead 43 (note) ; needed, to un-
derstand the Scriptures, 72 ; im-
patience in, rebuked, 126; ours,
as Christ's, should be for things
spiritual, 157; not suited to God,
196 ; not consistent with God-
head, 239 ; for all mankind, 290.

Preachers, to be attended to more
than performers, I, 3 ; must
arouse the sluggish, 40.

Preaching, its labor lightened by the
hearer's attention, 76 ; reward of,
not lost by the hearer's fault,
105; without holiness an offense
to unbelievers, 141.

Presumption, dangerous, 27; caused
Adam's fall, 28.

Pride, ruined the Jews, 33 ; evils of,
34, 54; remedies of, 34; sep-
arates the brethren, 54; why more
inexcusable than other vices, 57;
of Christian's shamed by Christ's
washing the disciples' feet, 260.

Priesthood, its dignity and danger,
326; to be honored, because in
Moses' seat, ib. ; their unworthi-
ness, hinders not the effect of the
Sacraments, ib.; God dispenses
grace by their hands, ib.

Prisons, the sobering effect of visiting,
220 ; contrasted with theaters,
ib. ; the inmates of, sometimes
better than others, 221; all men
were confined in, but delivered
by Christ, ib. ; St. Paul preached
in with effect, 222.

Prophecies, sometimes made uncon-
sciously, 241.

Prophecy, why more persuasive than
miracles, 68; impossible to devils,
ib. ; addressed to particular per-
sons by Christ, 113; of the future
confirmed by the fulfillment of the
past, 1 40; given by the mouths
of evil men, 241 ; caused by, not
the cause of the event, 252, 301 ;
fulfillment of, in the parting of
the garments, 317; in the pierc-
ing of The Side, 319.

Prophets, the, quoted by the Evan-
gelists, 44 ; speak of future
events as past, 46; sowed for the


Apostle's reaping, 120; Christ's
agreement with, concerning the
Judgment, 141 ; wrongly com-
pared with Christ, 198; in what
sense "saw" God, 271.

Providence, implied in Christ being
the Life, 23 ; not perfectly devel-
oped before the Judgment, 162.

Psalms, titles of, to teach attention,

5'-

Public amusements supersede religious
duties, 210.

Punishment, a proof of God's love,
35; of those who received not
Christ, 36; of the wicked for the
sake of the good, 37; everlast-
ing, 43; to be avoided by holi-
ness only, ib. ; the fear of, the
most powerful motive with most
men, 106; endures longer than
the sin, 131; redoubled after re-
lapse, ib. ; if not sent now, will
be the more heavy hereafter, ib. ;
brings men to virtue, more than
reward, 137 ; delayed, but cer-
tain, 157-162 ; not inherited,
200; objection removed, 201.

Pythagoras, his disciples' enquiries, 5 ;
in Magna Graecia, 6; how con-
versed with brutes, ib. ; his doc-
trines unprofitable, ib.

" Reaping," was kept for the Apos-
tles', 120; easier than sowing,
ib.

Reason, unassisted, cannot reach
Divine truth, 5, 27, 87; failed to
discover the nature of the soul
and heaven, 234.

Reasoning, human, inapplicable to
God, 17; uncertain, ib.; in Divine
mysteries dangerous, 86, 87; un-
able to penetrate things natural,
88.

Regeneration in Baptism, 37; a real
sonship, 48; superior to natural
birth, 88; to be taken on trust
as a mystery, not understood of
angels, ib.; inferior to Christ's
eternal birth, 91 ; types of, in the
Old Testament, 92; doctrine of,
received by faith, 93; the work
of the Spirit, 126; shown in the
Water from The Side, 319.

Relationship, to Christ, did not profit
His enemies, 75; to good men,
no protection to the wicked, ib. ;
earthly, useless without the spir-
itual, 89.

Repentance, its efficacy to procure
pardon, 50; to avert judgment,
121; is the not doing the same
again, ib. ; great difficulty of, 260;
a source of hope, 295.

Repetitions, vain, consist in praying
for vain things, 157.

Reproach, to be borne patiently, after
the example of Christ, 312; in-
jures only the author, ib.

Reserve, in teaching doctrine, 13, 93;
of John Baptist, 105; and Paul,
ib.

Resurrection, the, implied in Christ,
"The Life," 22; of Christ glori-


ous, 42; witnessed by few only,
61 ; the great Evidence, 82; why
not plainly foretold, ib. ; doc-
trine of, most affects the obsti-
nate, 139; a token of, in the
cure of the Paralytic, 140; the
general, is common to the godly
and ungodly, 161 ; the special,
for the good only, ib. ; belief of,
destroys, Fatalism, 163 ; belief
in, the Essence of Christianity,
ib. ; confessed by devils, ib. ;
necessary to God's justice, ib. ;
the special, with, the general,
without, reward, 168; of Christ,
proved by his death, 218; the
doctrine of, concerned in the
raising of Lazarus, 232; truth of,
proved by the Apostles' acts, 234 ;
shown in the growth of seed,
246; moral argument for, ib.;
denied by heretics on heathen
principles, 247 ; foretold in Jacob's
prophecy, 25 1 ; compared to birth,
291 ; Christ's, alluded to in "a
man born into the world," ib.;
the beginning of knowledge, 292;
various proofs of, in the burial-
place, embalming, position of the
clothes, 320, 321 ; why first made
known to Mary Magdalene, 323.

Retirement, frequently recommended
by the example of Christ, 151;
its spiritual blessings, 225.

Return, what, to be made to Christ,
40.

Reverence, promoted by merely hear-
ing the Word, 192.

Revenge, the best is to return good
for evil, 261 ; of what sort to be
employed by Christians, 185.

Reward of the true pastors, 43.

Riches, transitory nature of, here, 57;
how to be made lasting, 58; the
thorn of the humble, 86; vanity
of, 118; only good here, 159;
abuse of, a betraying of Christ,
172; dangerous to the soul, 244;
love of, hinders faith, 254; their
end is to be used, not hoarded,
nor abused, 69, 299; the earthly
to be despised for the heavenly,
301.

Robber, the, compared with the Shep-
herd, 213: is he that useth not
the Scriptures, ib.

Romans, the, danger from, a mere
pretense of the Pharisees, 239.

Rulers, the, some believed in Chrisli
205; in general, believed not^
214.

Sabbath, the, Gospels appointed to
be read on, 38; breach of, how
the keeping of the Law, 179.

Sabellians, denied the Personality of >
the Son, 28, 138.

Sabellius, separated the Father and '
the Son, 271; his life and doc-
trine, 274 (note); doctrine of,
refuted by Christ's indwelling in
His disciples, 303.

Sacraments of the Jews, types of ours,
48; of the Lord's Body and


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


537


Blood, unites us with Christ, i66;
its usefulness, 167.

Sacrifice, mercy preferred to, 46; sin
of making, with the fruits of
injustice, 270.

Saints, their merits no help to the
sinner, 175; the glory of, will
consist in reflecting that of the
Son, 304.

Salvation, signified by the names of
" Christ's meat," the " field," the
"harvest," 119.

Samaria, the woman of, an example
of a soul healed by Christ, 42;
encouraged by Christ's appear-
ance to approach Him, 45; con-
verted by prophecy, 68 ; her con-
siderateness, 109; more reverent
than Nicodemus, IIO; more at-
tentive to the Word than the
Jews, ib. ; her patience in listen-
ing, a reproach to Christian con-
gregations, ib. ; bolder than Nic-
odemus, in bringing others to
Christ, 112; her candor in judg-
ment, 112; her meekness in
bearing reproof, 113; her desire
to learn, 117; her zeal for her
countrymen, 118; her prudence,
ib. ; in faith superior to those
Jews who would have Manna
from Christ, 161 ; doubted, but
with humility, 198; a sinner, but
received by Christ, 221.

Samaritans, the, visited by Christ, but
only in passing, 107; origin and
history of, ib. ; only received the
works of Moses, 108; hated by
the Jews, ib.; their call not in-
tended by Christ, but deserved
by their zeal, 109; inferior to the
Jews in purity of faith, 115; re-
ceived all from the Jews, 116;
why expected a Messiah, ib.;
their reception of Christ, and
candor in hearing Him, rewarded

»by the gift of faith, 122; praised
for believing without miracles,
after teaching only, 123, 125;
name of, a term of reproach
against Christ, 197.

Sanctification, of the Jews only nega-
tive, of Christians positive, 48.

Satan, cast down by Christ's death,
because not deserved by sin, 250.

Scribes, the robbers of the fold, 2 1 3.

Scripture, Holy, its elevating power,
I, 4, 7, 8; its taming power, 10;
its inspiration, 2, 4; safeguard of
the soul, U; publicly read, 38;
mystery of, meant to excite our
attention, 5 1 ; the food and
medicine of the languid soul,
66; needs careful study, 72; its
preaching varied to include all,
80; why imputes a will to things
without life, 91; significant in
every word, 95; copies of, to be
studied, not shown, 114; deters
Devils from approaching, ib.;
draw down the Spirit, ib.; gen-
eral ignorance of, ib. ; no part
of, to be passed over, 125; its
universal use, 128; its humility


in expression, intended to excite
attention, 142; requires care to
clear its obscurity, as gold in the
mine, 143; contradictions of,
only apparent, ib, ; what cau-
tions to be observed in its inter-
pretation, 144; speaks to the
majority, 164; a charm for an-
ger, 17s; has said nothing in
vain, 180; requires exact search,
207; the only means to refute
heresy, 247 ; uses the same words
in difierent senses of God and
men, 275; qualifications neces-
sary for understanding it, 301 ;
neglect of, the cause of our little
wisdom, 316; and of our un-
fruitfulness, ib.; duty and bene-
fits of searching it, 333.

Sea, an inadequate type of Christ's
fullness, 47.

Seal, implies testimony to that which
is sealed, 159.

Self, to be conquered, 19.

Self-deceit, danger of, 75.

Self-judgment, the only way to escape
God's, 120-142.

Separation from the wicked, some-
times necessary, 154, 206.

Sermon, Christ's, after the Supper,
was to comfort the Disciples, 266 ;
recalled, to their minds after-
wards by the Spirit, 265.

Servants, to be rebuked without
clamor, 92; how far different
from sons, 194.

Severity, use of, in rousing the dull,

157-

Shame, is for the insulter, not the in-
sulted, 24.

Shepherd, distinguished from the
robber, 213, 214; layeth down
his life, 215.

Sight, the most trustworthy sense, 92 ;
applied to Christ and God, means
exact knowledge, 104, 137; said
of God, signifies intellectual per-
ception, 269.

Signs, why refused to the Jews, 81,
84; of Jonas, why often used by
Christ, 82; asking for, a practice
of tempters, 84; not for the
faithful, but heathens, ib.

Sin, its blindness, 24; misery, ib.;
madness, 25; shamefulness, ib.;
ways to put away, 29; a fire, 66;
after Baptism, not unpardonable,
96; of all will be revealed to all
in the Judgment, 121; buried in
Baptism, ib. ; more excusable
when from natural passion, 1 30;
punished both in body and soul,
131 ; how affected by blindness,
213; its filthiness, 189; to be put
away only by Holy Baptism, 190;
the greatest bondage, ib. ; only
to be removed by God, 194;
freedom from, the only real lib-
erty, ib. ; worse in Christians
than Heathens, 250; cleansed in
Baptism, and by alms, 270; its
offensiveness, ib.

Sin before birth, not possible, 200.

Sinfulness, in what sense attributed


to the blind man and his parents,
200.

Sloth, its danger, 29; is of willfulness,
62.

Society, a remedy for human weak-
ness, 67.

Son of God, Christ and man differ-
ently so called, 1 1 ; not greater
than the Father, 13; declared
equal with the Father, 14, 52, 53;
not " younger " than the Father,
17; of the same Essence, i8, 53;
Infinite, 18; has attributes of
Godhead ascribed to Him, 18,
24; personality of, 28; begotten,
ib. ; left not heaven to be made
man, 36; alone of all hath seen
God in His Essence, 52; coeter-
nal with the Father, 53; ad-
dressed in the words, " Let us
make man," 116; independence
of, 189; to be glorified by works,
not words only, ib. ; His identity
of Power and Essence with the
Father, 224; only different in
being a Son, ib. ; seeing and be-
lieving on Him is seeing and
believing on the Father, 254;
the True God equally with the
Father, 297; why called the
Messenger, 299; His agreement
with the Father, 299, 300; His
glory from the Eternal Genera-
tion, 304, 31 1; His agreement
with the Father proved by His
pre-existence, 305.

Sonship, of Christians real, of Jews
nominal, 44; of Christ implied
in the word "Sent," 138; and in
"hath given," 139.

Sophists, their rhetorical displays, I ;
their inflated style condemned
by Socrates, 6.

Sorrow, its use in calming the pas-
sions, 219; immoderate, brings
death, 286.

Soul, weakened by earthly passions,
8, 31 ; being one cannot contain
many desires at once, ib. ; when
unmoved by externals, II; its
own mistress, 42; healed by
Christ, ib. ; culture of, more dif-
ficult than of the earth, 62; how
may recover its appetite of spir-
itual food, 66; its diseases pro-
duced by luxury, 79; is invisible,
yet most exposed to attack, ib. ;
real though invisible, 88, 91;
how inferior to spirit, 88; chas-
tised through the body, 131 ; but
secured by the fear of God, 193;
darkened by grief, 230; how
best adorned, 256.

Sowing, the, was done by the
Prophets, 120; harder than the
reaping, ib.

Spectacle of the spiritual combat to
be seen in Holy Scripture, 114;
of heathen theaters to be avoided,
ib.

Spirit, the Holy [see //ol)' Ghosi\.

Spiritual life, its pleasures, 295.

Spiritual sight is within the mind,
170.


538


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Spiritual things, superior to woridly,
8; should occupy part of our
time, lo; objects of faith, not
reason, 27, 87; perfection of,
immediate, 90; real though in-
visible, 91; the substance and
end of things temporal, 156;
folly of losing them for things
temporal, 159.

Spoilers of the flock, either active or
passive, 217.

State, love of, makes men depend on
their slaves, 298.

Stoning, why avoided rather than
prevented by Christ, 199.

Success, its intoxicating effect upon
the careless, 316.

Suffering for Christ's sake rewarded,
212; the clearest witness of
Christ's truth, 217: and of St.
Paul's, ib. ; an offense, but
wrongly, to weak Christians,
227; for Christ's sake enjoined,
284.

Tabernacle of David, Christ's human
nature, 39.

Teachers should speak with certainty,
7; and a little at a time, 16;
lilce builders, 27.

Temporal blessings given us as we
can bear them, 15.

Testimony, facts the best, 49.

" Testimony of two," how applicable
to God, 188; of man, when
credible, 189.

That, expresses the consequence, not
the final cause, 227.

Theaters, indecency of, 3; to be
avoided, 4; corrupting tendency
of, 66; corrupt their inmates
more than prisons, 220.

Thomas, St., his fear before, exceeded
by his courage after, the Cruci-
fixion, 228; condemned for vain
curiosity, 327; his doubt was
from unbelief, ib. ; after receiv-
ing the Gift, perfect in faith, ib.

Thieves, the, did not obscure the
Glory of the Cross, 317.

Threatenings of God, their use, 37.

Time disregarded in prophecies, 46;
waste of, in idle talkers con-
demned, 66; "fullness of," in
what sense said of the age of St.
Paul, 121; shortness of, urged,
172; waste of, a sin and folly,
211.

Title on the Cross, a shame to the
Jews, 317.

Titles of Christ (Shepherd, Door,
&c.), their significance, 214.

Tradition, to be kept, 28.

Transmigration of souls asserted by
the ancients, 5; by Plato, 7.

Trinity, the, the same expressions ap-
plied to each Person, 23 ; proved
by Isaiah's vision, 252; Three
Persons of, distinct, yet equal,
289; Baptism, the common work
of, ib. ; Will of, one, ib. ; Equal-
ity of the Three Persons, 325;
concurred in the call of the
Apostles, 326.


Truth, seen in Christ's fulfillment of
the types, 50; boldness of, 99;
rewards honest enquirers, 122;
its power with candid hearers,
186; made illustrious by opposi-
tion, 207 ; the kindness of speak-
ing it in season, 287.

Twelve, the, how detained by Christ,
170; their affection for Him,
171 ; they admit the Resurrec-
tion, ib.

Types of the Law, their relation to
realities, 48; how fulfilled in
Christ's acts, 50; became clearer
and nobler as the Antitypes ap-
proached, 126.

Unbelief, a transgression of God's
will, 120; arises from unlawful
curiosity, 166.

Unbelievers, condemned already, be-
cause under sentence, 97; pun-
ishment of, certain, ib.; to be
judged by God's word, 255.

Uncharitable, the, shamed by infidels,
305; their manifold extravagan-
cies, ib.

Union, of the Father and the Son,
essential : of Christ and Chris-
tians, spiritual, 275.

Universal, warnings most acceptable,
106.

Universality, of Gospel offers, 24, 29,
36-

Vainglory, tyranny of, 14, 30; mean-
ness of, 14; evil effects of, 15;
worse than fornication, 98; ruined
the Jews, ib. ; the source of
avarice and passion, ib. ; of
John's disciples, 102; its evils,
and examples of, ib.; hard to
tame, ib. ; hindered belief in the
Jews, 136; folly and danger of,
103, 136; hinders faith, 254,
255; leads to domestic show and
expense, 256.

Valentinus, 30 (note) ; his heresy on
the Resurrection, 247.

Vinegar, offered to Christ in mockery,
as to a criminal, 319.

Virgin, the study of her history prof-
itable, 192; rebuked by Christ
at Cana, cared for on the Cross,
318; why entrusted to the be-
loved disciple, ib.

Virtue, has no merit without labor,
127; the true wisdom, 150;
hated by the world as reflecting
on itself, 302.

Vision, the beatific, 43; of the Di-
vine Presence, not granted to
all, 61.

Voice, from Heaven, was to persuade
the disciples, 249.

" Was," twofold use of the word in

Holy Scripture, 12.
Watchfulness, need of, against Satan,

79-
Water, at Cana, a type of worldly
minds, 78; a medium between
air and earth, 88; why used in
Holy Baptism, 89; virtue of, in


Holy Baptism, 90; "living,"
when from a spring, 1 1 2 ; a type
under the Law, 126; useless
without the Spirit, ib.

Waterpots, at Cana, why expressly
mentioned by St. John, 77.

Water and the blood, the life of the
Church, 319.

Wedding garment, a holy life, 37.

Weeping of Christ proves His true
humanity, 233.

Wickedness, extreme folly of, 150.

Widows, cared for by Christ, because
unprotected, 259.

Will, the, must be earnest, 3; free to
learn and beheve or not, 162; of
Christ and the Father, one, ib.

Willful continuance in sin, the cause
why men come not to the light,
98.

Wind, a fit type of the Spirit, Ijecaiise
lighter than solid bodies, 91 ;
real though invisible, ib.

Wine, at Cana, a type of strength of
mind, 78.

Wisdom, true, consists in despising
present vanities, 261.

Women, should keep at home, 225 ;
examples of their power for good
or evil, ib.; best adorned l)y
modesty, piety, and economy,
226; the poor, reproved for in-
decency : the rich, for vanity,
in mourning, 230; sought new
husbands by showing much grief
for the old, 23 1 ; exhorted to
almsgiving instead of dress and
ornament, 256; to edify their
husbands, ib.; boldness of, in
standing by the Cross, 318; in
coming to the tomb before the
Disciples, 323.

Word, the, why mentioned first by
St. John, 7; twofold meaning of,
ib. ; eternal Sonship of, II; co-
eternal with the Father, 17; how
"with God," 12; how in the
world, 17; the Creator of all,
21; the true Life, ib.; and Light,
22; why said to have been
"made flesh," 39; will judge
unbelievers, 254; cleanses the
Church, 303.

Word of God, means often commands
or prophecies, 16; to hear it, the
first duty of all, 65; toil of
preaching, how lightened, 76;
spoken to all in general, but
must be applied particularly by
each, 79; minute significance of,

95-

Work, in Paradise, was without labor,
125 (note).

Works, earnestness to be shown in,
3; must be added to faith, 19,
27; necessary after Baptism, 37;
should correspond with our privi-
leges, 42; the only safety, 43;
set forth God's glory, 46; of love
the best confession, 72; of others,
will not assist us, 75; to win for-
giveness, 142; of the Father,
works of Christ, 202; proper
time for working, ib.; evidence


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


539


of, required by the world, 267;
absolute need of, 273.
World, what, 30; ignorant of God, 31 ;
love of, cause of darkness, ib. ;
fleeting nature of, 78; love of,
an insult to Christ, III; ap-
proaching end of, conjectured
from wars, earthquakes, &c.,
121; love of, universal, 136;
danger of living for, ib. ; the
danger of resting in its pleasures,
157; to be given up for heaven,


196; signifies the wicked, 266,
274; how "convinced" by the
Spirit, 287; conquered by de-
spising it, 293; in Holy Scrip-
ture signiBes either the creation,
or the wicked, 245.

Worldly men, like children, admire
vain shows the most, 301; hate
virtue as opposed to themselves,
302.

Worship, doctrine of, first given to
the Samaritan woman, 115; of


the Jews purer than of the Sa-
maritans, ib. ; yet only a type of
the true, 116; which is universal
and spiritual, ib.

Zeal of John's two disciples in visit-
ing Christ, 64; of Christ for the
Temple was to conciliate the
Jews, 81; necessity of, 118;
shown in the Samaritan woman,
.*.

Zenobia, 30 (note).


HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF JOHN.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. I . . .

• 17

2 Kings vi. 1 7 .

. 40

Ps. Ii. 4 200

Isa. vi. 8, 10 ... 253

i. 2 . . .

II

xiv. 6 .

. . 201

Iviii. 4

9

vii. 9 . .

107

i. 20 . .

. 90

XV. 29 .

. 107

Ix. 12

23

vii. 14

44

i. 26 . .

116,238

xvii. 3 .

. 107

Ixii. 12

• t

viii. 3

68

ii. 7. . .

88

xvii. 4 .

. 107

Ixix. 4

. 283

ix. 6 .

5

3. 299

ii. 17 . .

ii. 18 . .

• 97

xix. 34

. 322

Ixix. 9

53.81

xi. 10

23

. 88

xxvi. etc.

• "5

Ixix. 21

. 46

xxii. 31

267

iii. s . .

• 195

2 Chron. xviii. 19

• 237

Ixxiii. 27

• 253

xxvi. 10

43

iii. 9 . .

• 237

Eira vi. 1 5 . .

. 82

Ixxx. 29

• 237

XI.3.

57

vii. 1 . .

. 262

Job ix. 8 . . .

. 156

Ixxxi. 5

. 146

xl. 26

245

xi. 4 . .

. 206

xxxi. 31 . .

. 166

Ixxxii. 6

11,48

xlii. 2, 3

84

xvii. 14

• 179

xl. 8 . . .

■ «32

xc. 2 .

. 18

xliii. 10

7.

'8.53

xviii., etc. .

. 116

Ps. i. 3 . . .

• 6s

xciv. 12

. 211

xliii. 12

68

xviii. 17 .

. 296

ii. 5 . . .

• 191

xcvi. 10

. 141

xliii. 26

. 29

xviii. 21 .

■ 237

V. 9 . . .

. 247

cii. 25

22

xliv. 6

18

xxii. I, 2 .

• 152

vi. 5 . . .

75. '22

cii. 27

IC

>. 39. 135

xiv. I

32

xxii. 12

• 237

vii. 9 . . .

• 152

ciii. 5

• 92

xiv. 24

18

XXV. 27 .

. 225

vii. II . .

. 141

ciii. 6, 7

• 49

xlvii. 13

68

xlix. 9 . .

• 251

viii. 8 . . .

. 160

ciii. 20

16, 127

xlix. 16

224

Ex. iii. 14 . .

• 53

ix. 15 . . .

. 241

ex. 7 .

. 108

1. 2 .

253

xii. 3 . . .

• 50

X. 5 . . .

137. '63

cxix. 18

• 5>

1.4 .

255

xii. 46 . .

• 31?

xi. 5, 7 . .

• 179

cxix. 103

3

I!!- 5 •

33

xiv. 21 . ,

. 156

xviii. 6 . .

■ 90

cxix. 120

• '93

III. II

206

xvii. 12 . .

• 5°

xviii. 13 . .

. 160

cxxxiii. I

• 67

Hi. 15

32

xix. 19 . .

. 146

xviii. 43-45 .

• 32

cxlv. 3 .

• '7

liii. 7

4

6, 251

XX. 13 . .

. 245

xix. I . . .

12

cxlvii. 5

• 17

liii. 7, 8

314

xxiii. 3 . .

. 179

xix. 10 . .

3

cxlviii. 2

• 52

liii. 9

191

xxxii. 10

. 44

xxii. 16, 18 .

. 46

Prov. i. 7 .

. 150

liii. 12

3'7

xxxiii. 13 .

• 5'

xxii. 30 . .

. 92

ii. 4

• 5'

liv. 13

164

xxxiii. 20 .

. 271

XXV. 8 . .

• 49

iii. 14

• 51

lix. 2 .

253

Num. ix. 12 . .

• 3'9

XXX. 31 . .

. 92

iv. 18

. 46

Ix. I .

92

xvi. 5 . .

. 217

xxxii., etc. .

• S«

ix. 9

. 49

Ixv. 16

299

Deut. iv. 19 . .

• 253

xxxii. I . .

• 92

X. 18

. 62

Ixvi. 2

28

iv. 33- •

. 146

xxxii. 5 . .

• 29

xi. 25

• 175

Jer. i. 9 .

255

V. 9 . .

. 201

xxxiii. 15

■ 83

xiv. 23

. 69

iii. 3 .

271

V. 29 . .

• 237

xxxiv. II

„ 211

xvi. 5

• 34

iv. 14

270

vi. 4 • •

• 53

XXXV. 15 . ,

• '!5

xxi. 8

. 150

ix. 17

240

vii. 7 . .

■ 49

xxxv. 19 . .

. 283

xxiii. 27

• 33°

X. II .

18

xviii. 10 .

. 48

xxxvii. 4 . .

■ 79

xxvi. 27

. 185

xiii. 23

252

xviii. 15 .56

,116, 164

xxxvii. 27 .

. 270

Eccles. vii. 2

. 220

xxii. 13

240

xviii. 18-22

• 149

xxxviii. 3, 4 .

. 150

Isa. i. 3 . .

180, 296

xxxi. 15

44

xxiv. 16 .

. 201

xxxviii, 5

189, 270

i. 7 .

• 259

xxxi. 31

48

xxvii. 26 .

• 5°

xxxix. 4 . .

. 182

i. 10, 23

. 187

Ezek. i. etc.

5'

I Sam. i. I . .

II

xxxix. II

• 244

i. 15 .

• 245

ii. 5

44

ii. 12 .

. 180

xl. 10. . .

. 183

i. 16 .

. 259

iii. I

255

„. "• 3° •

• '5

xii. 9 . . .

. 46

i. 18 .

. 256

iii. II

237

I Kmgs viu. 39

. 83

xlii., etc. . .

• 51

i. 19 .

3

iii. 18

44

XV. 23 .

. 132

xliv. 22 . .

• 303

V. 8 .

. 267

X. etc.

5'

xvi. 24 .

. 107

xlix. 7 . .

43.75

V. 8, 9

. 240

xiv. 14

316

xxi. 27.

• 333

1. 16, 20 . .

• 312

vi. I .

51.252

xiv. 16 .

43

2 Kings iv. 43 .

• «S2

1. 21 . . .

. 270

vi. 3 .

• 52

xviii. 2, 3

201

V. II .

. 202

Ii. I . . .

. 219

n-S .

• 49

xviiu 3

2

253

GOSPEL OF JOHN:

INDEX OF

TEXTS.

541

PACK

FACE

PAGE

FAOB

zek. XXV. 8 .... 199

Matt. vi. 24 . . . 31, 215

Matt. XV. 28 . .

. 84

Mark iv. 39 . .14

. 84. 237

xxxiii. 9

• 44

vi. 30 . .

• '33

XV. 32 . .

. 64

V. 41 . . .

84

xxxiv. 2

. 216

vi. 33 • •

'■.i

XV. 37. .

• '53

ix. 25 . .14

. 84. 237

xxxiv. 4

. 216

VI. 34 . .

xvi. 4 . .

81

ix. 44 . . .

• '35

an. iv. 27 .

29, 302

vii. 2 . .

xvi. 6 . .

108, 134

X. 39 • • •

. 89

vii. 9 .

• S«

vii. 6 . .

3

xvi. 9 . .

• >53

X. 40 . . .

. 248

[os. i. 4, 6, 9

. 68

vii. 8 . .

. 69

xvi. 15 .

• »7'

xi. 3 . . .

. 84

iv. 6

• 253

vii. 12. .

. 28a

xvi. 16 .

• 72

xii. 36. . .

• 30

vi. 6 .

. 46

vii. 21 . .

• 234

xvi. 17, 18

68, 162

Luke i. 2 . . . .

. 28

xi. I

. 44

vii. 22. .

. 266

xvi. 22

82, 107,

i.36 . . .

. 60

xii. 10 .

• 52

vii. 28, 29

• '5«

258, 267.

i. 66 . . .

• 55

xii. 12 .

• 75

vii. 29. .

• 41

xvi. 24

. 248

ii. 14 . . .

52.73

mos ix. 1 1 .

• 39

viii. 3 . .

14.84

xvii. I . .

. 263

ii. 46 . . .

• 74

[icah iii. i .

. 187

viii. 4 . .

. 129

xvii. 10 .

• 55

ii. 51 . .

• 74

V. 2 .

70,71

viii. 5 . .

• 123

xvii. 20 ,

• 234

in. 16 . . .

• 45.

vii. I, 2

. 240

viii. 7 . .

. 228

xvii. 27 .

214, 236

46, 274

ech. ix. 9 .

92.

«S4. 245

viii. 8 . .

. 229

xviii. I

117,260

vi. 24 . . .

. 240

xii. 10

• 319

viii. 20

. 108

xviii. 8

. 206

vi. 25 . . .

• 315

[al. ii. 10 .

. 178

viii. 22

• 154

xviii. 10 .

■ 52

vi. 26 , . .

. 302

iii. I

25, 26

viii. 29

. 163

xviii. 14 .

. 162

vi. 36 . . .

• 304

fisd. i. 5 .

. 150

ix. 2 . . 50,84, 128,

xviii. 30-34

. 142

vi. 37 • • •

• «9

ii. 24 .

• «73

132, 156, 237.

xix. 3 . .

. 223

vii. 37. . .

. 227

V. 3 .

• 294

ix. 3 . . . . 236

xix. 12. 127,

252. 273

viii. 3 . . .

. 265

ix. 14 .

• «7

ix. 6 . .

84.178

xix. 16-21

. 142

viii. 51 . .

. 263

cclus. i. 22 .

'9. 17s

ix. 13 . .

• 73

xix. 28 .

• 304

ix. 55 . . .

. 184

iii. 30

29, 270

ix. 14 . .

64, 102

XX. 14 . .

• 33

ix. 58 . .

65.69

V. 6 .

• 96

ix. 28 . .

• '^9

XX. 21 . .

• 245

X. 15 . . .

. 80

vii. 40

• "37

ix. 32.33 •

. 283

xxi. 2 . .

. 245

X. 19 . . .

• ^J5

X.9 .

• J75

x. 1,8. .

. 184

xxi. 8, 10

• 245

X. 20 . . .

. 266

X. 13

• 57

X. S . 32, 108, 109,

xxi. 18 .

. 108

X. 22 . . .

. 217

x. 13

• 34

246, 296.

xxi. 40, 41

. 191

X. 24 . .

. 30

xvi. 12

■ 96

X. 16 . 62, 142, 214

xxii. etc. .

• 37

X- 33 • •

. 108

xviii. 30

. 248

X. 17, 18 . . . 286

xxii. 13 .

. 161

X. 41, 42 . .

. 158

XX. 29

. 240

X. 27 . .

• 52

xxii. 17 .

. 223

X. 42 . . .

.. 229

xxxiv. 2i

^

• 47

X. 28 . .

161, 164

xxii. 23 .

223. 234

xi. 15 . . .

• 3«5

us. 42 .

• '52

X. 34 . .

. 206

xxii. 40 .

. 282

xi. 27 . .

V 75

[att. i. 18

. 192

X.38 . .

118,27s

xxii. 43 .

• 30

xi. 41 . . .

256, 302

i. 20

• 23

X. 40 . .

138, 263

xxiii. 2,53.

. 326

xii. 8 . . .

• 58

i. 22

• 44

xi. 6 . .

. 104

xxiii. 8, 9 .

. 260

xii. 47 . .

• 3'5

ii.4

. 180

xi. II . .

• 57

xxiii. 10 .

. 289

xii. 49 . .

1 18, 162

ii. S

• 71

xi. 12 . .

. 196

xxiii. 37 .

. 246

xii. 50. .

. 89

ii. 6

■ 70

xi. 19 . .

• 55

xxiii. 38 .

184, 191,

xiii. 34 .

• 253

' ii. 14

. 180

xi. 23 . .

• «23

241.

xiv. 33 .

• 273

ii. IS
ii. 18

• 44

xi. 27 . .

53. 257

xxiii. 43 .

30

XV., etc. .

• 295

• 44

xi. 28 . .

• 50

xxiv. 12 .

266

xvi. 15 .

■ 57

iii. s

. 100

xi. 29 . .

«7S. 256

xxiv. 37 .

121

xvi. 25

•57.285

iii. 9

• 194

xii., etc. .

• 133

XXV., etc. .

37

xvi. 26

. 3«6

iii. II

4;

.55. I"

xii. 1 . .

. 108

XXV. 9 . .

3'6

xviii. 34 .

• 245

iii. 14

. 60

xii. 2 . .

• «33

XXV. 12 .

183

xix. 8 . .

. 270

iii. 15

26,59

xii. 5 . .

• "79

XXV. 31 .

97

xix. 9 . .

• 333

iii. 16

. 146

xii. 7 . .

. 46

XXV. 34-36

216

xix. 46

. 80

iv. II

• 73

xii. 19, 20

. 84

XXV. 35 .

321

XX. 42 . .

• 30

iv. 19

• 65

xii. 24. .

68, 207

XXV. 42 .

219. 273

xxii. 32 .

. 268

iv. 21

. 263

xii. 27 . .

. 184

XXV. 45 .

. 221,285

xxii. 45 .

• =^^5

iv. 24

A

t«. 70. 73

xii. 29 . .

. 250

XXV. 46 .

• 97

xxiii. 43 .

. 84

V. 3. 7.

8

• 215

xii. 38 . .

. 80

xxvi. 7 .

. 227

xxiii. 49 .

. . 182

v. 4

. 231

xii. 39 • •

82, 265

xxvi. 22 .

• '7'

xxiv. 39 .

107, 246

V. 6

50. "83

xii. 48 . .

74. 3'8

xxvi. 35 .

• 330

John i. 3 . . .

• '35

v. 8

52, 269

xiii. 4-7 .

3

xxvi. 52 .

. 308

i-3. 4. .

• 297

v. II, 1

2

. 284

xiii. 22

. 86

xxvi. 53 .

192, 277

i. 9, II .

• • 297

v. 16

. 46

xiii. 24, 25

. 73

xxvi. 70 .

. 242

i. II . 104

257t3"

v. 17

178, 238

xiii. 36 .

. ,65

xxvii. 40, 42

. 218

i. 13 . .

. 9'. 251

V. 19

. 261

xiii. 44 .

• 5'

xxvii. 63 .

• ■ 315

i. 16 . .

■ • 274

V. 20

. 186

xiii. 55

55. «99

xxviii. 18 .

. 296

i. 18 . .

. . 271

v. 21, 2

.2

14,84

xiii. 58 .

. 80

xxviii. 19 .

. 246, 296

i. 27 . .

. . lOI

V. 22

• '75

xiv., etc. .

• '55

xxviii. 20 .

274,300

i. 29 . .

. . 166

v. 29

. 206

xiv. 13

• 59

Mark i. 2 . . .

. . 26

>• 33 • •

• 45. '44

V. 32

• 235

xiv. 28

. 156

i. 17 . .

84

i. 46 ■ 55.

123. 185

V. 39

• 312

XV. 9 . .

• 213

i. 41 . .

237

i. 50 . .

. 169

y-u>4

^5

. 262

XV. II . .

107, 109

ii. 2 . .

289

I. 51 • •

■ 99

*-4S

133. 220

XV. 24 . 32, 246, 297,

iii. 5 . .

. 84

n. 4 . .

. 318

vi. 12

. 142

246.

iii. 17 . .

68

ii. 6 . .

. 18

Ti,H

, |2I

ItV. 26 . .

• • 77

iv. 34 • •

. 165

. ii. II . .

• 73

542


GOSPEL OF JOHN: INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PACE

PAGE

PAGE

John u. 19 . 134, 166, 245,

John vii. 5 . .

• l^

John xii. 49. . . . 13

John xxi. 25 . .

42. 328

265.

vii. 7 . 246,

252, 283

xiii. 14

. 221

Acts i. 3, 4 • ■

. 292

iii. 2 .... 223

vii. 12. .

. 206

xiii. 16

• 3'S

i. 4 . . .

• 329

iii. II . 104, 105, 161

vii. 18. .

. 162

xiii. 18 . .

. 260

i. 8 . . . .

■ 325

iii. 13 .... 169

vii. 19. 113

213. 241

xiii. 31

. 284

ji. 36 . . .

12

iii. 17 .

. 96, 196

vii. 20. .

. 219

xiii. 32 .

. 272

ii. 46 . . .

• 277

iii. 18 .

. 140, 190

vii. 28 . .

188, 236

xiii. 34 .

• 304

iii. I . . .

. 266

iii. 20 .

. 24, 188

vii. 30 . .

• 76

xni. 36 .

286, 304

iii. 6 . .

. 272

iii. 24 .

• • I^

vii. 31 . .

223, 244

xiii. 37 .

• 330

iii. 12 . .

. 238

iii. 26 .

. . 64

vii. 33 • •

• 277

xiv. I . .

. 254

iii. 17 . . .

• 315

iii. 27 .

. 106, 257

vii. 33. 35

192,251

xiv. 2 . .

. 194

iii. 24 . . .

• 30

iii. 29 .

. . 64

vii. 34. .

. 192

xiv. 3, 16.

. 324

iv. 13 . . .

5

iii. 32 .

. 141, 161

vii. 38. .

III

xiv. 5 . .

. 286

iv. 29, 31 . .

. 292

iii- 33 •

.158,300

vii. 44 . .

• 24

xiv. 6 . .24, 29, 269,

iv. 32 . .

• 277

iii. 36 .

. . 140

vii. 48 . .

214,244

271, 299, 326.

V. 32 . .

• 333

iv. 10 .

. . 160

vii. 49 . .

1 10, 244

xiv. 7 .... 271

V. 36 . .

. 214

iv. 12 .

. . 198

vii. 51 . .

. 84

xiv. 8 . .

151, 286

V. 39 . . .

. 101

iv. 14 .

. . 184

vii. 52. .

4. 123

xiv. 9 . .

14. 237

ix.39 . •

. 322

iv. 18 .

. . 64

viii. 12 .2.

U 99. 237

xiv. 10

. 288

X. 41 . 61

284, 32S

iv. 24 . .

• 18, S3

viii. 13 .

144,217

xiv. 10, II

. 124

X. 44 . .

. 284

iv. 26 .

. . 222

viii. 14 143

, 144, 284

xiv. II

. 13

X.45 . .

• 33

iv. 34 .

• • 72

viii. 19

. 180

xiv. 12

. 234

X. 47 . .

. 89

iv. 46 .

• • 78

viii. 20 .

• 76

xiv. 14, 15

. 280

xi. 3 • •

• 33

v., etc.

. . i8i

viii. 21

. 192

xiv. 19

. 328

xi. 21 . .

. 272

V. 8 .

• • 237

viii. 28 . 82

.177.265

xiv. 23 . 24

,162,304

xiii. 2 . .

• 274

v. 14 .

. . 200

viii. 29 .

• 255

xiv. 26

82, 288

xiii. 46 . .

. 107

V. 17 . 14, 128, 137,

viii. 33, etc.

• "I

xiv. 27

• 325

xiv. 15 . .

. 238

272.

viii. 40 .

. 178

xiv. 28 .

. 300

xvii. 28 .

• 23

V. 18 . . . 208, 241

viii. 46 .

207, 208

xiv. 30 .

. 247

xvii. 31

• >3

V. 19 . . .177.237

viii. 48 .

108, 123,

xiv. 31 .

. 236

xviii. 3 . .

. 15s

V. 21 . . 14, 23, 162,

.219. 315.

XV. I . .

• 69

xix. 2 . .

. 60

178, 237, 252, 255,

viii. 51

165, 236

XV. 3 . .

259. 303

xix. 6 . .

. 184

297.

viii. 52

139, 168

XV. 9 . .

• 297

XX. 34 . .

. 158

•V. 22 . . . . 189

viii. 54 .

■ 213

XV. 13 . .

. 268

XX. 35 . .

. 158

V. 23 .

"4. 17. 237

viii. 56

30.7s

XV. 14, 15

. 84

xviii. 4 . ,

• 94

V. 26 .

• 24,311

viii. 58 .

• 177

XV. 15 . 2, 7, 104, 294

Rom. i. 3 . . .

• 13

y. 28 .

. . 238

ix., etc. .

. 130

XV. 19 . .2, 190, 302

i. 4. . .

. 82

V. 29 .

. . 161

ix. 6 . .

• 133

XV. 22 . . 9, 97, 315

1.7. . .

. 18

V. 30 . 13, 104, 236,

ix. 6, 7 .

. 41

XV. 25 . . . . 97

1.9. . .

. 116:

252.

ix. 16 . .

138, 145

xvi. 6 . .

. 265

i. 10 . .

. 23

V. 31 . . . 198, 309

ix. 22 . .

. 284

xvi. 7 . .

277. 32s

i. 17 . .

. 48

V. 32 •

. . 26

ix. 29 . 76,

146, 178,

xvi. 12 .

. 282

i. 19, 20 .

. 201

V. 34 •

. 26, 162

180.

xvi. 15 .

. 24

j. 20 . .

136,202

V. 34. 36

. . 64

ix. 32 . .

. 283

xvi. 22

• 325

t^ : :

• '5

V. 37 •

. . 271

ix. 37 . .

143. 223

xvi. 30 .

. 296

• 25;

V. 38 .

. . 238

IX. 39 • .

. 210

xvi. 33 .

• 32s

i. 32 . .

. 154

V. 39 . 51, 104, 161,

X. 10 . .

. 289

xvii. I . .

•0 76

li. 4. S •

. . 132

184, 213.

X. 15 . . I

4. S2. 103

xvii. 3 . .

18, 106

ii. 6 . .

. . 9f

V. 41 . . . 154, 162

X. 16 , .

145, 241

xvii. 4 . .

• 74

ii. 7 . .

. . 28:

V. 43, 44 • • • »6l

X. 18 . 134,

233. 264,

xvii. 6 . .

• 2S7

ii. 12 . .

• • 3:

V. 44 .14,30,98,136,

318.

xvii. 10 .

• 'P

ii. 17, 21, 23

. i8(

205, 254, 297.

X. 20 . .

. 236

xvii. II .

. 289

ii. 24 . .

. . 3.

V. 45 . . .174,184

X. 24 . .

• "7

xvii. 12 .

. 308

iii. 3. 4 •

. . 18;

V. 46 . . . . 209

X. 28 . .

161,289

xvii. 14 .

• 3"

iii. 12 . .

. . 3;

vi. 27 . . . . 252

X. 29 . .

• 71

xvii. 21 .

. 234

iii. 19 . .

. . 3;

vi. 28 . . . . 202

X. 30 . .

14. 237

xvii. 24 .

43. «82

iii. 22-24

. • 3;

vi. 30 . . . . 223

X. 33 • •

• 237

xvii. 25 .

• 31

iii. 23 . .

■ • 9;

vi. 33 • • • • 236

X.36 . .

• "43

xviii. 4, 6

. . 192

iii. 23, 24

. 122, i9<

vi. 35 . . . . Ill

X. 37 . Ill

237. 272

xviii. 6

173.277

iv. 14. IS

. . i&

vi. 37 . . . . 301

X. 38 . .

■ I4S

xviii. 8, 9

• 215

iv. 16 . .

. . i&

vi. 39 . . . . 301

X. 41 . .

. 64

xviii. 20 .

■ 99

iv. 17 . .

. 18,15:

vi. 39, 40 . . 198

xi. 25 . .

«36. 237

xviii. 23 .

• • 257

V. S . .

. . 12;

vi. 40 . . . 136, 197

xi. 42 . .

. 296

xviii. 36, 37

. 154

V. 7 . .

• . 9*

vi. 44 . 24, 250, 257,

xi, 56 . .

. 176

xviii. 37 .

. 13

v. 10 . .

. . 21;

325-

xii. 25 . .

236, 275

xix. 15

. 246

V. 12 . .

• ■ 241

vi. 45 . . .184, 271

xii. 26 . .

. 260

xix. 39 .

. 84

V. 20 . .

. . 201

vi. 46 .

. . S3. 181

xii. 30 . .

. 236

XX. I . .

. 320

vi. 4-6 .

. . &

vi. 60 .

. . 236

xii. 32 . .

. 269

XX. 21 . .

• 275

vi. II, 23

• ■ *i

vi. 63 .

. . 289

xii. 36 . .

202, 289

XX. 22 . .

184, 274

viii. 2 . .

. . 4I

vi. 64 .

. .242,299

xii. 40 . .

• J4

XX. 27 . .

246

viii. 3 . .

. . 2S<

vi. 65 .

. . . 299

xii. 41 . .

• S'

XX. 29 . .

83. •23

viii. 9 . .

• '?

vi. 66 .

• • "93

xii. 42. .

. 84.99

xxi. 4 . .

• '73

viii. 10 .

. tS>,

vi. 71 .

. . 360

. xii. 47- •

. 84

xxi. 15 .

ii7.a63

Vui. U ,

^ ' a*)

p

GOSPEL OF JOHN:

INDEX

OF TEXTS.

543

PAGE

PAGE

FACK

PACK

.om. viii. 15 .48

,184,289

I Cor. V. 5 . .

• i3«

Gal. i. 13 .

. . . . 36

1 Tim. i. IS . .

• 35

viii. 17 .

. . 298

V. 13 . .

. . 206

i. 19.

. ... 174

i. I6 . .

• 36

viii. 20 .

. . 91

vi. 7 . .

54. 150

ii. 20

. ... 141

i. 19 . .

• "5

viii. 27 ,

. . 152

VI. 10 .

• 243

iii. 13

. . . . 50

ii. I . .

. 29

viii. 32 .

. . 217

vi. II

. 289

iii. 27

... I

ii. 9, 10.

. 226

viii. 33. 34

. 194

vi. 15

• 235

iv. 4.

... 91

iii. 6, 7 .

• 34

viii. 35 .

• 330

vii. 13 .

• 235

V. 6 .

... 217

iii. 16 .

52,269

ix 4 . .

. . 48

vii. 16 .

225, 256

V. 18

... 289

V. 8 . .

• 305

ix. 5 . .

. 18,116

vii. 28 .

• 299

V. 22

... 295

V 17. .

• 76

ix. 30 . .

. . 32

vii. 34 .

• 49

V. 22, 2;

... 278

VI. 16 .

24.52

ix. 30, 31

• 213

ix. 6 . .

• 297

Eph. ii. 3 .

... 221

2 Tim. ii. 9 . .

. 278

ix. 30, 32

• 33

ix. 17

• 33

ii. 15

... 217

ii. 12, 13

135. 329

X. 3 . .

• 33

ix. 18 .

. 158

iii. 10

. . . 2

ii. 14

■ 247

X. 6, 7 .

• «7i

x. 4 . .

. 204

iv. 26

... 19

ii. 19

• 217

x. 12 . .

• • 33

X. II . .

105, 128

iv. 28

... 158

ii. 25

. 46

X. 17 . .

. . 102

X. 24 . .

. 216

iv. 31

... 92

iii. 16, 17

. 146

X. 20 . .

• • 32

X. 32 . .

. 206

v. 2

• -255.297

iv. 2 . .

0 ^5

xi. 2 . .

217

xi. I . .

256,311

V. 12

... 20

Tit. i. 16 .

97

180,305

xi. 7 . .

• • 32

xi. 29

. 167

V. 26

• • • 303

ii. 13

18

xi. 26 . .

• • 23

xi. 32 .

• «3i

V. 29

• ■ . 54

iii. 3 •

. 221

xi. 33 • •

. . 90

xii. 3, 4 .

• 326

V. 30

... 166

iii. 5 .

• 85

xii. I . 116

273. 303

xii. 7 . .

. 289

vi. 15

... I

Heb. i. I .

• 53

xii. 2 . .

• 255

xii. If .

• 274

Phil. ii. 6.

• 13.25.297

;-3-

13. 1

7, 28, 254

xii. 15

. . 131

xii. 13 .

• 54

ii. 6, 7

... 134

i. 28

. . 167

xii. 17

. 206

xii. 16 .

. 201

ii. 7 . 7

3, 218, 255, 297

iii. 13

• 199

xii. 19

. 185

xiii. 3

. 130

ii. 21

... 216

iv. 10

• «27

xiii. I . .

. 220

xiii. 5

. 206

iii. I

62, 114, 186

V. 2,3

• 194

xiii. 10 .

. 282

xiv. 20 .

■ 301

iii. 3

... 48

V. II

8, 196

xiii. 12

. 202

xiv. 22 .

• '5"

111. 5, 6

... 121

vi. 18

• '35

xiii. 13 .

• 25

XV. 9 . .

; 35

iii. 6

... 48

vii. 3

18

xiii. 14 .

I

XV. 24 .

161,257

iii. 19

. . . 164

ix. 28

• 137

XV. 3 . .

• 53

XV. 27 .

• 237

iv. 5, 6

... 121

X. 25

67, 290

XV. 4 . .

105, 128

XV. 33 .

206, 247

Col. i. 15 .

... 52

X. 28, 2

9 •

. 96

XV. 1 2 . .

• 23

XV. 45 .

. 88

i. 16.

... 22

"•37

. 163

XV. 14. .

9

XV. 49 .

• 36

i. 16, 17

... 23

xi. I

• 327

Cor. i. I . .

• 23

XV. 53 .

. 246

i. 18.

... 163

xi. 38

• 57

i. 9 . .

23, 162

2 Cor. ii. 7 . .

. 286

ii. 5 .

... 103

xii. 2

. 284

i. 24 . .

21

iii. II

. 48

ii. 14

... 142

xii. 6

• 125

i. 27 . .

• 70

iii. 18 .

• 305

ii. 16

... 94

xii. 9

• 294

ii. 10 . .

2

iv. 17, 18

• 329

ii. 19

... 23

xii. 14

49. 234

ii. II . .

79, 288

iv. 18

. 163

iii. 5 .

• . 243. 273

xiii. 17

. 326

ii. 14. .

. 86

V. 10 . 121

.137.163

iii. 13 .

... 142

Jas. ii. 18.

. 267

iii. I, 2 .

• '?5

v. 17. .

. 90

iii. 16

... 62

I Pet. i. 24

• 154

iii. 2 . .

. 86

V. 19 . .

• 303

I Thess. ii. 6

... 15

ii. 22

94. 303

iii. 3 . .

175,196

V. 20 . .

72, 326

iv, I

0-12. . 158

iii. 15

. 62

iii. 8 . .

• 43

vi. 14

3

iv. I

6 ... 139

V. 8

• 215

iii. II

• 23

vii. I . .

• 49

V. 3

. . 121, 163

I John i. 5

. 24

iii. 22, 23

. 326

viii. 18 .

• 65

v. I<

? ... 183

iv. 2

• 39

iii. 23 .

68, 275

ix. 12 .

. 46

2 Thess. ii. 4

... 148

2 John 7 .

• 39

iv. 5 . .

. 121

X. 7 . . .

• 55

ii. I

, 12 . . 148

Rev. i. 15

• 5'

V. 8 . . .

. 206

xi. 83 . .

, 217

I Tim. L 13 .

• • • 35

xxii. 16

• 23

HOMILIES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abraham, how received not the prom-
ises, having patiently endured,
received the promise, 418; his
patience, ih.; and great-heart-
edness, 418, 474, 477 sqq.; and
intense resolve of his affection
Godward, 521, 522; learn from
his hospitality, 422; exceeding
superiority of Melchisedek to,
and thus to the Jewish polity too,
424,427 sqq.; fortitude of, mani-
fested by God to all men, 478;
his faith to the end, ib. ; enjoyed
things of the world, with afflic-
tion, 482; and affliction made
him bright, 50x3.

Affliction (see Suffering, Pain, Pun-
ishment), afflicting ourselves here,
benefit of, 442; came to Abra-
ham, and must come to every
righteous person, 475, 499; a
great good, 483, 494, 517; wipes
out sins, makes people firm and
steady, 494; makes God our
debtor, 517; casts out sloth, and
ill desire, and collects the soul,
500; brings forth joy, 503; for
a time, 512; helps to pay the
penalty of our sins, 391, 517;
thrusts into the narrow way, 517.

Age, full, 406; how to be attained,
ib. ; him of, who holds the Faith,
and a right life, 409.

Aid, each can others, in the way of
salvation, 504, 505 ; and not seek
for himself only, 506.

Almsgiving, 412, 417; can exhaust
hell-fires, 369; saves from, 513;
of the very poor, yea, of the
beggar, surpasses that of the
rich, 369, 374, 375 ; in, God es-
timates will, 369; the most es-
sential ingredient in medicine, of
repentance, 412; causes our
prayer to be heard, 420; God
looks at our purpose, 422, 513,
514; not worthiness of recipi-
ents, 4^22; cleanses after sins,
426, 509; blessing of, 454; hand
withered that is without, 480;
guilt of giving, and receiving
from ill-gotten gains, 481, 513;
what is, 495; we ought to give


superfluities in, ib. ; the oil for
our lamps, 498; cf. 513; gives
earthly, receives heavenly, 509;
heaven's gates open to, 513;
might of, ib. ; some do it but
scantly, ib. ; some their all, 516
(note e) ; in doing, we must be
intent, lest anxiety for wife and
children intervene, 521 ; false
receiving of, 516. See Poor,
Poverty.

Alphabet, 409, 490.

Angels, minister to our salvation, 377 ;
the Son's servants, our fellow-
servants, ib. ; great, the interval
betwixt us and, ib.; manifold
examples of, ministry of, ib.;
their ministry to us an encour-
agement, ib. ; law given through,
how, 378; entrusted with the
charge of nation, ib.; with care
of us, mourn over our badness,
472; are by us in the night,
438; in Church especially, 442;
and in fear when Christians pray,
490; were our enemies, recon-
ciled by Christ, 447; Cherubim
dwell on earth, 444; despise us
their fellow-citizens, if enslaved
to gold, 480; do not need at-
tendants when they go through
the world, 495 ; the theatre of
Christians, 496; with, is that
soul, whose lover God is, 498;
angelic work, yea, Christ's work
to do all for salvation of brethren,

377-
Anger, how guarded against, 393; a

fire a flame, forbearance quenches

it, as iron red-hot dipped in water

is quenched, 468.
Animals, do not readily attack their

fellows of the same species, 480.
Antichrist, the Jews having rejected

Christ, will fall into hand of,

515-
Apostles, received nothing in writing,

435; tombs of but four known

(see Tombs), 482.
Arians, 376, 407; their formula, there

was when He was not, 367 ; as by

an instrument, 371 ; God needed

not an helper, 376.


Arius, 370, 371, 376.

Armor, some parts of Christian, ex-

plained, 393 ; shield of faith, 468;

girdle of truth, 450.
Article, definite, force of, 376.
Athlete, example of an, 392, 456, 462,

470; Christ's, 478; chastisement

strengthens, 503.

Babylonians, of less understanding
than they of Lystra, 486.

Baptism, sins forgiven in, 389;
cleanses the soul, 455; repent-
ance after, is of grace, 400 ; after,
comes repentance, 436; neces-
sary, 410; one, 410 sqq., 457;
if not so, how careless we
should get, 41 1; if more than
one, an endless number, ib. ;
cross, 410; our death and rising,
41 1 ; gifts in, ib. ; a grace once
for all, ib. ; the whole is grace,
410; called " the Seal," 430;
enlightening, 431 ; peril of delay-
ing to the end of life, ib. ; they
who do so alluded to, 457, 481
(note) ; great loss thence even
if one does not receive baptism,
431 sqq. ; shame that accrues to
these when they behold others'
sweats and rewards, ib. ; bears
sons, 433; our Lord's Passion,
444; if without fruit, punishment,
457; makes brotherhood, be-
cause God then our father, 480.

Baptized, the, called Enlightened, 432.

Bastards, not worth punishing, 500.

Beatitudes, 403.

Begging, a disgrace, 421.

Beginning, value of, 412; and hard-
ness, ib.

Bitterness, root of, difference between
and a bitter root, 506.

Brother, in St. Paul meant not a monk
but a believer, 480, 481.

Cain, what St. Chrysostom thought
the fault of his sacrifice, 514.

Carnal, tempers what, 452.

Catechumens, 430, 432; know Christ
and the Faith, 432; not a brother
in St. Paul's sense, even if he be
a monk, 480.


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


545


Chance, they who all to, are not pleas-
ing to God, 467.
Charity, praise of, 381; his work on,
referred to, ii.; loves not in
order to be loved in turn but for
God, ib. ; wears itself out for
Jews, heathen, heretics, ib. ; pity-
ing those who have done not well
but wrong, 417.
Chastisement is exercise, bearing

sweet fruit, 503.
Children, in a passion, if they strike
us, we do but laugh, 468; if our-
selves in a passion we become,
ib. ; intelligent, will sometimes
decline playthings, longing for
what is higher, 471 ; playthings
kept back if too eagerly longed
for, given freely if not so, 479.
Christ, His sufferings, 389 ; from the
Jews, 493; from disciples, 494;
in babyhood, ib. ; from scorning,
493, 494; an aid to patience,
\k 365,494; an honor, 3S4; a glory,
B 499; far, far greater than crea-
■! tion, 384; we are to have fellow-
B ship with, 515, 517; calls His
~ Cross glory, 383; cf. 384; His
Death called a taste because it
held Him not long, 383; smote
the devil, 385 ; and death, ib. ;
His Resurrection, 365, 373, 384,
411, 520; to prove, one aim of
St. Paul in Epistle, 365, 520;
known to those of old, 481 ; His
appointment as Priest, 403; His
weeping at prayer not told in
Gospels, 404; sometimes spoken
I of from the Divine, sometimes

Br from the Human, 368; in .Spirit,
iPf' and flesh, 368 init. ; not &vapxos
or alien from God (according to
some), 370; acts of His own
authority, 490; calls His own
coming in the flesh Exodus, St.
Paul Eisodos (coming in), 375;
Apostle as sent, 391 ; became
Priest when He took flesh, 428,
433; One Priest because undy-
ing, 429; one act of, 430, 447,
448; Godhead and Manhood in,
430, 433; our One Sacrifice, 430,
434. 439 (see Sacrifice); all
heavenly, 434; died once, 447;
died for all even though all ac-
cepted not, ib. ; suffered because
He willed, 493, 517; and gladly,
493; His enemies are Jews, un-
believers, carnal, 452; Jews' con-
tumelies to, 493; many Of His
words already come to pass, 463 ;
gives His Gifts in ways contrary
to natural course, 479; because
nature's Maker, ib.; His Death
our safeguard, 487; why He
chose death of the Cross, 493;
prayed, not needing prayer, but
to teach us, 490; if we suff'er we
must look to, 493, 494; has im-
planted in us of His Beauty and
Comeliness, 368; we one with,
394; we read not that lie laughed,
442; to be looked to as a blas-
ter, that we may learn how to do,


493; gave us the Faith, ib.;
gave the beginning, will put on
the end, ib.

Christ's Blood, 499; mixed up with
the very substance of people's
souls, rendering them vigorous
and pure, 444; sprinkled in our
souls, 487 ; we have, ib. ; partake
of, 517; has cleansed all, 510;
purifies us, 440, 444; flowed from
the Body which had been framed
by the Spirit, 444; carried into
Heaven, 517.

Christ's Body, framed by the Holy
Spirit 440, 444.

Christ God, 372, 389, 430, 433;
though Priest sits, stands not,

. 373. 4.S0, 433. 452, 454-
Christian, shines out most brightly in
poverty, 374; the crucified, has
Charity, 381 ; the crucified, the
mourner, 442; how to fight,
bravely, not inviting war, not
interfering, 392; to be ready to
pour out his blood as though it
were water, ib. ; his constant
daily warfare, 392, 393; different
parts of his armor explained,
393; mercifulness his special
characteristic, 513; his super-
human might, 522; should arm
himself with desire of Heaven, a
fire which none may withstand,
ib.
Christianity, danger of fulfilling as a

custom, 414.
Chrysostom, .St., rejoices that things
will not always abide as they
are, 376; thought that miraculous
gifts were less at the date of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, 379; re-
fers to an already published writ-
ing of his on charity, 381 ; speaks
from necessity, would from pleas-
ure too if he knew his hearers
were earnest, 382; would fain
have been silent lest he increase
their peril, but fears to be silent,
476; will examine the careless
ones, will not tell them when,
382, 383; prays and exhorts
others to pray that no untimely
deaths may befall, 387; threatens
to punish hired mourners brought
into Christian funerals and to sus-
pend those who bring them, ib.;
cannot preach the Resurrection
while Christians thus contradict,
385, 387; calls himself a good-
for-nothing, yet must use his au-
thority, 3S7; begs them to bear
with him if severe, ib. ; would fain
only loose, yea, not need power
of loosing, ib.; longs to praise,
388, 472; speaks of the want of
Bible knowledge among his peo-
ple, 407 sqq. ; the discouragement
in his teaching from their inatten-
tion, 382, 408; and risk through
repetition of making the account
of some heavier at the Judgment,
409; expects that his people will
bring forth fruit suddenly, 417;
thought that the sky did not


move and is not spherical, 433,
490; addresses not Christians
only, but even heathen, if any
present, on the truth of Christ's
words, 463; thought that Phari-
see spake his prayer in no man's
hearing, 464; elsewhere thought
otherwise, 490; apologizes for
what he says, as constrained to
say it, 472; calls himself a father,
473; attests his inmost grief,/*./
always has to repeat same things,
476; knew not how to rebuke
owing to the sin of alms out of
ill-gotten gains, 481 ; wants his
people to help him by helping
each other on, 504 sqq.

Church, bonds of, if any despise, put
on by authority, the Day of
Judgment will teach him, 387;
if any burst, he answers it to
Christ, ib.; laws of (see Laws,
Church, Heaven), 434. See
Service.

Clergy who are over us we must obey,
518, 519; even if bad, so their
faith be sound, 519; must be
sober and watchful; if despised
must weep, God punishes, ib. ;
their terrible responsibility, ib.;
and account, ib. ; peril in throw-
ing themselves upon dignity, they
ought to flee; then, if seized, to
submit, 520.

Club, the, in St. Chrysostom's time,
504.

Comfort, the duty of giving, 396.

Commands, easiness of God's, 432.
See Will.

Compunction, God's gift, 408 ; to
prayer, 459.

Publican filled with, when Pharisee's
words came to him, 490.

Confession, the Faith, 391, 400, 410;
of sins, 490. See Sins, Priest,
Repentance.

Conscience must be compelled to own
sins, that it may repent and escape
torment, 508.

Consulate, its transitoriness, 412.

Contrition an ingredient of Repent-
ance, 412; what, /A

Cornelius, the centurion, his offering,
420.

Covenants, both of God, though not
in like manner, 378.

Covetous, 505; they who overreach,
ruin themselves, not others, 480;
>*in of going to their entertain-
ments, 480, 481 ; a poor man
who refused to go for his own
soul's sake would shame, 481.

Covetousness worse than mire, 480.

Creation a less thing than preserva-
tion, 372; transfiguration of, so
easy, 376; fulfills its appointed
course, 489; reverenced Joshua
for the name he bore, ib.

Credibility, those who handed to us
Gospel Truth accredited as not
forgers, 379; what has already
come to pass accredit those yet
to come, 463.

Creed. See Confession.


546


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Cross, our Master calls glory, 383;

why He chose, 493; fruit of, how

great, 383; our, 494.
Crowning, time of, one ; of conflict of

each, manifold, 492.

Danger, to run needlessly into, tempt-
ing God, 484.

Daniel, why he did not refuse the
oblation andsweet odors, 485 jy?.,-
he was humble, 485, 486.

Deacon's warning and searching cry
at Holy Communion, 449, 450;
after the whole sacrifice is com-
pleted, 450; meaning of, ib.

Death, of Christ, smote the devil, 385 ;
death's death, il>. ; once only,
411,447; our purification, 444;
how death undone to us, 447; its
terror, 385; untimely, St. Chry-
sostom prays and exhorts prelates
and all to pray that no, may be-
fall, 387; day of each person's,
nearer than end of all things, 463 ;
death's death, hope given of, in
Enoch's translation, 467.

Desire, implanted, 374; but capable
of most grievous abuse, 502; evil
cast out by chastisement, 500;
hides sight of God, 468. See
Lust.

Despair, we may not, 396; even after
deepest wickedness, 426.

Devil, smitten in Christ's death, 385;
and brought to nought, ib. ; aims
to make us speak against God,
459; overthrow of, hope given
in Enoch's translation, 467; if
he wound not, wounded, 468;
wounded in his attack on Job,
wounded in his attack on St. Paul,
ib. ; his dart concupiscence, ib.;
glories at our evil state, 472.

Disobedience, peril of, 378.

Dives received (oirt'Ao^fJ received
not as a gift, but in return) here
the reward of his good deeds,

39'-
Docetoe alluded to, 385.
Doctrines which concern the soul

must be contended for, 392; cf.

519-

Dress, a lady sometimes had a precious
garment inwoven with gold, 459;
beautiful and costly belong to the
stage, 496; by St. Paul set at
nought in the very Church itself,
334. See Lady, Lace, Silk.

Drunkards, we go to their houses
though St. Paul forbids us, 481.

Drunkenness, sin of, 490.

Enoch not discouraged by what had
befallen Abel, 466; and knew
that he had received a recom-
pense, 467.

Envy, no one envies himself, 456;
Hebrews obnoxious to, 466; we
give way to, 490.

Eucharist, 468; the Sacrifice, 430;
daily, 449; therein the purifying
Blood entereth the soul, springing
up like a fountain in our souls,
444; many partiike once or twice


a year, many often, the solitaries
yearly or after two years, 449;
Lent the preparation for the
Easter-Eucharist, 449; frequent
receiving right if prepared, sel-
dom receiving too frequent if
unprepared, ib. ; peril of un-
worthy receiving, 449, 458; the
Deacon's warning cry at, 449,
450; the beauty of ornament
that fits to approach, 450; the
beauty of Eunuchs who stand by
the Majesty, ib.; may be a cause
of disease, even as food when the
system is disordered, 449; a
Royal Table, sweet Ointment,
ib. ; forty days' prejiftration, one
week's care after, ib. ; in, a per-
son becomes the Body of Christ,
458; unworthy partaking of, 490.

Eunuchs, spiritual, to stand before
King, 450.

Evil-speaking, earns praise to the
receiver if he requite it not, more
abundant disgrace to the giver,
368; terrible harm we do by, 464;
rife, 473; vain prayer uttered by
one while repeating gossip, 464;
if Pharisees condemned though
he spake truth, what we when we
utter lies, ib.

Eyes, what we see with, more readily
retained than what we hear, 434;
sometimes injured from a bad
habit of body, 449; of the soul,
how to make beautiful and keen
of sight, 450; evil desires, pas-
sions, affairs of this life darken,
468.

Ezra, gathered the scattered Scrip-
tures, 407.

Faintheartedness, 463, 465; some-
times produces unbelief, 416;
springs from unbelief, 455; hin-
ders a promise of its fruit, 418;
makes one no ready hearer, 423;
loss from at the last, 476; at last
came on the Hebrews, 483; dan-
ger of, to soul in tribulation, 516.

Faith, the, 391, 398, 400, 409, 410,
419, 432, 462; handed down that
we may not have to engage with
every heresy, 407 ; known to
Catechumens, 432; Christ gave,
493; imparts holiness, 504; the,
and right life make of full age,
409; we are to endure so long as
the, is not touched, 504; cf. 392;
who misteach, we must shun, 519;
cf. on Galatians, p. 16.

Faith, to need aljsolute proof of God's
Providence or care, want of, 396;
insufficient without a right life,
398; necessary to salvation, ib. ;
cf. 455, 516; must be very sure,
455; in it we trust the Holy
Ghost, ib.; contrary to reasoning,
516; the very essence of things
of hope, 462, 463; comes of a
sincere will, 522; needs a gen-
erous soul, 465 ; saves, ib. ; its
might, 487, 488; can do all, 487 ;
is all, 516; a pure life, springs of.


515; makes all things pure, ib.,
mutual aid from, 465; accused
by some as being without proof,
and defended by St. Paul, ib.;
knowledge concerning God, be-
longs to, 465, 466; of Abel, 466;
of Enoch, 469; of them of old,
482; of Joseph, !i5. / manifoldly,
ib. ; in retribution necessary,
467; holds nothing more to
relied on than God's words, 4691

Father, his desire to remit punish-
ment, seen in God also, 467;
he lets approved children wa
for the others, so God orden
that the saints wait for us, 492J
sends away from a son an evB
companion, if the son persial
after he is warned, 518.

Filth, like a host who gives a splen-
did entertainment, and sits down
with his hands smeared with th«
veriest, such is the covetous host
480.

Fire, no longer consumes but bean
to heaven Christian sacrifices
420; of spirit to burn up desir
of wealth, ib.; the ardent desir
for heaven, the Christian's, 522.

Flesh, taken of us, sits on high, anc
is worshiped by angels, arch'
angels, cherubim, seraphim, 388

Food, mischief of immoderate eaters,
501, 502; what can be digested
nourishes, 502; repletion worse
than famine, ib.

Forerunner, implies them who followj
419.

Forgiveness of others ingredient of
repentance, 412.

Form of a slave, man; form of God,
God, 372.

Freewill, its proneness to ill, 425 ; its
reality, ib.; it is aided by God,
425, 520.

Friends, favor of, must be risked to
obtain his salvation, 472; real,
help one another's souls, 505.

Funerals, hymns and psalmody at,
proclaim triumph, 386; un-
seemly grief at, ib.; those who
tear their hair and behave un-
seemly ought to be long while
shut out of Church, ib.; the
part of madmen, ib. ; harmful, ib. ;
a scandal and makes Resurrec-
tion disbelieved, 385, 387; Psalms
cxvi, xxiii, xxxii, sung at, 386;
hired mourners if admitted to
Christian funeral shall be pun-
ished, those who admit them
treated as idolaters, 387; daily,
hourly, 426.

Garden, untilled part of, 501.

Garments, precious, laid among per-
fume and spices to preserve them
from moths, 459.

Gifts, some receive not because of
impure life, some lest it should
harm their souls, 379, 380; diver-
sity of, 380; if householder knows ■
to whom to entrust, God more,
ib.; how to comfort ourselve?


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 547


that we have not, 380, 381 ; must
use thankfully the little ones we
have, 3S0; the greatest, Charity,
offered to all, 381.

Glory, from men we must account as
nothing, 493; obtained by sim-
plicity, 497.

Glutton, overreaching, 506.

God, ilis Peace surpasses mind, much
more does He, 370; reverence
and faith needed to hear or speak
of, 370; when our human lan-
guage fails, then we must praise
Him for His greatness, ib. ; of,
we know somewhat yet under-
stand not, ill. ; or conceive and
cannot utter, ih. ; not enclosed by
space, 373; spoken of as though
man, 391; wonderful in His
works, in His love to man more
wonderful, 381 ; through uncer-
tainty would keep us watchful,
382; teaches patience, 418; His
condescension in swearing, who
ought to be believed without,
419; cf. 429; everywhere present,
432; by remembering we forget
wickedness, 437; we must remem-
ber specially at night and at day-
break, ih.; and so have Him our
helper, ih. ; remembrance of Him
uplifts us to endure and be brave,
484; and makes hard things easy,
lb. ; several results of His remem-
bering us, and we Him, i/>. ; com-
mands nothing impossible, 446;
what philosophers knew of His
Being, belonged to Faith, not to
reason, 465, 466; Being of, Faith
assures; truths of His Essence
neither Faith nor reasoning may
attain, 467; inflicted punishment
of death, as He threatened, as a
Parent showed mercy at once in
translating Enoch undying, ib.;
they who attribute all to chance
are not pleasing to, ib.; a Re-
warder, 467, 468; how to be
sought, 468; evil desires, pas-
sions, cares, obstruct sight, ib.;
how to lift ourselves toward, ib. ;
His manifold gifts at creation,
471; His Gift of His Son, ib.;
the God and Friend of holy peo-
ple, 475; will be ours if we will
be strangers to the world, 476;
obedience makes us friends of,
ib. ; gives not full rest here but
some refreshment, 470; wished
to seem a Debtor even in giving
up His own Son, 478; a glory to,
to be called God of the good ; a
shame to, to be called God of the
wicked, 475, 476; gives earthly
things if our hearts be not set on
them, 479; with fear of Him bit-
ter things not painful, 485; the
friend of, besought God his
Friend and the creatures yielded,
489; if we hold fast to, we shall
stand against the foe and temp-
tation, 494; the Lover of holy
souls, 498; chastens as sons ten-
derly loved, 500; gave Law, gives


too the Gospel, 512; our example
in mercifulness, 513; if our friend,
temporal things matter not, 516;
alone knows what is good for us,

God the Father, angry for dishonor
done to His Son, 377; and the
Son, each subsist, 370; God the
Son, God the Holy Ghost, unity
of, 371.

C!od the Son, from the Father, 370,
371 ; absolutely equal to the
Father, 370, 377; has absolute
Power, 371; equal Honor, 517;
gift of Redemption enhanced by
being through, 373; what means
sittings ib. ; who disdained not to
become Man, neither disdained
He the lowly expressions ib.;
teaches us thereby lowliness, ib.;
marked off from creatures, 376;
sent, i.e. made flesh, 377; no min-
ister, ib. ; assumed what is of us
and united it to Himself, 382;
suffered though God is incapable
of suffering, 389; why called a
sword, 39S ; passes through inner
heart, to judge, ib. ; severity of,
399; tender aid given by, 400;
sympathy of, 389, 400; appointed
Priest, 403; His obedience, 404;
His learning it, 419; prayed yet
raised Himself from the dead,
404 ; prayed for us, ib. /emptied
Himself and glorified Himself,
ib.; mediated by an oath, 419;
and all the power of the Spirit
dwell in His flesh, 440.

God the Son God, 372; who is wor-
shiped, 375; who beholds all,
400; who stands not as High
Priest but is on the Throne, ib. ;
who in the Gospels swears by
Himself, 418. See also Christ
God.

God the Holy Ghost, 420; argument
against objectors to His God-
head, 366; God who reveals,
469; grace of, shows Its might
as It will, 367; mighty, 468, 487,
521. See Grace. His inspira-
tion of and care for preservation
of Scriptures, 407; received in
Baptism, 410; St. Paul's words
words of, 413; might of in Body
of the Word, 440; whose Body
of (e'/c), ib. ; framed by, 444; His
presence hallows men, 450; we
trust to in matters of faith, 455 ;
somewhat that St. Chrysostom
said, the words of, 449; waters
us, Christ having planted us,
457; we know not how to pray
save by, 5 1 7.

Gold is but dirt, 480.

Gold-embroidered linen, 480; orna-
ments, 496, 497; we must part
with for others' need that we may
enjoy His Beauty, 498.

Gossip, grievous sins of, 464; idle
excuse that it was another that
told us, ib.; if we must, to speak
of our sins to God and our friends,
ib.


Grace, Throne of, now will then be
throne of Doom, 400; Repent-
ance after Baptism is of, ib. ; of
the Spirit, 468, 487, 500, 521,
522; compared to wind filling
sails and wafting ship, 521; even
of old time wrought through the
unworthy, 476; prevents, our dil-
igence follows, ib.; fills up our
work, 520; poured on Moses in
his babyhood, wrought in Pha-
raoh's daughter, 483; surpasses
the Law in that it can bring to
Heaven, 489.

Hair, see Temple.

Hand, withered that doth not alms,
480; filthy that grasps beyond its
due, ib.

Heaven, 396, 397 ; not to be reached
negligently, 398; we lose by
seeking first things of time,
408; the glory beyond words,
413; through hope we now
there, 419; offerings presented
by Christians borne unconsumed
to, 420; who wishes may be in,
may be heaven, 444, 445 ; as St.
Paul and others did, 445 ; there
calm, ib. ; there good things
abide, 512, 513; the Patriarchs
alive to, dead to the world, we
alive to the world, dead to,
473. 474; Theater of, 496;
Beauty of, how much more His
Beauty, 498; the homes that are
there the Poor build us, 513.

Hebrews, Epistle to, written to Jews
(he thought) in Palestine and
Jerusalem, 364; mode in, com-
pared to that in Epistle to Ro-
mans, 403, 405, 424, 462; Gala-
tians, 405,406,41 5; I Corinthians,
406, 51 1; 2 Corinthians, 514;
Thessalonians, 515, others, 520;
and his discourse at Athens, 405 ;
had been Christians long time,
365,405; babes, 406; had been
better once, 405, 406, 483; their
Faith and Patience, 483; St. Paul
apologizes to them, 520; place of
his prayer here at end, in other
Epistles at beginning, ib.

Hell, 396, 403, 421, 431, 456, 457,
461, 469, 471, 476, 481, 490;
terror of, 368, 369; none afraid
of, 472; some believe not that
there is, 507; we must often think
of lest we suffer it, 369 ; almsgiv-
ing will quench, ib. ; everlasting,
396, 450, 495; terrible beyond
thought, 495, 509; due punish-
ment for evil speaking, 464; we
must hinder in friends what leads
to, 505 ; there none may aid, 509.

Heretics, 404, 406, 428; the faith
handed down to us our preserva-
tive against, 407. See Arius,
Alanichaus, Marcellus, Marcion,
Paul, Novations, etc.

Highmindedness to no purpose, 373;
danger of, 379, 380, 425, 426; St.
Peter's special danger of, as know-
ing that he loved Christ more


5'48


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


than all, 507; prosperity some-
times produces, 517; constant
memory of our sins does away
with, 508.

Hope, its stay, 391, 393, 415, 419,
429; that of each covenant con-
trasted, 434; of future bears
through despondency, 503.

Human things, their transitoriness,
412; a shadow, 484; nought if
God our friend, 516; hope a help
even in, 419; the whole of virtue
to be loose from, 473. See Tem-
poral things.

Humility, aid from listening to our
Lord's words on, 409 ; not true,
to call ourselves sinners and be
angry when so called, 490; what,
ib.

Ill, we are apt to suspect, good not
so, 422; our will readily inclines
to side of, 425 ; we often abstain
from, out of respect to men, 516.

Image and Express Image contrasted,

372-

Indolence the reason why the bad
become not better, 474; why we
imitate not the Saints, 456.

Injure, they who, injure themselves,

479-

Injuries, remembrance of, a great sin,
412, 490; will go if we ever re-
member our sins, 508; liearing
will help us and the injuring
party too, 504.

Insult, who, insult themselves, 479,
480.

Isaac, only-begotten in respect to the
promise, 478; praise of, 474, 482;
his toils and gain therefrom, 500.

Jacob, faith of, 474, 482; gain through
affliction, 500, 501.

iesus, in the form of Man, 489.
ews, had power in their own land
to act independently of their
rulers, 365 ; their priests ceasing
to be priests, 403; St. Paul proves
that far superior to, and to their
polity is the uncircumcised Mel-
chizedeli, 424; times of, under
Ezra and Malachi referred to,
436; their law, old, ib.; Jewish
captives glorious even in cap-
tivity, 484 ; having deprived them-
selves of Christ will fall into
hands of Antichrist, 515; heath-
ens, heretics, true charity wears
itself out for, 381.
Jews Christian, how well-nigh worn
out when St. Paul wrote to them,
365, 366; cf. 514; had long be-
lieved and borne, 365 ; compared
to Elijah in their troubles, 491 ;
exhorted to perseverance in that
whereunto they had attained, 514;
their enemies Christ's enemies,

377-
Joshua, reverenced as a very special

type of Christ, 489 ; availed more

than did Moses, ib.; even while

Moses was living, 490.
Joy, never unmued here, 442; the


true, how to be attained, ib. ; en-
durance with, Apostolical, 462;
fruit of grief, of chastisement,

503-

Judge, the Judge of words as well as
of actions, 438; propitiated if we
accuse ourselves for our sins, 508;
confess to, ib.

Judgment, 401 ; the Throne of grace
now, becomes then Throne of,
400; day of, 420, 472; near, 463;
the Judge will be there, 509; sins
of all publicly displayed then
except we do them away by con-
tinual remembrance of them, 508,
509; in that day the poor man
will deliver thee, 421 ; proof that
end of world is nigh, 463; end
of all at hand, day of each one's
death yet nearer, ib. ; we shud-
der at end, as if going to, 475;
special account then taken of
purity, 476; Judgments men-
tioned in his day, 472; com-
mon, of all indisputable, 503.

Jugglers' sleights, 445.

Lace, a superfluity, 496.

Lady, walking with few attendants
attracts less notice, 495, 496; to
dress simply, 496 sqq.; such an
one has her husband's respect,

497-

Lamb, paschal, type of our deliver-
ance, 487.

Laughing, evil habit of, in Church
and at prayers, 442; Sarah re-
buked for, ib.; her denial of it
was from her faith, 471; right
use of and misuse of, 442 ; women
do not laugh, save in times of
relaxation, in presence of their
husbands, ib.; we laugh at chil-
dren who strike us in a passion,
468; when we ought to mourn
bitterly, 471, 472.

Law, has less might than has grace,
489; superiority of Christian
things over those of, 511; the
same who gave the Gospel, 512;
Laws Ecclesiastical, 387! written
in hearts belong not to Jews but
to Christians, 435.

Lent, forty days' preparation for
Easter Communion, 449; loss if
insufficient, 450.

Long-suffering tames anger, 468.

Lose, not to, of less toil than after-
ward to recover it, 462.

Lost, a thing, with what earnestness
sought, 468.

Love, the perfect thing, 455; from,
all good things, 456; nought good
which is not from, ib. ; assembling
ourselves increases, 455, 456; a
natural path leading to virtue,
456; as self what, ib.; of enemies
and the bad, praise of, ib.

Lungs, reason given why they be
placed under the heart, 393.

Lust, not pleasure, a mere shadow of
pleasure, 393; he who is pos-
sessed by, worse than one in a
fever, 441; evil desire hinders


our seeing when we would find
God, 468; generated by over-
eating, 502.
Luxury, brings to an ill end, 501; en-
feebles body and soul, ib. ; pro-
duces low spirits, ib.; food for
lusts, 502.

Man, spoken of sometimes from the
lower, sometimes the higher part,
so Christ, 368; Image of God,
372; young, old; see Young,
Old.

Manichaeans, 406, 409; the modernest
heresy, 407.

Marcellus, 370, 371, 376; taught as
did Labellius, 407.

Marcion, 371, 376, 409; the first
heresy, 407.

Marriage, 516; not it, but want of
moderation in, hurts, 402.

Martyrs, whole burnt-ofl'erings, body
and soul, 420.

Mary, Virgin, some deemed that God
the Son had His beginning from,
407 [see St. Cyril Alex, de recta
fide 1 1 a, 20 fin., 21 a, 44 ^ / Quod
Untis est Ckristits 717 ^, contra
Nest. i. 4 (p. 21, O. T.); Apol.
contra 7'heod. cap. i. 206 e"] ; the
heresy of Paul of Samosata, 407.

Matter, self-existent, some people say
that it is, 467.

Mediator, not the owner of that in
regard to which he mediates, 443.

Medicine, of Repentance, what its in-
gredients, 411; a, if removes dis-
ease utterly at once, has strength;
if needed continually, is weak,
448; not needed where no stroke,
449; bitter, gives first unpleas-
antness, then benefits, 503.

Mercifulness, untold beauty of, 513;
might of, ib.; specially belongs
to a Christian, ib. ; God first
showed forth, ib. See Almsgiv-
ing.

Milk, the lowlier doctrines, 404, 406;

cf. 398.

Mind, how the grace of the Spirit
gives it wings, 468; winged, it
soars above the devil's darts, ib.

Miracles, they who wrought, and
prophesied, and were denied; it
was probably the want of perse-
verance, 476; perhaps, too, they
were wicked while they wrought,
ib.

Money, the degradation of those who
give themselves to, 441 ; peril of
love of, 459, 460, 476; and slav-
ery to care of choice treasures,
459; address to Mammon, 442;
value for, a worse than Egyptian
bondage, 459; gold mere dirt,
480; angels would despise them
who love, ib.

Monks, or solitaries, not for them
alone Christ's precepts, but for
people living in the world, 386,
403; saints in life and in faith,
416; might of their life, 522;
some wanted to aid only, 417;
when beggars, called impostors,


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


549


422; sometimes communicate
yearly or after two years, 449.

Moses, compared with Christ, 389,
390; a part of the house, 390;
his faithfulness, 391 ; grace poured
on in his very babyhood, 483;
cared not for Palace of Egypt
when Heaven is before him, ib. ;
his flight was of faith, 484; less
than Joshua, 489, 490; tied from
dignity yet imperilled in discharge
of it, 520.

Mourners, hired, forbidden even to
come to a Christian funeral and
threatened, 387. See funerals.

Night, some spend in prayer, some in
deeds of evil, 438; prayer at,
490.

Novatians alluded to, 457.

Obedience, makes friends of God,
476; aids others too, 481; lack
of, worse than anarchy, 518; pun-
ishment follows, 519.

Of {iO the Father, 370, 371, 373, 385.

Oil, for lamps, is kindness, 498; cf.

513-

Old age, exceeding disgrace of a
wicked, 401; depends not on
years, but on virtue, 402 ; of sin,
repentance frees from, 410, 436;
impairs not beauty of soul, 498;
man, an emperor if he have all
his in subjection, 402.

Olympic games, interest excited by,
437; herald's cry at, 450; rii
tfxotov Kara ndvra (similarity in
all respects), 371.

Oppression, deeds of, and of defraud-
ing so great that many would
gladly have parted with life, 471 ;
see 480.

Orator, his special pains at the end
of his speech, 476.

Pain, here, 392, 477, 478, 508.

Painting, the outline a shadow, with
the colors an image, 447, 448.

Passion, patience disarms, 468; if in
a, we become very children, i6.

Passions, some are useful, 374.

Patience, 416,419 note, 459; Christ's
sufferings an aid to, 365, 383;
needed while things are still in
process of being subjected to our
King, 383; of fisherman and
husbandman, 417; of Abraham,
418; why God teaches it us, i/>.;
lost at very end when combat
even over, 462, 463; disarms
passion, 468; of the Hebrews,
483; need of much, 490.

Patriarchs, strangers to the whole
world, 471, 473, 474; and lived
as foreigners, 474; their faith
very persevering, 483.

Paul, St., Apostle of Gentiles, 363;
Jews ill-disposed to, ii. ; why
not sent to Jews, ii. ; once a Jew
himself, and holding with them,
has greater force thereby, 364;
why he wrote to them, 364, 365 ;
his love for them, id. ; for each.


4 1 6 ; his history after close of Acts,
364; his trade alluded to, 367;
(like his Master) leads up by
little steps, then down, 367, 370;
cf. 174, 365; his way of speak-
ing of the Son compared with
St. John's, 372, 373; (like his
Master) does not utter all, but
leaves to conscience of hearers,
378; is not particular in use of
phrases, ii. ; cites holy Scripture
anonymously to those who were
familiar with it, 382; his example
as an athlete, 392; transposes
his thoughts, 394 [cf. Si. Jrenaus,
iii. 7, 2, p. 217, O. T.] ; his mode
and in the Epistle to the Romans
compared, 403, 405, 424, 462;
here and in Epistle to the Gala-
tians, 405, 406, 415, 462; and in
Epistles to Corinthians, 406, 511,
514; to Thessalonians, 515; and
discourse to Athenians, 405;
leads his hearers on even to the
very hard, 405; by little and
little, 423, 429; mixes praise and
blame, 415, 416, 418, 461 ; his
praise of them, 416; passes not
away, 413; words of, words of
the Holy Ghost, of Christ, 413;
his fear of failing, 414; mixes
lowly and lofty, 433; expands
Prophet Jeremiah, 436; and
others lived in Heaven while
here, 445; praises of, 456; his
travail-pangs, 472; did not call
himself a stranger only, but dead
to the world, 473; allows not to
eat with the covetous, 480, 481 ;
nor drunkards, yet we disobey,
481 ; his use of term brother, 480,
481 ; not a trace of monastic life
in his time, 481 ; his great wealth
of thought, 487; his triumph
over troubles when now in twen-
tieth year of preaching, 494;
commanding simplicity of attire
utterly disobeyed in the very
Church, 497; ever gave thanks
in all his afflictions, ib. ; his apol-
ogy to the Hebrews, 520; his
deep love for them and prayers
and asking their prayers, ib. ; we
must imitate in his overcoming
all affliction for Heaven's love,
522.

Paul of Samosata, 371, 376, 407;
taught that God the Son has His
beginning from the holy Virgin,
407; his followers called Jews,
376 and note.

Peacock, beauty of, 513.

Perseverance, need of, when near the
goal, 398, 399; need of, 398, 476,
490; from examples, 476; want
of, probably cost those who had
prophesied and cast out devils
their crown, 476.

Peter, St., a common person may be
as, 453; praise of, 456; his tomb
known, 482; his penitence per-
fect, 507; God left, that he might
learn not to contradict the Mas-
ter, ib.; his special temptation


to be highminded, ib. ; his cour-
age afterward, ib.

Photinus, 370; taught same as Sabel-
lius, 407.

Physicians, taste food first for the sick
man, 384 ; why they say the lungs
are under the heart, 393; parts
of bodies that are grown callous
yield not to hands of, 394; mix
medicines of many ingredients,
one the essence of the medicine,
41 1; after deep incisions use
gentle remedies, 461 ; if he go
not forward to the end, his early
success but loss, 476; if despised
cannot avenge himself on his
patient, 519.

Playthings, sometimes offered to an
intelligent child, to show how he
cares for higher things, 471 ;
withheld if too eagerly desired,

479-

Pleasure, less if disappointment be
expected to follow, 503; that
brings despondency no pleasure,
ib.

Poor, the, a fellow-freeman, 421 ; will
stand by thee in the day of Doom,
thy Advocate, ib. ; neglected
while a dead body is richly
adorned, ib.; if he beg, called
impostor, 421, 422; ought to be
helped, for we always eat, our
children beg of us, 421; ought
to be helped without enquiry, for
we, too, say, remember not my
sins, 421, 422; the Saints of old
poor, yet very mighty, 452, 453;
who feed, feed Christ, 454; many
of, bitterly defrauded and op-
pressed, 471, 480; the rich most
truly, 480; if a poor man asked
to an entertainment by a de-
frauder therefore refused, the
other would be shamed, 481 ;
none too, to give the cup of
water, the two mites, to visit sick,
prisoners, 509; build our houses
in Heaven, 513; offerings of, ac-
cepted equally with gold, 514;
yea, of ten thousand talents, 378.

Poverty, not, but caring to be despised
for, makes us despicable, 374;
the Christian shines out more in,
than in riches, 374; it affords,
too, more pleasure, ib. ; we may
not be impatient of, 375; many
blessings of, 452, 459; makes
bold, 453; leads by the hand to
Heaven, ib. ; great independence
of, ib.; Christ called perfection
of virtue, ib.; an ill-omened
thing, ib. ; if voluntary, gives
great might, 453, 454; and trust
toward God, 454 ; every one afraid
of, 472; not painful with the fear
of God, 485; luxurious habits
make hated, 497; to be sought,
518.

Praise, to repudiate, one form of pride,
490.

Prayer, intense, one ingredient of re-
pentance, 412; heard through
alms, 420; no marvel if not


550


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


heard when we neglect those
who beg of us, 421 ; night-long
(xoi'mx'')' 43^; ^ great weapon,
437; special need of night and
morning, 437, 468; a certain, ut-
tered in act of tale-telling, 464;
intense, 468, 490, 521; we sin-
stained, if not heard at our first,
draw back, 485; watching in,
what, 490; a mighty weapon,
ib. ; made worthy one unworthy,
ib. ; some yawn and scratch
themselves at, ib. ; laugh during,
442; prevents sins, heals mis-
deeds, 490; f/". 509; need of, 490;
usually asked of them who love
us, 520.

Priest, our, not visible, under old
Covenant not visible, 455; in of-
ferings of Christians, each his
own, 420.

Priests, their aid toward forgiveness,
412; the, offer up the prayer of
all, 442 ; if a man call himself a,
enquire as not giving but receiv-
ing from him, 422; wicked, grace
works through, for sake of their
flock, themselves condemned,
476; may not be silent, ib. ;
grave responsibility of, 519. See
Clergy.

Promises, in what respect they of old
received them not, 470, 481, 482;
received by trusting thoroughly,
471; Christ's, not that we shall
have power to stay the sun and
moon, but that He and the
Father will dwell in us, 490.

Proof, continued after a person is sat-
isfied, wearies him, 488.

Proverb, a, 480.

Psalm, xxiii., xxxii., cxvi., sung at fu-
nerals, 386; vi., said every day,
442.

Punishments, 403; there not here,
391, 458, 473; given with bless-
ing here, that there may be no
account, 391 ; instances, ib. ; evil
of being without, alluded to, 374;
in store for the wicked, 396; to
the soul, too, 398 (see Soul) ;
much spared us, 412; use of,
426; we must exact from our-
selves, 508; greater to those who
have enjoyed good things here
without becoming better, 460;
will come, 463; as in dread of,
we grieve at leaving this life,
475; if we deny our sins, 508; if
clergy are disobeyed and weep,
we incur, 519.

Purity, of itself admits to the king-
dom, its absence takes to de-
struction, 476.

Race, foot, St. Paul uses for a simile, as
being easiest of the contests, 493.

Reasoning, faith opposed to, 465,
516; our reasonings like spider-
webs, 522 ; reasoning power
given to each is a talent, 504.

Repentance, 412; after Baptism, yet
remains to us, 457; a propitia-
tion, ib.; after Baptism, is of


grace, 400; sets free from old
age of sin, and makes strong, re-
news not the former brightness,
410; if used aright, will blot out
all sins, 412; in deepest peril can
deliver, ib. ; medicine of, con-
tains about nine ingredients,
almsgiving the most essential,
ib. ; necessity of strict, 426,490;
its might, 426 ; restores lost
beauty, so as even the King may
desire it, 436, 437; even from
worst deformity, 436; ours a
weak, 450; here of use, there of
no avail, 463, 464; why unavail-
ing Esau's, 506, 507; Cain's,
506; Judas', 507; sins too great
for, lb. ; St. Peter's, ib. ; King
David's, 507, 508; does not for-
get sins, ib. See Sins.

Repetition, use of, 409, 509.

Reproach, apt to pervert the soul and
darken the judgment, 461 ; sore
trial of, when in presence of
many, ib.; Christ endured, 484;
we must accept, thus we put
away, 490; makes our sins lighter
for us, ib. ; St. Paul does not al-
low the clergy, if despised, to
use, but to weep, 519.

Reproof, profitable to endure, 387;
bitterer than fire and knife; we
must learn from surgeon in us-
ing, 505 ; patience in giving, ib. ;
looking to the reward in store,
ib. ; not always immediate, 507.

Rest, God gives not full here, 470;
not here, 512.

Resurrection, preaching to heathen
of no avail while Christians by
unseemly grief at funerals con-
tradict, 385, 387; they believe it
not who give way to mad grief
at loss of friends, 386; some be-
lieve that some rise and others
do not, 455; aids to those who
believe not, 391 ; deceit not to
believe, 396; disbelief of, 407;
that there is, a part of our Con-
fession, 400; though not yet
here, hope realizes it in our soul,
463 ; at the doors, ib. ; Abel and
those of his time knew not of a,
467; yet of old the hope of it
given, 478; of all together, 509;
Christ's, 365, 373, 383, 411, 520.

Rewards, there, 391, 459, 463, 489;
cf. 484; to receive here an in-
sult, 489; if we are virtuous only
for, shall never be so, 431; dif-
ferences of, 432; given to thank-
fulness, 459, 460; who believe
not in, please not God, 467; we
may not despond of, 503.

Sabbath-day, meet occupations for,

what, 396.
Sabbath-rests, three, 393; the first

God's, the second Palestine, ib. ;

the third Heaven, 394, 396, 400 ;

the proof of this, 395, 396.
Sabellius, 370, 371; taught that

Father, Son, Spirit, are but one,

407.


Sacrifice, the Cross the One, 439, 449 ;

^/ 430. 434. 444. 452. 457. 487.
507; ours the memorial of that
One, 449; our, 517; Deacon's
cry. Holy things for the holy,
uttered after completion of, 450.
See Eucharist

Sacrifices, showed weakness by need-
ing repetition, 448, 451; the
weakness of, shown, and they
abolished ere Christ came, 45 1 ;
of Christians, 420; all their rites
heavenly, 434; their own souls,
420; shadowed out in Old Testa-
ment too, ib. ; the martyr's body
and soul, ib. ; voluntary poverty is
also a whole burnt-offering, ih.;
those of Cornelius, ib.

Saint, every Christian a, in faith,
416.

Saints, if weighed against whole world,
avail more, 475, 489; some say
we cannot be as the, 487; friends
of God, 475, 476, 489; how great
their virtue, 490; gladly wait for
us, 491, 492; made to shine by
affliction, 500, 501.

Salvation, each can aid others in the
way of, 504, 505; can aid even
more than teacher can, 504.

Saul, declined the Kingdom, yet
scaped not peril for managing it
ill, 520.

Scripture, Holy, Old and New Testa-
ments of one and the same, 366;
uses human expressions of God,
391 ; food, 406; experience of,
makes of full age, 406, 407; no
one attends to, 407; some do
not know existence of, ib. ; Holy
Ghost provided for preservation
of, ib. ; Scripture testimonies to,
ib. ; may not be known without
learning, 407, 408; people's ig-
norance of, 408; what the reader
in Church gives out when at the
desk to read, ib.; when dis-
persed, God inspired Ezra to col-
lect them, 407 ; to be heard with
fear, 413; Old Testament prefig-
ures Christian sacrifices, 420; say
no more than needed, 467 ; texts
commented on or explained : —

Ps. vi. 7 450

XXV. 7 401

xxxii. 4 414

xl. I 420

xlv. 10 (forget) 437

1 1 (thy beauty) 436, 498

13 496

lii. 8 513

bcviii. 13 513

Ixxvii. 2 468

ciii. 5 410

Prov. xiv. 29 456, 468

xxiv. II 417

Isa. i. 16-18 426

Mai. i. 14 514

St. Matt. V. 42 42'

vii. 7 468

14 S0«

22 476

X. 38 494

xviii. 18 387


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


551


St. Matt, xxiii. 2, 3 519

XXV, 2 509

8 498

>5 504

St. Mark xii. 44 495

St. Luke vi. 36 422

X. 30 W 4«7

xvi. 9 369

25 39'

St. John viii. 35 481

xvi. 33 400

Rom. xii. I 420

xiii. 14 502

I Cor. V. II 480, 481

vi. 9, 10 504

vii. 23 481

ix. 26 400

X- 13 499

2 Cor. iv. 17 (light affliction) . 494

xi. 2 498

xii. 9 517

Gal. vi. 2 505

Eph. vi. 14, 17 393

Phil. ii. 6, 7 (of slave and of

God) 372

Col. i. 20 447

I Tim. ii. 9 496, 497

Sepulchres, see Tombs.

Sermons, applause at, 409.

Servants, two are enough, 495; lady
walking out should not be at-
tended by many, ib.; angels do
not have, ib.

Service in church, every day, 450;
increases love, 455, 456; benefit
of being together in, 504, 516.

Seventy, the, translated (ordered of
the Holy Ghost) Scriptures into
Greek, 407.

Shame, in the wicked their own wit-
ness against themselves, 474; be-
fore men, not before God, 508.

Sheep, treatment of the sickly, 450.

Silence, peril of, to ministers of the
Word, 476.

Silk, a superfluity, 496.

Sin, a very plague, 441; in Heb. xi.
25, holding back from affliction,
483; to, belongs ease, 484; its
bitterness causes some to pine
away, 506; easily overcome if we
will, 493; the sole disgrace,
though none think so, 496; the
sole evil, 518; it is a duty to keep
others from sin even if by force,
after in other ways and by beg-
ging his help for one's self, 505 ;
King David long bewailed his,
507; may lie hindered even from
a lower motive, by degrees lead-
ing to a higher, 505 ; abstaining
from, a due observance, 516.

Sins, the lesser not a spot or wrinkle,
but far worse, 368; not small,
490; recoil on the doer, 368;
parent of unbelief, 394 ; notwith-
standing, hope remains, while
to-day lasts, 396; we may not de-
spair after, 396, 426; he who
seeks pardon for sins of youth
must not sin when old, 401 ; they
who are old in, repentance frees,
410; all can be blotted out by
right repentance, 412; must be


confessed one by one, 412, 508;
aflliction wipes out, 494; confes-
sion lessens, 508; we must re-
member our, 412, 437, 507
sqq.; if we remember, God for-
gets, 508; remembering, helps
cure, ib.; great help of remem-
bering, 473, 508, 509; punish-
ment if we deny, 508; pity if we
confess, ib. ; called thorns., 414,
415; not enough to remove,
treatment also needed, 414; if
we cut out, may enjoy the good
things innumerable, 415; diffi-
culty of cleansing away, 426;
almsgiving and defending the
wronged do it, (A,' f/. 412; if we
begin, God cleanses, 426; of ig-
norance none is free from, 439;
we should mourn over others',
442; and keep silence as to them,
464; to tell our own to God and
our friends, ib. ; prevented or
healed by prayer, 490 ; one
enough to cast us out of the king-
dom, and they are many, ib.; to
confess, not humility but candor,
ib. ; some too great for repent-
ance, 507; remembering always
our own, we forget wrongs from
others, 508; we must ofler to
God, 447, 508; penitence, prayer,
deeds of mercy, wash away, 509 ;
by mourning our, we draw God
to us, 519; putting away, what,
448.

Sinners, if others call us, we must not
be angry, 491; cf. 507.

Slave-dealers, 495.

Slaves, esteemed, the Master some-
times called after, 475, 476; two
suffice for a family willing to part
with superfluities, 495.

Sleep, some indulge in by day, we
spiritually, 474.

Son, force of the word, 367, 368, 373,
375. 385. 390, 430; the Son and
sons contrasted, 384, 385.

Soul, punished, 398,459; suffers, 396;
in its vigor when a person is
aged, 401 ; when one is young it
is subject to fevers, ib.; purified
by Blood of Christ, 440; its eye,
how to make quick and beauti-
ful, 450; mingled with soul in-
creases love, 455; might of a
great, 456; in calamity apt to be
impatient, 459; reproach a sore
trial of the, 461 ; and scorning
and jests, 493; covetousness de-
grades, 480; eating at banquets
of the overreaching destroys,
ib. ; and defiles, 481; striving in
prayer to God, 490; wrestles in
theater of Heaven, 496; the well-
adorned, has God for its Lover,
and place with the choirs of an-
gels, 498; virgin if pure, even
though married, 496, 498; it the
Lord seeks after, 498; exhausted,
how refreshed, 499; made col-
lected through affliction, 500;
enervated through luxury, 501 ;
shares it if body be effeminate,


ib. ; must be forced to remember
its sins, 508; in tribulation liable
to despond, 516; must be braced
to receive the impulses of the
Spirit, 521, 522.

Spirit, Holy, see God the Holy Ghost.

Starvation, no one dies of, except by
his own will, 422.

Strangers, Patriarchs, to this world,
47'. 473 •f??-.' King David 475;
we to our own country, 473,
475; to the world if we, God to
be called our God, 475, 476.

Substance, no word will express, even
of angel, far less of God, 372.

Suffering, perfects, 384, 392, 404; is
acauseof salvation, 384,' cf.\o^;
we are to rejoice in our own, as
paying the penalty of sins, 391;
helps to wipe them out, 494; use
of, 426, 494; it is only our own
which moves us, 426; amid, we
may be calm within, as the sky
when overclouded, 445 ; of Abel
preaches beyond all speech, 466;
of them of old during their whole
lives we have no idea of, 49!,
494; all can be borne if we be
approved of Heaven, 494, 495,

Suicide, some long for death, and only
the fear of God withholds them,

5'2-
Surgeons, their mingled gentleness

and firmness, 505.
Suspect, we are apt to, 422.
Swearing, 477.

Talents, teacher has five, learner one,
504; earth wherein single talent
IS buried, the bad heart, ib.

Teacher, of grammar, must make boy
master the things to be learnt,
409; if he repeat the alphabet,
it is not to teach himself, 490;
has five talents, learner one, 504;
if he teach a child heedless, one
is called who punishes the child,

519-

Tears, help wash away sins, 442, 509;
one ingredient in medicine of
repentance, 412, 426; of waihug
and mourning, they worthy who
choose to fail of the things to
come, 471; St. Chrysostom calls
for, 472; of Christ, 442.

Temple, its magnificence, 446; its
wonders, 510; its being One,
446; as the Jewish was for whole
world, so is Christ our Priest in
the temple of Heaven, 447; of-
fering even of hair accepted for,
514.

Temporal things, we seek first, and
lose both them and Heaven, 408;
God gives, when He sees us
prefer spiritual things, 460, 479;
given as a refreshment, 470; often
possessed, not as His gift, but by
fraud, 460; Patriarchs of old
loved their Home, cared not for
these, 471 ; so magnificent, ib. ;
who seek, lose them and Divine
things; who prefer Divine obtain
both, 486; soon go, 5 1 2; when


55*


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


we mind, the grace of the Spirit
leaves, 521. ^ee Human things.

Temptation, different kinds of con-
duct under, 392; terrible attack
of, on young men met by ascetic
practices, 403; the noblest had
to pass through, 416; stronger
in time of calamity, 459; shall
be trifling, if we hold fast to
God, 494.

Thanksgiving, we must bear all with,
to attain the true joy, 442, 517;
as St. Paul did, 517; to God,
both for comfort and afflictions,
518; brings untold blessings,
459, 460; without, we cannot
serve God, 514; our offering, 5 1 7 ;
offered with a contrite mind, ib. ;
due to God the Son, ib.

Thoughts, some beyond power of ex-
pression, 370, 372.

Through or by (Sio), not limited to
the Son, but used of the Father,
too, 384; cf. on Galatians, pp.

4.S-

To-day, 373, 394 sqq., 399, 515.

Tombs, why they of old cared for
their, 482; of Sts. Peter, Paul,
John, Thomas, known, of rest un-
known, ib. ; where any one's may
be, the earth is the Lord's, ib.

Tongue, why given us, 368.

Trial, without, we cannot know our-
selves, 380; life full of those who
cause, and thus strengthen us,
456; God exercises His athletes
with, 478; in, bearing with evil a
great weapon, 504.

Trinity, see God the Father, God the
Son, God the Holy Ghost.

Truth our girdle, 450.


Unbelief, 469, 471 ; arises sometimes
from faint heart, 416.

Vainglory, source of evils, 490; we
act for, 496.

Virgin souls, pure even though mar-
ried, 496, 498; literal virginity a
mere shadow of, 498; the true,
ib.

Virtue, like bitter medicine, 503.

Virtues, to practice one by one, care-
ful in learning one not to lose
another, 476, 477.

Wants, who has few, preferred, 374,

495 ^??-

Water, taken, lessens not fountain;
so works remain to doer, 368;
fevered person drinking much,
not high-minded, 373; quenches
hot iron, so forbearance anger,
468.

Wealth, peril of love of, 476; peril of,
518. See Money, Poor, Poverty,
Covetous.

Wicked, sometimes has here the re-
ward of a few good deeds, there
utter punishment, 391 ; instances
of, ib. ; God wills that His chil-
dren show compassion for the,
417; deride and condemn their
like, 474; thereby judge them-
selves, ib.

Wickedness, by remembering God we
forget, 437; of alms from ill-
gotten gains, 481.

Wife, a great good and great evil,

459-
Will, with, nothing difficult, 432; not
even to overcome sin, 493; in-
clines readily to ill, 425; great


power of, not apart from action,
445,446; two kinds of, 451,452;
alone needed, 477; of it comes
faith, 522.

Wine, need of moderation in, 402.

Women, breed of, in towns weak
through delicate habits, 501; in
the country stronger than men
in towns, ib.

Words, human, fail to express God,
Him must we praise, 370;
thoughts not to be expressed by,
370, 372; our, bare, God's not
so, 372.

Works, good or ill, the doer first reaps
the fruit of, 368; who holds
the Faith and does right, of full
age, 409; dead, a grievous of-
fense, 44 1; our work and God's
act combine, 455 ; God's grace
preceding, our work following,
476; good, need of, 457; aid
from, 447; the wealth of, 450;
of teachers, their power, 455; ill,

457-
World, to be one day transfigured,
376; avails not weighed against
the saints, 475, 489; nor against
the soul's beauty, 498.

Yawning, at prayers, 490.

Yonder, Heaven, 391, 397, 398, 408,
444, 474, 480, 490 ; are the
Rewards, the punishments, 391 ;
the Rewards, ib. ; the Rcsl, ,

477- i I

Young man, has excuse only in things I '
that need experience, not cour- >
age and effort, 402; ascetic hab-
its his safeguard against strong
temptation, 403.


HOMILIES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


Ex.


Gen. i. 3 . .
iii. 9 .
iii. lo .
iii. 1 6 .
iii. 1 8, 19
iv.4 .
iv. 7 .
iv. 9 .
iv. 10 .
vi. 2 .
vi. 5 (?)
vi. 9 .
xii. I ,
xii. 7 .
xiii. 15
XV. 5 .
XV. 6 .
xviii. 15
xviii. 21
xxi. 12.
xxii. I .
xxvii. 41
xxviii. 20
xlvii. 9
ii. 14
iii. 6 . .
vi. 9 . .
xix. 18 .
xix. 19 .
xix. 20 .
XX. 19 ,
XX. 21 .
XXV. 23 .
^um. xi. 12 .
xvii. 12
Deut. vi. 7 .
xxii. 9
xxii. 15
xxviii. 23
cf. xxix. 1
cf. xxxiii.
osh. X. 12 .
! Sam. xii. 8
xii. 12
xvi. II, 12
xxiv. 17
Kings xviii. 18
ob i. 21 . .
ii. 4 . . .
ii. 5. . .
n. 9. . .


PACE

• 372
. 508
. 508

• 396

• 396
. 466
. 466
. 508

. sio

. SOI

• 391
. 500

• 477
469. 477

• 389

• 47'

. 522

• 47"

• 39«

• 477

• 478
. 506

• 452
482, 501

• 484
. 476

• 423
. 510

: ^Js
510,511

• S'o

• 5H
. 380

• 472

• 407
. 366

• 517

• 435
! . 506

! . 510

. 489

. 460

. 508

• 490

• 456

• 452

459. 5'8

• 385
. 459
. 459


PACE

Job ii. 10 . .

• • 459

xxxiv. 3

. 406

Ps. i. 2 . . .

• 407

II. 4. 5 • ■

■ 377

ii. 8 . . .

. 366

11. II . . .

• 413

iv. 5 . . .

. 420

v.. 5 . . .

• 463

VI. 6 . . 412,

442, 507

VI. 7 . . .

• 450

Vll. 12 . .

• 398

ix. 16 . .

• S>7

X. 13 . . .

• 394

XI. C . . .

4.70

xii. 4 . . .

. 394

xiv. 2. .

"^QI

xvi. 4 .

. A.'VI

xvii. 3, 4. .

■ 437

XVIII. 9 . .

• 5"

xviu. 24 . .

. 520

. 4^6

xxiii. I . .

. 459

xxni. 4 . .

. 386

XXIV. I . .

. 482

XXV. 7 . .

. 401

XXV. 18 . .

• 391

XXV. 19 . .

• 391

xxxii. 4 . .

• 414

XXXII. 5 . .

412,464

XXXII. 7 . .

. 386

XXXIV. II

. 408

XXXIV. 12

. 408

XXXIV. 13

• 368

XXXIV. 13, 14

. 408

XXXVI. I, 2 . .

• 394

XXXVII. 5 . .

. 508

xxxviii. 7

• 393

xxxix. 12

474. 475

xl I . . .

. d20

xl. 6, 7 . .

. 420

xlii. 6 . .

• 484

xlii. 10 . .

. 461

xlv. 10, II .

• 436

xlv. II . .

436, 497

xlv. 13 . .

• 496

xlix. 6* . .

. 460

xlix. 7 . .

369. 463

xlix. 8 . .

. 509

420
4«7
455
452

* See same form of citation in St, Chrysostom on Romans, p. 459.


Ps.l. 3 .

1.14 .

1. 20 .

1. 23 .
Ii. I .

Ii. 10 .
Ii. 16 .
Ii. 17 .
Iii. 8 .
Iv. 12

ixiii. 6
Ixv. 9 .
Ixviii. 13
Ixxvii. 2
Ixxviii. 34
Ixxxii. 8
xc. 2 .
xc. 10
xciv. 7
xcv. 2
xcvii. 3
cii. 9 .
ciii. 5
ex. I .
cxii. 2
cxii. 9
cxvi. 7
cxviii. 15
cxix. 7
cxix. 103
cxxi. 3
cxxi. 4
cxxvii. I
cxxviii. I
cxxxii. 12
cxlv. 8 .
cxlvi. 9 .
Prov. iii. 2i .
iii. 27 .
viii. 22
X. 4 .
xii. 28
xiv. 29
xvi. 6 .
xviii. 3
xviii. 17
xviii. 19
xxi. 13
xxiv. II
xxvii. 17
XXX. 8 .


PAGE

. 472

. 420

• 464
. 420

• 5>3
372. 426

• 45'
412,420

• 5'3
. 461

• 437
. 414

• 513
. 468

• 5'7
. 400

• 372

• 463

• 394

• 463

• 472
. 412
. 410
. 400
. 468

• 453
. 386
. 512

• S'7

• 407

• 425

• 425

• 507
. 460


• S'3

• S'3
. 378

• S'4

• 375
. 452

• 490
456, 468

. 412

• 394
. 412

455. 505


PAGE

Ecclcs. i. 2 . .

• 442

11. 4 . .

■ 442

u. 6, 7 .

■ 442

ix. 16 .

. 452

xii. 8 .

• 442

Isa. i. 2 . . .

39', 472

1. 12. . .

■ 45'

i. 16. . .

. 426

i. 16, 17 .

. 408

1. 17. . .

. 426

i. 17, 18 .

. 426

iv. 6 . . .

V. 2 . • ,

, . A'l±

v. 6 . . .

• . aiA

xi. 0 . . .

xxvi. 12

■ 391

XXXV. 10 .

396,473

xl. 2 . .

• 39"

xliii. 25 . .

■ • 437

xliii. 26. .

4' 2. 437

cf. xlviii. 10

• 452

liii. 9 . .

• 430

Ivii. 17, 18

. . 412

Ixv. 17 . .

• • 436

Jer. ui. 3 . .

• 44'

IV. 14 . .

. 426

VI. 20 . .

. . 420

vu. 4 . .

. . 446

vm. 4 . .

. 412

ix. I . . .

All

■ . 48?

Ezek. xvi. 49 .

. . 501

xxviii. 3 .

. 486

xxxm. II

• 452

Dan. ii. 30 . .

485, 486

ii. 46 . .

. . 48s

iv. 8 . .

. . 486

v. 17 . .

. 486

V. 29 . .

. 486

Hos. iv. 2 . .

■ 47'

vi. 6 . .

. 420

xn. 10. .

. 366

Amos V. 23 . .

. 420

vi. 6 . .

• 4'7

vm. II .

406, 4'4

Mic. vi. 2 . .

• 39'

vi. 8 . .

. 420

vn. I, 2 .

• 472

Mal. i. 14 . .

• 5'4

iv. I . .

• 472

554


EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Wisdom iv. 8, 9 . . 401

Matt. xxi. 43 .

• • 377

John V. 23 . .

- • 517

Acts xxi. 20 ... 364

Ecclus. i. 22 . .

374. 393

xxi. 44 .

• • 377

vi. 42 . .

• • 493

xxi. 20, 21

363

ii. 12 .

• -^ss

xxii. 29 .

• • 407

vi. 67 . .

• • 494

xxi. 21 . .

36

4,520

ii. 18 .

• 4S»

xxiii. 2, 3

• • 5'9

vii. 12

• • 493

xxii. 18 .

363

iii. 30 .

• 4«2

xxiii. 12

• • 479

vii. 42 .

• • 493

xxii. 19, 2C

.

363

V. 6 . .

. 458

xxiv. 14 .

• • 463

vii. 52

• • 493

xxii. 21

363

ix. 15 .

■ 407

xxiv. 21

. . 463

viii. 12 .

• • 37'

xxiii. 5

365

X. 28

. 480

XXV. 8

• • 498

viii. 18 .

• • 443

Rom. i. 12 . .

,

465

xvi. 3 .

475. 489

XXV. 12 .

. 498, 509

viii. 35 .

. . 481

i. 18 . .

414, 472

xix. 10

■ 464

XXV. 26

• • 509

viii. 42 .

• • 403

i. 27 . .

378

xix. II

• 464

XXV. 31, 3

2 . . 509

viii. 48 .

• 493. 494

iii. 8 . .

431

XX. 29 .

• 453

XXV. 33

• ■ 509

ix. 4 . .

• • 474

iii. 31 .

.

409

xxviii. 3 .

. 412

XXV. 34

. . 509

X. 18 .

• 404. 493

V. 10 . .

.

5'3

xxviii. 25 .

• 464

xxv. 34-3

6 . . 454

X. 20 . .

• • 493

V. 14 . .

382

xxxiv. 22 .

. 480

XXV. 40 .

. . 368

xi. 5 . .

• • 383

V. 15 . .

383

Song of Three Chil-

XXV. 41

• • 509

xi. 26 .

. . 418

V. 20 .

.

366

dren, 6 . . . 485

XXV. 42

• • 509

xii. 23 .

• • 383

vi. I, 2

.

411

Hist. Susannah, 42 . 380

XXV. 45

. . 368

xii. 25

• • 477

vi. 4 .

410

Bel and Dragon, 24 . 486

xxvi. 28

• • 444

xii. 49

• • 403

vi. 5 .

410

38 . 48s

xxvi. 38,

39 • • 404

xiii. 16

• „• 365

vi. 6 .

410

Matt. 1. 20 . . . . 440

xxvi. 41

• • 392

xiii. 34

•381,443

vi. 9 .

411

i. 21 .

. 389

xxvi. 68

• • 493

xiii. 35

.381,506

viii. 3 4

DO,

428, 436

iv. 6 .

■ 484

xxvi. 75

• • 507

xiv. 2 .

• 365. 481

viii. 7

452

V. 3 .

■ 452

xxvii. 39

. . 484

xiv. 15

• • 476

viii. 15

385

V. II, 12

• 5'8

xxvii. 40

■ 484. 493

xiv. 17

• • 521

viii. 18

494

V. 20 .

406, 456

xxvii. 63

• • 493

xiv. 23

• 445> 490

viii. 24

39'

V. 22 . 3

7«

374. 490

xxviii. 19

. . 389

xiv. 26

• • 435

viii. 25

391

V.42 .

. 421

Mark ii. 5 .

. . 389

xiv. 27

. . 506

viii. 26

5'

',517

V.44 .

■ 456

vi. 18 .

• . 452

xiv. 28

• 403. 404

viii. 32

383

vi. 24 .

• 442

xi. 25 .

. . 412

xiv. 30

• 384. 493

viii. 34

429

vi-33-

408, 470

xii. 42

.509,514

XV. 14

.471,476

viii. 35

445

vii. I . 1.

16

464, 519

xii. 44

• • 495

XV. 16

• • 493

vni. 37
viii. 38, 3

494

vii. 3 .

• 5'9

Luke i. 2 .

• • 379

XV. 22

• • 414

9

445

vii. 6 .

. 458

ii. 26

. . 469

XV. 26

• - 443

ix. 3 •

364

vii. 7 .

. 468

V!. 25

• • 442

XV. 27(?)

• • 443

ix. 15 .

425

vii. 14

5oJ.5'7

vi. 36

•422,513

xvi. 20

. . 501

ix. 16 .

425

vii. 22

. 476

X. 20

• • 453

xvi. 28

- • 375

ix. 19.

425

vii. 23

. 476

X. 30

• . 417

xvi. 33 4

00, 463, 477,

xi. 4 .

469

vii. 24

• 419

".34

• • 417

494. 501

xi. 13, 14

363

viii. 20

452,491

"•35

• • 417

xvii. 1 1

• • 455

xii. I .

420

X. 9, 10

. 452

X.37

• . 417

xvii. 19

■ • 447

xii. 5 .

394

X. 16 .

. 504

xi.8

• • 490

xvii. 20

• • 443

xii. 18

5°4

x. 18 .

• 477

xi. 15

• • 379

xvii. 21

• • 381

xii. 20

479

X. 24 .

• 493

xi. 41

. . 412

xvii. 24

• 443. 450

xiii. lo

456

X. 25 .

• 493

xii. 42

• . 380

xviii. 23

• • 493

xiii. 1 1 366, 455, 462

X.36 .

• 477

xiii. 34. 3

5 • • 377

xix. 37

• • 509

xiii. 14 403, 432, 502

X. 38 .

477. 494

xiv. 27-3

3 • • 477

XX. 23

• • 434

xiv. 10 . . . 473

X. 42 .

. 509

xvi. 9 .

• -369.397

Acts i. II .

• - 377

XV. 4 .

• • . 407

xi. 8 .

. SO'

xvi. II

• . 380

ii. 5, 9, 10

. . 446

XV. 25

. • • 365

xii. 24

. 493

xvi. 25

• • 391

ii. 36 .

• 367. 375

I Cor. i. 17 .

. . . 364

xiii. 3 .

• 375

xvi. 26

• • 509

ii. 46 .

• • 379

ii. 9 .

• 370. 397.

xiii. 6 .

. 414

xvii. 10

• •373.485

iii. 6 .

• • 452. 454

471. 495

xiil 17

. 481

xvii. 26, ;

l^ . . 469

iii. 26 .

- - - 389

ii. II

• • 450

xiii. 22

. . 414

xviii. 6

• • • 490

iv. 32 .

- - 455

ii. 14

. 522

xiii. 41, 4

2

• 429

xviii. II

• • 464. 490

V. 20 .

- - • 377

iii. 2 .

. 406

xiii. 55

• 493

xviii. 13

• • • 490

V. 41 .

. . . 462

iii. 3 .

. 406

XV. II

• 5'6

xix. 27

• • • 377

vii. 5 .

• - - 477

iii. lo

• 409

XV. 19

. 426

xxi. 2 .

. • 369

vii. 34 .

. . . 490

iii. 12

• 409

XV. 26, 2;

• ■ 490

xxii. 19

• • • 449

vii. 51 .

. . . 45'

iii. 22

• 377

xvi. 18

• 463

xxii. 31, .

52 . • 507

vii. 53 .

- - • 378

iv. 7 .

• 473

xvi. 24

. . 392

John i. I

• • • 372

X. 4 .

. . . 420

iv. 10

• 494

xviii. 15

• • 387

••3 •

• • ■ 372

xi. 29 .

• • • 491

iv. II

• 494

xviii. 1 6

. . 387

i-4 .

• • . 372

xii. 5 .

• • • -^55

iv. ii-i

• 494

xviii. 17
xviii. 18

. . 387

i. 10 .

• • • 375

xii. 22, 23

. . 486

iv. 13

. 494

. . 387

i. II .

• • • 484

xiii. 26

. • • 389

V. 5 .

• 3?1

xviii. 20

• • '^SS

i. 15 .

. • . 368

xiii. 41

• . • 442

V. 6 .

. 506

xix. 21

• 453. 5 '8

i. 17 .

• • • 378

xiv. 12

. . . 486

V. II

.' 480, 481

xU. 23

• • '*53

ii. 19 .

• • • 404

xiv. 15

. . . 485

vi. 7.

• 459. 479

xix. 24

. . S18

iii. 20 .

• • • 394

XV. 10 .

• • • 436

vi. 9, 10

• . 504

xix. 29

■ 470.479

iii. 34 .

■ -376.440

xvii. 30, 3

I . . 405

vii. 7

• 446, 45'

XX. 18, IC

■ • 404

iv. 24 .

. . . 420

xviii. 17

■ - • 365

vii. 14

. . 416

XX. 26

• 479

V. 21 .

. . . 429

xix. 6 .

. . . 4'o

vii. 23

. . 481

xxi. 40

. . 378

v. 22

.

• •371.429

XX. 24 .

. . . 385

vii. 29

!75

.4C

>3. 455

EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS : INDEX OF TEXTS.


555


PAGE

PACK

PACE

PACE

. vii. 31

• 375. 403

Gal. ii. 8 . . .

• . 363

2 Thess. iii. 13 . . . 421

Heb. vii. 18. . .434.436

viii. 6

. . 384

ii. 9 . . .

• • 36s

I Tim. ii. 6 .

. . 404

vii. 19. 434.436.439.

viii. II

. . . 506

ii. 10 . .

• 365

ii.9.

.496,497

454

ix. 15

• ■ 494

iii. 4 . .

•405.415

iv. 14

• 504

viu. 3 .... 430

ix. 26

. 392, 401

iii. 19 . .

• • 378

iv. 15

. 407

viii. 7 . 378, 436, 439

ix. 27

.414,517

iv. 18 . .

■ • 374

V. s .

• 490

viii. 10 . . . 428

X. 4 .

. . 484

iv. 19 . .

412, 462,

V. II

• 452

viii. 13 . 378,454,

X. 10

. . 514

472, S°7

V. 13

• 464

522

X. II

■ • 407

iv. 20 . .

. . 406

V. 14

4S«.4S2

IX. 10 . .

. 428

X. 12

• • 414

V. 4 . . .

• 507

V. 20

ix. II . .

• 454

X. 13

392. 494.

v. 7 . . .

405, 415

vi. 8

■ ; 496

ix. 12 . .

• 454

499

V. 10 . .

405.415

vi. 10

• 476

ix. 24 . .

• 440

X. 27

. . 481

vi. 2 . . .

• 50s

2 Tim. i. 7 .

. 38s

X.S . .

• 454

XI. 30

• • 391

vi. 10 . .

• 417

ii. 12

. 396

X. 12 . .

• 430

xii. 7

• 379. 380

vi. 14 . .

• 473

ii. 25, 2

6

• 417

x. 14 . .

■ 457

xii. 18

■ • 379

Eph. ii. 6 . .

. 384

iii. 12

• 391

X. 20 . 438

440,457

xii. 31

• 374. 381

ii. 7 . .

• . 384

iii. 16

• 407

X. 22 . .

. 462

xiii. I, 2

■ ■ 381

ii. 13 . .

. 388

iv. 6

• 364

X. 25 . .

457. 504

xiii. 3

. . 381

iii. 3, 4 .

. 520

iv. 16

■ 364

X. 31 • .

. 461

xiii. 5

• . 456

iii. 6 . .

• 394

Heb. i. I, 2 .

• 423

X. 32 . 398,465,499,

xiii. 12

• • 493

iv. 29 . .

. 368

i. 2

• 370

500

XV. 32

■ . 442

V. 3 • .

• 477

i. 5 .

. 366

X. 34 . . . 365, 483

XV. 33

• • 459

V. 4 . .

442, 477

1. 5. 6, 7.

10

. 382

X. 37 •

365

XV. 52

. . 510

V. 5 . .

387. 442

i. 10 .

• 37«

X. 38 .

465

XV. 58

• • 425

V. 27 . 368,

436, 498

i. 13 •

366, 383

xi. I .

46s

xvi. 4

. . 365

V. 30 . .

• 394

i. 14 .

. 388

xi. 4 .

510

i. 22 .

. . 410

vi. 11 . .

• 445

i. 15 .

• 433

xi. 13 .

418

iii. 13

. . 511

vi. 12 . .

• 392

11. I .

• 365

XI. 34 .

489

iii. 18

. . 5"

vi. 14 . .

392. 393

ii. 14 .

■ 388

xi. 37. 38

473

iv. 17

• • 494

vi. 17 . .

• 393

ii. 18 .

. 391

xi. 38 .

466

iv. 18

• 445.5'4

vi. 18 . .

. 402

iii. 6 .

389, 393

xi. 39, 40

418

V. 4 .

• • 475

Pliil. i. 18 . .

• 496

iii. 12 .

365. 396

xii. 12.

365. 399.

vi. 2 .

. . 400

ii. 6, 7 .

• 372

iii. 13 .

• 5°4

506

vi. 4, S

• • 494

ii. 7 . .

• 513

iv. 14 .

• 405

xii. 12, 13 . . 365

vi. 8 .

• • 494

ii. 9, 10 .

• 493

V. I .

. 405

xii. 13.

. S06

vi. 10

.452,494

ii. 14 . .

. 514

V. 5 . .

. 406

xii. 14

•5'4.5'S

vi. 16

• ■ 444

iii. 19 . .

480, 501

v. 6 .

406, 454

xii. 16

• 5«4

viii. 5

. . 416

iii. 20 . .

• 444

v. 7 .

. 406

xii. 28

. . S16

viii. 12

• • 514

iv. 5, 6 .

366,455

V.8 . .

• 419

xii. 29

. 510

X. 5 .

• • 378

^ , ■'''■ "> • ■

• 370

V. II . .

406,415
• 398

xiii. 2

. 422

xi. 2 .

■ . 498

Col. 1. 20

423. 447

V. 11, 12

xiii. 4

• 504

xi. 24, 2(

) . . 494

ii!-s, • •

• 459

V. 12 . 365, 408, 414,

xiii. 7

. 5'9

xi. 26

• ■ 494

111. 16 . .

• 407

415, 424

xiii. 9

. . 406

xii. 2

• • 494

I Thess. ii. 14 .

365, 466

V. 13 .... 409

xiii. 13

• 365

xii. 8, 9

. . 518

iv. 13.

. 386

vi. 9 . . .388,405

xiii. 16

. . 420

xii. 8-10

• • 494

iv. 18 .

380, 504

vi. 10 . . . . 365

xiii. 23

. 364

xii. 9

• . 499

V. II .

380, 504

vi. 12 . . .365,506

James v. 13 .

■ 386

xii. 10

. . 518

V. 13 .

• 515

vi. 19 . 429, 438, 440

V. 15.

. 412

4 . .

. . 404

V. 14 .

• 396

vi. 20 . . . . 423

I Pet. n. 22 .

• 493

6 . .

.406,415

2 Thess. i. 6, 7 .

■ 378

vii. 1 1 . . . . 434

Jude 19 . , .

. 46s

18 .

. • 494

iii. 10 .

. 421

vii. 16. 4

34

439. 454

DDiUUi


«

I


BR 60 .S4 1890

V.14 snc


A Select library of the
Nicene and post-Nicene
AMZ-7369 (mcsk)


UvCJH^^
