Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, Vol. 14: The Seven Ecumenical Councils
Philip Schaff & Henry Wace (eds.), various translators (1890)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

A SELECT LIBRARY


OF


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH
Scconb Serice

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES


VOLUMES I. -VII,
UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D. and HENRY WAGE, D.D.

Professor of Church History in the Principal of King's College.

Union Theological Seminary , Neiv York ' . London.

IX CONNECT/ON WITH A NU.MBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE

AND AMERICA


VOLUME XIV.


THE SEVEN ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

OXFORD AND LONDON

PARKER & COMPANY

1900


CHARLES SCRIBxN'ER'S SONS


f/ ^

[( Sl? 2 5 1963


^tffsfjy OF tO^"^

81)0582


V,


V-


?^0


TKinV niRECTOKY

PKINTlNii AM) BitOKIUNDING COMPANY

NEW YORK


THE SEVEN ECUMENICAL COUNCILS


OF THE UNDIVIDED CHURCH.


THEIR CANONS AND DOGMATIC DECREES,

TOGETHER WITH THE CANONS OF ALL THE LOCAL SYNODS WHICH
HAVE RECEIVED ECUMENICAL ACCEPTANCE.


EDITED WITH NOTES GATHERED FROM THE WRITINGS OF THE

GREATEST SCHOLARS

BV

HENRY R. PERCIVAL, M.A., D.D.


CONTENTS


Preface,. vii

General Introduction, xi

1. Method of Treatment, xi.

2. Concerning Ecumenical Councils ii5 General, xi.

3. The Number of tlie Ecumenical Synods, xv.

Biographical Introduction, xviii

Appended Note on the Eastern Editions of Synodical Literature, xxiii

A Bibliographical Index of the Printed Editions of the Canons of the Apostles and

of the Councils in the Slavonic and Russian Languages, xxiii, xxv

Excursus on the History of the Roman Law and its Relation to the Canon Law, . . xxix


PAGE

The First Ecumenical Council — The

First Council of Nice, a.d. 325, . . 1

Historical Introduction, .... 2

The Nicene Creed, 3

Excursus on the Word Honiousios, . . 3
Excursus on the Words yewrj^ei'Ta 6v ttoitj-

^evra, . . . . . • . 4

The Canons of 318 Holy Fathers assembled

in the City of Nice, in Bithynia, . • 8
Excursus on the Use of the word "Canon," 9
Excursus on the Word Trpo<T(pepetv, . . 13
Excursus on the Extent of the Jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Rome over the Suburbi-
carian Churches, . . . . .16
Excursus on the Rise of the Patriarchate of

Jerusalem, 18

Excursus on the Chorepiscopi, . . .21
Excursus on the Public Discipline or Ex-

omologesis of the Early Church, . . 25
Excursus on the Communion of the

Sick, 30

Excursus on the Translation of Bishops, . 33

Excursus on Usury 36

Excursus on the Deaconess of the Early

Church, 41

Excursus on the Number of the Nicene

Canons, 43

The Captions of the Arabic Canons Attrib-
uted to the Council of Nice, . . .46
Proposed Action on Clerical Celibacy, . 51
The Synodal Letter. . . . \ .53
Excursus on the Subsequent History of the
Eastern Question, 55


II. The Canons of the Councils of Anct-
RA, Gangra, Neocesarea, Antioch and
Laodicea — Which Canons were Ac-
cepted AND Received by the Ecumeni-
cal Synods, 58

Introductory Note to the Canons of Pro-
vincial Synods 59

i. The Council of Ancvra, a.d. 314 — Histor-
ical Note, . \ . . . 61-62
The Canons of the Council of Ancyra, . 63
Excursus on Second Marriages, Called

Digamy, 72

ii. The Council of Neocsesarea c. a.d. 315 —

Historical Note, .... 77-78
The Canons of the Holy and Blessed Fath-
ers who Assembled at Neocajsarea, . 79


iii. The Council of Gangra, a.d. 325-381 -His-
torical Introduction, . . . .89
Synodical Letter of the Council of Gangra. 91
The Canons of the Holy Fathers Assembled
at Gangra, . .' . . . .92
iv. The Synod of Antioch in Encseniis — a.d.

.341, 104

Historical Introduction, .... 105

The Synodal Letter 107

The Canons of the Blessed and Holy Fath-
ers Assembled at Antioch in Syria, . 108
V. Synod of Laodicea, a.d. 343-381, . .123
Historical Introduction, .... 124
The Canons of the Synod held in the City

of Laodicea, in Phrygia Pacatiana, . 125
Excursus on the Choir Offices of the Early

Church, 134

Excursus on the Worship of the Early

Church, . • 136

Excursus on the Vestments of the Early
Church, ....... 141

Excursus on the Minor Orders of the Early
Church, 144

III. The Second Ecumenical Council — The
First Council op Constantinople, a.d.
381, 161

Historical Introduction, .... 162

The Holy Creed which the 150 Fathers set
forth, which is Consonant with the Holy
and Great Synod of Nice, . . . 163

Historical Excursus on the Introduction
into the Creed of the Words "and the
Son," 165

Historical Note on the Lost " Tome " of
the Second Council, .... 169

Letter of the Same Holy Synod to the
Most Pious Emperor Theodosius the
Great, to which are Appended the Can-
ons Enacted by Them, • . . .170

Introduction on the Number of the Canons. 171

Canons of the 150 Fathers who Assembled
at Constantinople, ..... 172

Excursus on the Heresies Condemned in
Canon I., . . . . . . . 172

Warning to the Reader Touching Canon
Vn.,'' 184

Excursus on the Authority of the Second
Ecumenical Council, .... 180

The Council of Constantinople, A.D. 382 —
The Synodical Letter, . . . . 18S


IV


CONTEXTS


IV. The Third Ecumenical Council— The
Council of Eimiesus, a.d. 431, . . . 191
Historical Introduction, .... 192
Note on tlie Emperor's Edict to the Synod. 196
Extracts from the Acts — Session I., . . 197
Tlie Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius, . . 197
E.xtracts from the Acts — Session I. (con-
tinued), 199

Historical Introduction to St. Cyril's

Analhematisms, 199

The Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius with the

XII. Anathematisms, . . . .201
The Anathematisms of St, Cyril Against

Nestorius, 206

Excursus on the Word ©eori^Kos, . . 206
Excursus on How Our Lord Worked Mira-
cles, 215

Extracts from the Acts — Session I. (Con-
tinued) 218

Decree of the Council Against Nestorius, . 218
Extracts from the Act.s — Session II , . 219
The Letter of Pope Ca'lestine to the Synod

of Ephesus, " . 220

• Extracts from the Acts — Session II. (Con-
tinued), 222

Extracts from the Acts— Session III., . 223
The Canons of the 200 Holy and Blessed

Fathers Who Met at Epiiesus, . . 225
Excursus on the Conciiialmlum of John of

Antioch, 226

Excursus on Pelagianism, .... 229
Observation of the Roman Editors (Ed.

1608), 2ai

Observation of Philip Labbe, S. J. P., . 231
Excursus on the Words irlaTiv erepav, . 2d<i
The Letter of the Same Holy Synod of
Ephesus to the Sacred Synod in Pamphy-
lia Concerning Eustathius who had been
Their .Metropolitiiii, . . . 236

The Letter of the Synod to Pope Celestine. 237
The Definition of the Holy and Ecumenical
Synod of Ephesus Against the Impious
Mes.snliaiis, who are also Called Euchette

and Enthusiasts 240

Note on theMessalians or Massaliaus, . 240
Decree of the Synod in the Matter of Eu-
prepius and Cyril, ...... 242


V. The Foukth Ecumenical Council— The
Council of Chalckdon, a.d. 451, . . 243
'' General Introduction, .... 244
Extract's from the Ads — Session I., . . 247
Extracts from the Acts — Session II. , . 248
The Letter of Cyril to .lohu of Antioch, . 251
Extracts from the Acts — Session II. (con-
tinued), 253

The Tome of St. Leo, . . . .254
Extracts from the Acts — Session II. (con-
tinued), III., 259

The Condemnation Sent by the Holy and

Ecumenical Synod to Dioscorus, . . 260
Extracts from the Acts — Session IV., . 260
Extracts from tlie Acts — Session V., . 261
The Definition of Faith of the Council of

Chalcedon, 262

Extracts from the .\cts — Session VI., . 265
Decree on the Jurisdiction of Jerusalem

and Antioch, 266

The Decree with Regard to the Bishop of
Ephesus — Session XII., .... 266


PAGB

Decree with Regard to Nicomedia — Ses
sion XIII 267

The XXX. Canons of the Holy and Fourth
Synod of Chalcedon, .... 267

Excursus on the Later History of Cauon
XXVIIL, 288

Extracts from the Acts— Session XVI., . 292

VI. The Fifth Ecu.menical Council — The
Second Council of Constantinople, a.d.
5r)3 297

Historical Introduction, .... 299
Excursus on the Genuineness of the Acts

of the Fifth Council 301

Extracts from the Acts — Session I., . . 302
Extracts from the Acts — Session VII., . 304
The Sentence of the Sj'nod, . . . 306
The Capitula of the Council, . . . 312
Excursus on the XV. Anathemas Against

Origen, 316

The Anathemas Against Origen, . . 318
The Anathematisms of the Emperor Jus-
tinian Against Origen, .... 320
The Decretal Epistle of Pope Vigilius in
Confirmation of the Fifth Ecumenical

Synod, 321

Historical Excunsus on the After History
of the Council, 323

VII. The Sixth Ecumenical Council — The
Third Council of Constantinople, a.d.
680-681, 325

Historical Introduction, .... 326
Extracts from the Acts — Session I., . . 327
The Letter of Agatho, Pope of Old Rome,
to the Emperor, and the Letter of Agatho
and of 125 Bishops of the Roman Synod,
Addressed to the Sixth Council, . . 328

Introductory Note, 328

The Letter of Pope Agatho, . . .328
The Letter of Pope Agatho and of the Ro-
man Synod of 125 Bishops which was to
Serve as an In.struction to the Legates
Sent to Attend the Sixth Synod. . . 340
Extracts from the Act.s— Session VIII., . 342
The Sentence Against the Monothelites —

Session XIII., 342

Extracts from the Acts— Session XVI., . 343

The Definition of Faith 344

The Prosphoneticus to the Emperor, . 847
Letter of the Council to St. Agatho, . . 349
Excursus on the Condemnation of Pope
Ilonorius, ...... 351

The Imperial Edict Posted in the Third
Atrium of the Great Church, near what
is Called the Dicymbala, . . 353

VIII. The Canons of the Council in Trullo :
Often Called The Quinisext Council,
A.D. 692 355

Introductory Note 356

The Canons of the Council in Trullo, . 359
Excursus on the Marriage of the Clergy, . 3G5


IX. The Canons op
DiCA, Carthage,


the Synods of Sar-

Constantinople, and

Carthage Under St. Cyprian, which

Canons were Receiyed by the Council

IN Trullo and Ratified hy Nick II., . 409

Introductory Note, 410


CONTENTS


PAGE

i. The Council of Sardica, a.d. 343 or 344, . 411
Introduction on the Date of the Council, 413
Note on the Text of tlie Canons, . . 414
The Canons of the Council of Sardica, . 415
Excursus as to Whether the Sardica
Council was Ecumenical, . . . 435
ii. The Canons of the CCXVll. Blessed Fath-
ers who Assembled at Carthai,^ Commonly
Called the Code of Canons of the African

Churcli, A.D. 419, 437

Introductory JSTote, .... 438
An Ancient Introduction, . . . 440
The Canons of the 317 Blessed Fathers
who Assembled at Cartilage, . . 441
iii. Council of Constantinople held Under Nec-

tarius, a.d. 394, 511

Introductory Note, .... 5X3
Council of Constantinople under Nec-
tarius of Constantinople and The-
ophilus of Alexandria, . . . 513

iv. The Council of Carthage Held Under

Cyprian, a.d. 357, 515

Introductory Note 516

The Synod Held at Carthage over which
Presided the Great and Holy jMartyr
Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, a.d. 857. 517
Epistle LXX. Cyprian, Liberalis, Cale-
donius, etc., to Tlieir Brethren, Jan-
uarius, etc.. Greeting, . . . 518

X. The Seventh Ecumenical Council — The
Second Council of Nice, a.d. 787, . . 531
Introduction, ...... 533

The Divine Sacra Sent by the Emperors
Constantine and Irene to the Most Holy
and Blessed Hadrian, Pope of Old Rome, 529
Tlie Imperial Sacra Read at the First Ses-
sion, .......

Extracts from the Acts — Session I., .
Extracts from the Acts — Session II.,
Extracts from the Acts — Session III.,
Extracts from the Acts — Session IV.,
Extracts from the Acts — Session VI.,
Epitome of tlie Definition of the Iconoclas-
tic Conciliabulum, Held in Constantino-
ple, A.D. 754,

Excursus on the Conciliabulum St\iing
Itself the Seventh Ecumenical Council,
but Commonly Called the Mock Synod
of Constantinople, .....
The Decree of the Holy, Great, Ecumeni-
cal Synod, tlie Second of Nice,
Excursus on the Present Teaching of the
Latin and Greek Churches on the Sub-
ject,

The Canons of the Holy and Ecumenical

Seventh Council,

Letter of the Synod to the Emperor and

Empress,

Examination of the Caroline Books,
Exr-ursuson the Council of Frankfort, a.d.

794

Historical Note on the So-called " Eighth
General Council " and Subsequent Coun-


530
533
536
539
539
542


543


546
549


551
555

571

578

583


586


Appendix Containing Canons and Rulings
not having conciliar origin, but ap-
PROVED BY Name in Canon II. of the

Synod in Trullo,

Prefatory Note, ......

1. The Apostolical Canons, ....

The Canons of the Holy and Altogether
August Apostles, .....

8. The Canons of the Blessed Peter, Archbishop
of Alexandria, and Martyr, which are
Found in His Sermon on Penitence, .

3. The Canonical Epistle of St. Gregory, Arch-

bishop of Neocsesarea, who is Called Thau-
maturgus, Concerning them that During
the Incursion of the Barbarians Ate of
Things (Jftered to Idols, and Committed
Certain Other Sins, .....

4. The Epistle of St. Athanasius to the Monk

Animus, .......

The Epistle of the Same Athanasius
Taken from the XXXIX. Festal Epis-
tle,

The Epistle of St. Athanasius to Huf-
tinian, .......

5. The First Canonical Epistle of Our Holy

Father Basil, Archbishop of Cfesarea in
Cappadocia, to Amphikichius, Bishop of
Iconium, .......

The Second Canonical Epistle of the

Same,

The Third Epistle of the Same to the
Same,

6. The Canonical Epistle of St. Gregory, Bish-

op of Nyssa, to St. Letoius, Bishop of Mity-
lene, ........

7. From the Metre Poems of St. Gregory The-

ologns, Specifying which Books of the Old
and New Testament Should be Read,

8. From the Iambics of St. Amphilochius, the

Bishop to Seleucus on the Same Sub-
ject

The Canonical Answers of Timothy, the
Most Holy Bishop of Alexandria, who was
One of the CL. Fathers Gathered Together
at Constantinople, to the Questions Pro-
posed to Him Concerning Bishops and
Clerics, .......

The Prosphonesusof Theophilus, Archbishop
of Alexandria, when the Holy Epiphanies
Happened to Fall on a Sunday, .

The Commonitory of the Same which
Ammon Received on Account of Ly-

cus

The Narrative of the Same Concerning
those Called Cathari, ....

The Canonical Epistle of our Holy Father
among the Saints, Cyril, Archbishop of
Alexandria, on the Hymns. — Cyril to Dom-
nus. — Of the Same to the Bishops of Libya
and Pentapolis,

The Encyclical Letter of Gennadius, Patri-
arch of C-onstantinople, and of the Holy
Synod :\Iet with Him to all tlie Holy Metro-
politnns, and to the Pope of the City of
Rome,


PAGE


9.


10


11


13


589
590
591

594


601


603
602


603
603

604

605
607


611


613


612


613


613


614
615


615


Index of Authors,

Index of Names,

Index of Words and Phrases,

Index of Places,

Index of Subjects,


615

619
633
638
630
683


PREFACE.

The work intrusted to me of preparing this volume evidently can be divided into
two separate parts. The first, the collecting of the material needed and the setting of it
before the reader in the English tongue ; the other, the preparation of suitable intro-
ductions and notes to the matter thus provided. Now in each of these departments two
courses were open to the editor : the one, to be original ; the other, to be a copjdst. I
need hardly say that of these the former offered many temptations. But I could not
fail to recognize the fact that such a course would greatly take from the real value of the
work, and therefore without any hesitation I have adopted the other alternative, and
have endeavoured, so far as was at all possible, to keep myseK out of the question alto-
gether ; and as a general rule even the translation of the text (as distinguished from the
notes) is not mine but that of some scholar of well-established reputation.

In the carrying out of this method of procedure I have availed myself of all the
translations which I could find, and where, after comparing them with the original, I
have thought them substantially accurate, I have adopted them and reproduced them.
Where I have thought that the translation was misleading, I have amended it from
some other translation, and, I think, in no case have I ventured a change of translation
which rests upon my own judgment alone. A very considerable portion, however, of the
matter found in this volume is now translated into English for the first time. For some
of this I am indebted to my friends, who have most kindly given me every assistance
in their power, but even here no translation has been made from the Greek without care-
ful reference being had to the traditional understanding, as handed down in the Latin
versions, and wherever the Latin and Greek texts differ on material points the difference
has been noted. I have not thought it necessary nor desirable to specify the source of
each particular translation, but I have provided for the use of the reader a list of all the
translations which I have used. I should also add that I have not considered any one
text sufficiently well established as to command any deference being paid to it, and that
I have usually followed (for my own convenience rather than for any other reason) the
text contained in Labbe and Cossart's Concilia. No doubt Hardouin and Mansi are in
some respects superior, but old prejudices are very strong, and the reader will remem-
ber that these differing Concilia gave rise to a hard-fought battle in the history of the
Galilean Church. I should add, however, that where more recent students of the sub-
ject have detected errors of importance in Labbe's text, I have corrected them, usually
noting the variety of reading. With regard then to the text I entirely disclaim any
responsibility, and the more so as on such a matter my opinion would be entirely
valueless. And with regard to the translation my responsibility goes no further than
the certifying the reader that, to all intents and purposes, the meaning of the original is
presented to him in the English language and without interpretation being introduced
under the specious guise of translation. Some portions are mere literal translations,


Mil PREFACE


and some are clone into more idiomatic English, but all — so far as I am able to judge —
are fair renderings of the original, its amhiguiiies being duly preserved. I have used as
the foundation of the translation of the canons of the first four synods and of the five
Provincial Synods that most convenient book, Index Canomun, hj the Rev. John P'ul-
ton, D.D., D.C.L., in which united to a good translation is a Greek text, very well edited
and clearly printed.

In preparing the other division of the book, tliat is to say, the Introduction and
Notes, I have been guided by the same considerations. Here will be found no new and
l^rilliant gnesses of my own, but a collection of the most reliabk^ conclusions of the most
weighty critics and commentators. AVhere the notes are of any length I have traced the
source and given the exact reference, but for the brief notes, where I have not thought
this necessary, the reader may feel the greatest confidence that he is not reading any
surmises of mine, but that in every particular what he reads rests ujion the authority of
the greatest names who have written on the subject. In the bibliographical table
already referred to I have placed the authorities most frequently cited.

I think it necessary to make a few remarks upon the rule which I have laid down
for myself with regard to my attitude on controverted questions bearing upon doctrine
or ecclesiastical discipline. It seems to me that in such a work as the present any
expression of the editor's views would be eminently out of place. I have therefore con-
fined myself to a bare statement of what I conceive to be the facts of the case, and have
left the reader to draw from them what conclusions he pleases. I hope that this vol-
ume may be equally acceptable to the Catholic and to the Protestant, to the Eastern and
to the Western, and while I naturally think that the facts presented are clearly in
accordance with my own views, I hope that those who draw from the same premises
difi'erent conclusions will find these premises stated to their satisfaction in the following
pages. And should such be the case this volume may well be a step toward " the union
of all " and toward " the peace of all the holy churches of God," for which the unchang-
ing East has so constantly prayed in her liturgy.

I wish to explain to the reader one other principle on which I have proceeded in
preparing this volume. It professes to be a translation of the decrees and canons of
certain ecclesiastical synods. It is not a history of those synods, nor is it a theological
treatise upon the truth or otherwise of the doctrines set forth by those synods in their
legislation. I have therefore carefully restricted my own historical introductions to a
bare statement of such facts as seemed needed to render the meaning of the matter sub-
sequently presented intelligible to the reader. And with regard to doctrine I have
pursued the same course, merely explaining what the doctrine taught or condemned
was, without entering into any consideration of its truth or falsit}'. For the history of
the Church and its Councils the reader must consult the great historians ; for a defence
of the Church's faith he must read the works of her theologians.

I need hardly say that the overwhelming majority of the references found in this
volume I have had no opportunity of verifying, no copy of many of the books being (so
far as I know) to l)e found in America. I have, however, taken great pains to insure
accuracy in reproducing the references as given in the books from which I have cited
them ; this, however, does not give me any feeling of confidence that they may be relied
on, especially as in some cases where I have been able to look them up, I have found
errors of the most serious kind.


PREFACE ix


It now only remains that I thank all those who have assisted me in this work, and
especially I must mention his Excelleucj^ the High Procurator of the Holy Governijig
Synod of Russia, who directed the bibliographical table of Russian editions of the Canons,
etc., which is found in this volume, to be prepared for me by Professor Glubokoffski
of the Ecclesiastical Academy at St. Petersburgh. My special thanks are dvie to the
learned professor just named for the very admirable manner in which he has performed
the work, and to Mr. W. J. Birkbeck, who has added one more to his numerous labours
for making the West better acquainted with the East by translating the Piussian MS.
into English. I cannot but pause here to remark how deep my regret is that my igno-
rance of the Russian and Slavic tongues has prevented me from laying before my readers
the treasures of learning and the stores of tradition and local illustration which these
volumes must contain. I am, however, extremely well pleased in being able to put
those, who are more fortunate than m3'self in this respect, in the way of investigating
the matter for themselves, by supplying them with the titles of the books on the subject.
I desire also to ofler my thanks to Professor Bolotoff for the valuable information he
sent me as well as for a copy of his learned (and often most just) strictures upon Pro-
fessor Lauchert's book, " Die Kanones der wichtigsteu altkirch lichen Concilien nebst
den Apostolischen Kanones." (Freiburg in B. und Leipzig, 1896.)

The Rev. Wm. McGarvey has helped me most kindly by translating parts of the
Second Council of Nice, and one or more of the African Canons ; and by looking
over the translation of the entire African Code.

The Rev, F. A. Sanborn translated two of St. Cyril's letters, and the Rev. Leighton
Hoskins the Sardican Canons. To these and many other of my friends, who in one way
or another helped me, I wish to return my deep thanks ; also to the Nashotah Theo-
logical Seminary and to the Lutheran Theological Seminary at Mt. Airy, Philadel-
phia, for having placed their libraries entirely at my disposal ; nor can I end this list
without mention of my sister, who has assisted me most materially through the entire
progress of the work, and without whom I never could have undertaken it.

When I think of the great number of authors cited, of the rapidity with which most
of the translation has had to be done, of the difficulty of getting access to the necessary
books, and of the vast range of subjects touched upon (including almost every branch
of ecclesiastical and theological learning), I feel I must throw myself and my work upon
the reader's indulgence and beg him to take all this in consideration in making his esti-
mate of the value of the work done. As for me, now that it is all finished, I feel like
cryiug out with the reader, in deep shame at the recollection of the many blunders he
has made in reading the lesson, " Tu autem, Domine, miserere nobis ! "

In conclusion I would add that nothing I have written must be interpreted as mean-
ing that the editor personally has any doubt of the truth of the doctrines set forth by
the Ecumenical Councils of the Christian Church, and I wish to declare in the most
distinct manner that I accept all the doctrinal decrees of the Seven Ecumenical Synods
as infallible and irreformable.

Heney R. Peecival.

Pentecost, 1899.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

I. METHOD OF TREATMENT.

It is absolutely- necessary that a few words should be said on the general arrange-
ment of the work. The reader will find given him in the English tongue, so far
as they have come down to us, all the doctrinal definitions of the Seven Ecumenical
Councils (councils which have always, and still do, receive the unqualified acceptance of
both East and West), and all the canons, disciplinary and doctrinal, which were enacted
by them. To these has been added a translation in full of all the canons of the local
synods which received the approval and sanction of the aforesaid Ecumenical Councils.
Besides this, as throwing light upon the subject, large extracts from the ^rfa have been
given, in fact all that seemed to illustrate the decrees ; and, that nothing might be lack-
ing, in an appendix has been placed a collection of all the non-synodal canons which
have received the sanction of the Ecumenical Synods, the " Canons of the Apostles "
(so called) being given in full, and the others in a shortened form, for the most part in
the words of the admirable and learned John Johnson.

This then is the text of the volume; but it is manifest that it stood in need of much
comment to make its meaning clear to the reader, even if well informed on ordinary
matters. To provide for this, to each synodal canon there has been added the Ancient
Epitome.

Of this Epitome Bishop Beveridge treats with great learning in section xxvi. of his
"Prolegomena" to his Synodicon, and shows that while some attributed this epitome to
the Greek mediaeval scholiast Aristenus, it cannot be his, as he has taken it for the text
of his commentaries, and has in more than one instance pointed out that whoever he
was who made it had, in his judgment, missed the sense.^

The Epitome must indeed be much older, for Nicholas Hydruntinus, who lived in
the times of Alexis Angelus, when intending to quote one of the canons of Ephesus,
actually quotes words which are not in that canon, but which are in the Epitome.
" Wherefore," says Beveridge, " it is manifest that the Epitome is here cited, and that
under the name of the whole canon." This being established we may justly look upon
the Ancient Epitome as supplying us with a very ancient gloss ujjon the canons.

To this Epitome have been added Notes, taken from most of the great commentators,
and Excursuses, largely made up from the writings of the greatest theologians, canonists,
archaeologists, etc., with regard to whom and their writings, all the information that
seems necessary the reader will find in the Bibliographical Introduction.


II. CONCERNING ECUMENICAL COUNCILS IN GENERAL.

An Ecumenical Synod may be defined as a synod the decrees of which have found
acceptance by the Church in the ^^liole world.' It is not necessary to make a council
ecumenical that the number of bishops present should be large, there Avere but 325 at
Nice, and 150 at I. Constantinople ; it is not necessary that it should be assembled with
the intention of its being ecumenical, such was not the case with I. Constantinople ; it is

' Vide Apostolic Canon LXXV.. and Ancyr. Canon XIX.

- This was until the division of the East and West the definition accepted by all the whole Christian world. But since the Church
has been divided, while the East has kept to the old definition and has not pretended to have held any Ecumenical Councils, the Ro-
man Church has made a new definition of the old term and has theu proceeded to hold a very considerable number of sj-nods which
she recognizes as Ecumenical. I say " a very considerable number." for even amone Roman Catholic theolosrians there is much
dispute as to the number of these " Ecumenical Svuods," the decrees of which, like those of Trent and the Vatican, have never been
received by about half of the Christian world, incjudins: four of the five patriarchates, and of the fifth patriarchate all the Anglican
communion. According to modem Roman writers the definition of these non-ecumenically received Ecumenical Sjmods is " Ecu
menical councils are those to which the bishops and others entitled to vote are convoked from the whole world under the Presidency
of the Pope or his lesrates. and the decrees of which, having received Papal confirmation, bind all Christians." Addis and Arnold,
A Catholic Dictionary, s. v. Councils. The reader will notice that by this definition one at least (1. Constantinople), probably three,
of the seven undisputed Ecumenical Synods cease to be such.


xii GENERAL INTRODUCTION

not necessary that all parts of the world should have been represented or even that the
bishops of such parts should have been invited. All that is necessary is that its de-
crees find ecumenical acceptance afterwards, and its ecumenical character be univer-
sally recognized.

The reader will notice that in the foregoing I have not proceeded from the theologi-
cal foundation of what an Ecumenical Synod should be (with this question the present
volume has nothing to do), but from a consideration of the historical question as to
what the Seven Ct)uncils have in common, which distinguishes them from the other
councils of the Christian Church.

And here it is well to note that there have been many " General Councils " which
have not been " Ecumenical." It is true that in ordinary parlance we often use the
ex]iressi()ns as interchangeable, Imt such really is not the case. Tliere are but seven
universally recognized and undisputed " Ecumenical Councils " ; on the other hand, the
number of " General Councils " is very considerable, and as a matter of fact of these last
several very large ones fell into heresy. It is only necessary to mention as examples
the Latrocinium and the sj)urious " Seventh Council," held by the iconoclastic heretics.
It is therefore the mere statement of an historical fact to say that General Councils
have erred.

The Ecumenical Councils claimed for themselves an imnmnit}- from error in their doc-
trinal and moral teaching, resting such claim upon the promise of the ])resence and guid-
ance of the Holy Ghost. The Council looked u}«3n itself, not as revealing any new
truth, but as setting forth the faith once for all delivered to the Saints, its decisions
therefore were in themselves ecumenical, as being an expression of the mind of the
whole body of the faithful l)otli clerical and lay, the sensus communis of the Church.
And by the then teaching of tlie Church that ecumenical consensus was considered free
from the suspicion of error, guarded, (as was believed,) by the Lord's promise that the
gates of hell should not prevail against his Church. This then is what Catholics mean
when they affirm the infallibility of Ecumenical Councils. Whether this opinion is true
or false is a question outside the scope of the present discussion. It was necessary,
however, to state that these Councils looked upon themselves as divinely protected in
their decisions from error in faith and morals, lest the reader should otherwise be at a
loss to understand the auathematisms which follow the decrees, and which indeed would
be singularly out of place, if the decrees which they thus emphatically affirm were sup-
posed to rest only upon human wisdom and speculation, instead of u])on divine authority.

Theologians consider that the decisions of Ecumenical Councils, like all juridical
decrees, must be construed strictly, and that only the point at issue must be looked U])on
as decided. The obiter dicta of so august a body are no doubt of the greatest \\'eiglit,
but yet they have no claim to be possessed of that su])reme authority which belongs to
the definition of the particular point under consideration.'

The Seven Ecumenical Councils were all called together at the commandment and
will of Princes ; without any knowledge of the matter on the part of the Pope in one
case at least (1st Constantinople) '~ ; without any consultation with him in the case of
I. Nice, so far as Ave know ' ; and contrary to his expressed desire in at least the case of
Chalcedon, when he only gave a reluctant consent after the Emperor Marcian had
already convoked the synod. From this it is historically evident that Ecumenical
Councils can be summoned without cither the knowledge or consent of the See of
Ivonie.

In the history of the Christian Church, especiidly at a later period in connection
with the Great Schism, much discussion has taken place among the learned as to the
relative powers of a General Council and of the Po])e. It will be remembered by ev<'rv-
one that the superior authority of the council was not only taught, but on one occasion

' Vide Vasquez, P. lU., Disp. 181, c. 9 ; Bellarmin., De Concil., Lib. II., cap. xvij. ; Veron, Uule of the Cath. Faith, Chap. I., §§
4, 5, and 6.

' See IIefele'8 answer to Bnronins's special pleading. Hist. CotmciU, Vol. I., pp. 9, 10.

' It should be stated that at the Sixth Synod it was said that I. Nice was "summoned by the Emperor and Pope Sylvester," on
what authority I know not.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION xiii

acted on, by a coimcil, but this is outside of the period covered by the Seven Ecumen-
ical Synods, and I shall therefore only discuss the relations of these seven synods to
the E.oman See. And in the first place it is e\ddent that no council has ever been re-
ceived as ecumenical which has not been received and confirmed by the Roman Pontifi'.
But, after all, this is only saying that no coimcil has been accepted as ecumenical which
has not been ecumenically received, for it must be remembered that there was but one
Patriarchate for the whole West, that of Rome ; and this is true to all intents and pur-
poses, whether or no certain sections had extrapatriarchal privileges, and were " auto-
cephalous."

But it would be giving an entireh' unfair impression of the matter to the reader
were he left to suppose that this necessity for Rome's confirmation sprang necessarily
from any idea of Rome's infallibility. So far as appears from any extant document,
such an idea was as unknown in the whole world then as it is in four of the five patri-
archates to-day. And it should be borne in mind that the confirmation by the Emperor
was sought for and spoken of in quite as strong, if not stronger, terms. Before passing
to a particular examination of what relation each of the Councils bore to the Roman
See, it may be well to note that while as an historical fact each of the Seven Ecumen-
ical Councils did eventually find acceptance at Rome, this fact does not prove that such
acceptance is necessary in the nature of things. If we can imagine a time when Rome
is not in communion with the greater part of the West, then it is quite possible to im-
agine that an Ecumenical Council could be held whose decrees would (for the time
being) be rejected by the unworthy occupant of the Apostolic See. I am not asserting
that such a state of aflairs is possible from a theological standpoint, but merely stating
an historical contingency which is perfectly within the range of imagination, even if cut
ojff from any practical possibility by the faith of some.

We now come to a consideration of how, by its acts, each of the Seven Synods in-
timated its relation to the Roman See :

1. The First Council of Nice passed a canon in which some at least of the Roman
rights are evidently looked upon as being exactly on the same plane as those of other
metropolitans, declaring that they rest upon " custom."

It was the Emperor who originated this council and called it together, if we may
believe his owti words and those of the council ; and while indeed it is possible that
■when the Emperor did not preside in person, Hosius of Cordova may have done so
(even uniting the two Roman Presbyters avIio were the legates of the Roman See with
him), yet there is no evidence that anything of the kind ever took place, and a pope,
Felix III. (a.d. 483-492), in his Fifth Epistle {ad Imp. Zen.) declares that Eustathius,
bishop of Antioch, presided at this council.'

The matter, however, is of little moment as no one would deny the right of the See
of Rome to preside in a council of the whole Church.

2. The Second Ecumenical Council was called together by the Emperor Avithout the
knowledge of the Roman Pontiff. Nor was he invited to be present. Its first presi-
dent was not in communion at the time of its session with the Roman Church. And,
without any recourse to the first of all the patriarchs, it passed a canon changing the
order of the patriarchates, and setting the new see of Constantinople in a higher place
than the other ancient patriarchates, in fact immediately after Rome. Of course Prot-
estants will consider this a matter of very minor importance, looking upon all patri-
archal divisions and rank and priority (the Papacy included) as of a disciplinary char-
acter and as being jure ecclesiastico, and in no way aflecting doctrine, but any fair
reading of the third canon of this synod would seem plainly to assert that as the first
rank of Rome rested upon the fact of its being the capital city, so the new capital city
should have the second rank. If this interpretation is correct it affects very materially
the Roman claim oijxre divino primacy.

3. Before the third of the Ecumenical Synods was called to meet, Pope Celestine
had already convicted Nestorius of heresy and deposed and excommunicated him. When

1 Cf. Theod. H. E., Lib. I., e. 6.


XIV GENERAL INTEODUCTION

subsequently the synod was assembled, and before the papal legates had arrived, the
Council met, treated Nestorius as in good standing, entirely ignoring the sentence
already given by liome, and having examined the case (after summoning him three
times to a]i]iear that he might be heard in his own defence), proceeded to sentence
Nestorius, and immediately published the sentence. On the 10th of July (more than
a fortnight laterj, the papal legates having arrived, a second session was held, at
which they were told what had been done, all of which they were good enough to
approve of.'

4. The Council of Chalcedon refused to consider the Eutychian matter as settled by
Rome's decision or to accept Leo's Tome without examination as to whether it was ortho-
dox. Moreover it passed a canon at a session which the Papal legates refused to attend,
ratifying the order of the Patriarchates fixed at I. Const;intin()])le, and declaring that
" the Fathers had very properly given privileges to Old Piome as the im])erial city, and
that now they gave the same {ra laa -Trpec^ela) privileges " to Constantinople as the
seat of the imperial government at that time.

5. The fifth of the Ecumenical Synods refused to receive any written doctrinal com-
munication from the then pope (Yigilius), took his name from the diptychs, and re-
fused him communion.

6. The Third Council of Constantinople, the sixth of the Ecumenical Synods, ex-
communicated Pope Honorius, who had been dead for years, for holding and teaching
the Mpnothelite heresy.

7. It is certain that the Pope had nothing to do with the calling of the Seventh
Synod,'^ and quite possible that it was presided over by Tarasius and not by the Papal
legates.

Such is, in brief, the evidence which the Ecumenical Councils give on the subject of
what, for lack of a better designation, may be called the Papal claims. Under these cir-
cumstances it may not be deemed strange that some extreme ultrainontanists have ar-
rived at the conclusion that much of the acts and decisions as we have them is spurious,
or at least corrupted in an anti-papal direction. Vincenzi, who is the most learned of
these writers, argues somewhat thus ' if the members of the Ecumenical Synods believed
as we do to-day with regard to the Papacy it is impossible that they should have acted
and spoken as they did, but we know they must have believed as we do, ergo they did
not so act or speak.' The logic is admirable, but the truth of the conclusion depends
upon the truth of the minor premise. The forgeries would have been very extensive,
and who were they done by ? Forgeries, as the false decretals, to advance papal claims
we are unfortunately familiar with, but it is hard to imagine who could have forged in
Greek and Latin the acts of the Ecumenical S}aiods, It is not necessary to pursue the
matter any further, perhaps its very mention was uncalled for, but I wish to be abso-
lutely fair, that no one may say that any evidence has been suppressed,^

' Protestant Controvers'alists. as well as others, have cnrions ways of etating historical events without any resrard to the facts of
the case. A notable instance of this is found in Dr. Salmon's ItifallihiUty of the Church (p. 426 of the 2d"Edition) where we are
told that " the only one of the trreat controversies in which the Pope really did his j)art in teachinjj Christians what to believe was
the Eutychian controversy. Leo the (Ireat. instead of waitiup. as Popes usually do, till the question was settled, published his sen-
timents at the beirinning.and his letter to Flavian was adopted by the Council of Chalcedon Tliis is what would have always hap-
pened if (iod had really made the Pope the guide to the Church. But this case is quite exceptional, resulting from the accident that
Leo was a irood theologian, besides being a man of great visrour of character No similar intluence was exercised either by his pred-
ecessors or ■successors." This sentence is not plcisant readinsr. for it is an awe-inspiring display of one of two things, neither of
which should be in the author of such a book. We need only remind the reader that ('destine had condemned Nestorius and his
teaching before the Council of Ephesus ; tliat Honorius had written letters dellnintr th(^ question with retrard to the wll or wills of
the Incarnate Son before the IH. Council of Constantinople (which excommunicated liim as •. heretic irr these very letters) ; that Pope
Vigilius condemned the " Three Chapters " before the II. Council of Constantinople ; and th.at (Jregory II. condemned the iconoclastic
heresy before the Seventh Synod, if the letters attributed to him be L'enuine (which is not quite "certain, as will be shewn in its
proper place). Thus the only two srreat (piestions not decided, one way or another, by the See of Rome before the meeting of a
General Council were Arianism and Macedonianism, and some have held (though mistakenly as is gener.ally thought) that Arius
was condemned by a synod held at Home before tliat of Nice.

' See Michaud's brilliant answer to Ilefele. Disftission .lur lex Sept Coiiciles CEnnnriiiqiies, p. iiiT.

' The reader may easily satisfy himself on this matter by reading the somewhat extensive works of Aloysius Viucenzi, published
in Rome in 1875 and" thereabouts.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION xy


III. THE NUMBEK OF THE ECUMENICAL SYNODS.

It may not be unjustly expected that some reasons should be assigned for limiting
the number of the Ecumenical Synods to seven. There is no need here to enter into
any proof that Nice, I. Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon are Ecumenical, since
so long ago as the time of St. Gregory the Great, that Saint and Doctor said of them :
" I venerate the first four Ecumenical Councils equally with the Four Gospels (sicut
quatuor Evangelia)," ^ and no one has been found to question that in so saying he gave
expression to the mind of the Church of his day. Of the fifth and sixth synods there
never was any real doubt, although there was trouble at first about the reception of the
fifth in some places. The ecumenical character of the seventh is not disputed by East
or West and has not been for near a thousand years, and full proof of its ecumenicity
will be found in connection with that council. There is therefore no possible doubt
that these seven must be included, but it may be asked why certain others are not here
also.

The following is a list of those that might seem to have a claim : Sardica (343
circa), Quinisext (692), Constantinople (869), Lyons (1274), and Florence (1439).

The reasons for rejecting the claims of Sardica will be found in connection with the
canons set forth by that council. The same is the case with regard to the claims of the
Synod in TruUo. It is true that IV. Constantinople, holden in a.d. 869, was for a short
while held as Ecumenical by both East and West, and continues to be held as such by
the Latin Church down to this day, but it was soon rejected by the East and another
synod of Constantinople (879), which undid much of its work, has for the Greeks taken
its place. However the Easterns do not claim for this synod an ecumenical character,
but confine the number to seven.

The Councils of Lyons and Florence both fail of ecumenicity for the same reason.
At both the East was represented, and at each an agreement was arrived at, but neither
agreement was subsequently accepted in the East, and the decrees therefore have failed,
as yet, of receiving ecumenical acceptance.

We are left therefore with Seven Ecumenical Councils, neither more nor less, and
these are fully treated of in the pages that follow.

1 Epistle XXIV. of Lib. I.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION.

To the student of the ancient synods of the Church of Christ, the name of William
Beveridge must ever stand most illustrious ; and his work on the canons of the undi-
vided Church as received by the Greeks, published at Oxford in 1672, will remain a
lasting glory to the Anglican Church, as the " Concilia " of Labbe and Cossart, which
appeared in Paris about the same time, must ever redound to the glory of her sister, the
Gallican Church.

Of the permanent value of Beveridge's work there can be no greater evidence than
that to-day it is quoted all the world over, and not only are Anglicans proud of the
bishop of St, Asaph, but Catholics and Protestants, Westerns and Easterns alike quote
him as an authority. In illustration of this it will be sufficient to mention two ex-
amples, the most extensive and learned work on the councils of our own day, that by
the Koman Catholic bishop Hefele, and the " Compendium of Canon Law," by the
Metropolitan of the Orthodox Greek Hungarian Church,' in both of which the reader
will find constant reference to Beveridge's " Bynodicon."

This great work appeared in two volumes full folio, with the Greek text, beauti-
fully printed, but of course with the ligatures so perplexing to the ordinary Greek
reader of to-day. It should however be noted that the most learned and interesting
Prolegomena in XvvohiKov sive Pcmdecke Canonum, as well as the Praefationem ad
annotafiones in Canones Apostolicos, is reprinted as an Appendix to Vol. XII. of " The
Theological Works of William Beveridge, sometime lord bishop of St. Asaph," in the
" Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology," (published at Oxford, 1848), which also contains
a reprint of the " Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Primitivfe vindicatus ac illustratus," of
which last work I shall have something to say in connection with the Apostolical Can-
ons in the Appendix to this volume.

Nothing could exceed the value of the Prolegomena and it is greatly to be wished
that this most unique preface were more read by students. It contains a fund of out-
of-the-way information which can be found nowhere else collected together, and while
indeed later research has thrown some further light upon the subject, yet the main
conclusions of Bishop Beveridge are still accepted by the learned Avitli but few ex-
ceptions. I have endeavoured, as far as possible to incorporate into this volume the
most important part of the learned bishop's notes and observations, but the real stu-
dent must consult the work itself. The reader will be interested to know that the
greatest English scholars of his day assisted Bishop Beveridge in his work, among
whom was John Pearson, the defender of the Ignatian Epistles.

I think I cannot do better than set out in full the contents of the Synodicon so that
the student may know just what he will find in its pages :

" XvvohiKov sive Padectse Canonum SS. Apostolorum, et Conciliorum ab Ecclesia
Graeca receptorum ; necnon Canonicorum SS. Patrum Epistolarum : Una cum Scholiis
Antiquorum singulis eorum annexis, et scriptis aliis hue spectantibus ; quorum plurima
e Biblothecse Bodleianne aliarumque MSS. codicibus nunc primum edita : reliqua cum
iisdem MSS. summa fide et diligentia collata. Totum Opus in duos Tomos divisum,
Guilielmus Beverigius, Ecclesise Anglican;© Presbyter, Recensuit, Prolegomenis muni-
vit, et Annotationibus auxit. Oxonii, E Theatro Sheldoniano. M.DC.LXXII."

Such is the title in full. I proceed to note the contents, premising that for all the
Greek a Latin translation is given in a parallel column :

Volume I.

The Canons of the Holy Apostles, with the Ancient Epitome, and the scholia of Bal-
samon, Zonaras and Aristenus.

The Canons of the Council of Nice with notes ut supra and so throughout.

> As one of the few books of the Eaptem Church ever translated into a Western tongue, the reader may be glad to have its full
title. Coinpendium, des Kanonischen Rechtes der einen heiligen^ allcjeineinen und apostoliochen Kirche ver/aszt von Andreas Frei-
herrn von Schaguna. Hermannstadt, Buchdruckerei des Josef Drokiieff, 1868.


xviii BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION


The Canons of the Council of Constantinople.
The Canons of the Council of Ei)liesns.
The Canons of the Council of Chalcedon.
The Canons of the Sixth Council in Tnillo.
The Canons of the Sevc^nth (Ecumenical Council.

The Canons of the Council of Constantinople called the First-and-Second [in the
time of PhotiusJ.

The Canons of the Council held in the Temple of Wisdom [which confirmed the
Seventh (Ecumenical Synod]. All these with notes as before.

The Canons of the Council of Carthage [over which St. Cyprian, the Martyr, pre-
sided] with the notes of Balsamon and Zouaras.
The Canons of the Council of Ancyra.
The Canons of the C^ouncil of N(H)C8Bsarea.
The Canons of tlie Council of Oanifra.
The Canons of the Council of Antioch.
The Canons of the Council of Laodicea.

The Canons of the Council of Sardica. All these with full notes as before.
The Canons of the 217 blessed Fathers who met at Cartha<^e, with the epitome, and
scholia by Balsamon and Aristenus, and on the actual canons by Zonaras also. To
these some epistles are added, likewise annotated.

Then, ending Volume I. is a version of Joseplms ^Egyptius's Arabic Introduction
and Paraphrase on the Canons of the first four General Councils, bearing the following
title :

Josephi iEgyptii Prosemia et Paraphrasis Arabica in Quatuor Preorum Generalium
Conciliorum Canones, interprete Guilielmo Beverigio, the Arabic being given in the
left hand column.

Volume II.
Part I.
The Canons of Dionysius of Alexandria, with the scholia of Balsamon and Zonaras.
The Canons of Peter of Alexandria.
The Canons of Gregory Thaumaturgus.

The Canons of St. Athanasius. All these with scholia as above.
The Canons of St. Basil, with the Ancient Epitome and scholia of Balsamon, Zoua-
ras, and Aristenus.

The Canons of St. Gregory Nyssen with scholia of Balsamon.
The Canonical Answer of Timothy, Bishop of Alexandria.
The Canons of Theophilus of Alexandria.
The Canonical E]>istles of Cyril of Alexandria.

Extracts from the metrical poems of St. Cxregory Theologus, concerning what books
of the (31d and New Testaments should be read.

Extracts from the iambics of St. Amphilochius the bishop to Seleucus on the same
subject.

The Encyclical Letter of Gennadius, Patriarch of Constantinople.
The Epistle of Tarasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, to Adrian, Pope of Rome, con-
cerning simony. All of these with Balsamon's scholia.

Part II.
The Synopsis by Alexius Aristenus of the letters called Canonical.
The ciuestions of Certain Monks and the Answers sent by the Synod of Constantino-
ple. With notes by B;dsamon.'

The Alphabetical Syntagma of all that is contained in the Sacred and Divine Can-
ons, by Mathew Blastares, tlie Monk.-^

Concerning the Holy and (Ecumenical Synod which restored Photius, the most holy
Patriarch to the See of Constantinople, and dissolved the scandal of the two Churches

' According to the Eleuchns, in the beginning of this volume, both of these writings are found in the First Part and not in the
Second Part of the volume.

2 SchocU says that the text is not accurately given.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION xix

of 01(1 and New Rome ; [Styled by some the " Eighth Q^]cumenical Synod."] to which
is added the Letter of the Blessed John Pope of Rome to the most holy Pliotius,
Archbishop of Constantinople.

An Index Reruni et Verboruni of both volumes.

Beveridoe's own Notes on the Canons of the Councils.

An Index Rerurn et Verborum of the Notes.

Such are the contents of Bishop Beveridge's great work, and it is impossible to
exaggerate its value. But it will be noticed that it only covers the disciplinary action
of the Councils, and does not give the dogmatic decrees, these being excluded from the
author's plan.

Before leaving the collections of the canons we must mention the great work of
Justellus (the Preface and notes of which are found reprinted in Migne's Pat. Lai., Tom.
LXVII.) ; Canonum Ecclesue Universal Gr. et Lat. cum Prcefatione Notisque Christoph.
JusteUi.

The author Avas counsellor and secretary to the King of France, was born in Paris
1580, and died in 1649. After his death there appeared at Paris in 1661 a work in 2
volumes folio, with the following title : BihJiotheca juris canonici vetus . . . ex an-
tiqids codicibas MSS. BibUothecce Christopheri Justelli. . . . 02)era et stitdio Qui.
Voelli et Henrici Justelli.

The Church in Paris had the honour of having among its Cathedral clergy the first
scholar who published a collection of the Acts of the councils. James Merlin was
Canon and Grand Penitentiary of the Metropolitan Church, and the first edition of his
work he put out in 1523 in one volume folio. This work passed through several edi-
tions within a few years, but soon gave place to fuller collections.'

In 1538, the Belgian Franciscan Peter Crabbe (Pierre Grable) issued at Cologne an
enlarged collection in two volumes, and the second edition in 1551 was enlarged to
three folio volumes. Besides these, there was Lawrence Surius's still more complete
collection, published in 1557 (4 vols, folio), and the Venice collection compiled by Dom-
enick Bollanus, O. P., and printed by Dominic Nicolini, 1585 (5 vols, folio).

But the renowned collection of Professor Severin Binius surpassed all its predeces-
sors, and its historical and critical notes are quoted with respect even to-day. The first
edition, in four volumes folio, was issued at Cologne in 1606, and later editions, better
than the first, in 1618 and 1636. This last edition was published at Paris in nine vol-
umes, and made use of the Roman collection.

To the learned Jesuit Sirmond belongs the chief glory of having compiled this Ro-
man collection, and the " Introduction " is from his pen. The work was undertaken
by the authority of Pope Paul V., and much of the Greek text, copied from MSS. in the
Vatican Library, was now for the first time given to the reading public. This collection
contains only the Ecumenical Councils according to the Roman method of reckoning,
and its compilation took from 1608 to 1612.

No collection appeared from this date until the " Collectio Regia," a magnificent
series of thirty-seven volumes folio, at the royal press at Paris in 1644. But while it
was superb in get up, it left much to be desired when looked at critically, for many
faults of the Roman edition already pointed out by Sirmond were not corrected.

And now we have reached the time when the first really great Concilia ap-
peared, which while only filling seventeen volumes in folio was yet far more complete
— Hefele says twenty-five per cent, more complete — than the great Collectio Regia
just described. This edition was the work of Philip Labbe (Labbeus in Latin), S. J.,
and was completed after his death in 1667, by Father Gabriel C^ossart of the same
Society — " Almost all the French savants quote from this edition of Labbe's with
Baluze's supplement," ~ and I have followed their lead, availing myself of the corrections

' I am indebted to Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. I., p. 67 et seqq., for this account of Merlin's Collection, as also for most
of the statements that follow. Hefele says (footnote to page 67) : "The longest details on Merlin's edition are found in a work of
Salmon. Doctor and Librarian of the Sorboune, Traite deVEtride des Conciles et de leurs Collections, etc. Paris, 1726. "

'■* Hefele, Hist. Councils, vol. I, p. 69.


XX BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION

made by later editors. The title of the edition used in this work is : " Sacrasancta
Concilia ad llegiam Editioueni exacta. Studio IMiili]). Lal)l)ei et Gabr. Cossartii, Hoc.
Jesu Presl)yterorum. Lutetiae Parisioruin. MDCLXXI. Cum Privilegio Regis Chris-
tianissimi."

Anything more perfect than these precious volumes it would be hard to conceive of,
and while of course they contain the errors of chronology et cetera of their age, yet their
general accuracy and marvellous completeness lcav(^ them even to-day as the greatest
of the great, although the later edition of Hardouin is more often used by English and
American scholars, and is the one quoted by Pope Benedict XIY. in his famous
Avork Dc Si/noilo Ui(ecesana. Hardouin's edition did certainly correct many of the
faults of Labbe and Cossart, yet had itself many faults and defects which are pointed
out by Salmt)n ' in a long list, although he fully acknowledges the value of Hardouin's
improvements and additions. Perhaps, not unnaturally, as a Professor at the Borbonne,
he preferred Labbe and Cossart. It may not be amiss to add that Hardouin was very
anti-dallican and ultiamontane.

The Dominican Archbishop of Lucca, Mansi, in 1759, put out his " Concilia " in
thirty-one volumes folio at Florence, styled on the title-page " the most ample " edition
ever printed, and claiming to contain all the old and much new matter. It was never
finished, only reaching to the XVth century, has no indices, and (says Hefele) "is very
inferior to Hardouin in accuracy. The order of the subjects in the later volumes is
sometimes not sufficiently methodical, and is at variance with the chronology." '

I shall now present the reader with some bibliograj^hical notes which I extract ver-
hatbn from Hefele (Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. I., p. 74).

Among the numerous works on the history of the councils, the most useful to con-
sult are :

1. John Cabassutius, A^otifia ecclesiastica Jdstoriarum conciliorum et canonum.
Lyons 1680, folio. Very often reprinted.

2. Hermant, Histoirc des Concilfs, Rouen 1730, four volumes, 8vo.

3. Labbe, S;/noj)sis hisiorica Concilioruin, in vol. i. of his Collection of Councils.

4. Edui. Richer, Historia conciliorum cjeneraliuni (Paris, 1680), three volumes, 4to.
Reprinted in 8vo. at Cologne.

5. Charles Ludovic Richard, Analysis conciliorum generalium et parficularium.
Translated from French into Latin by Dalmasus. Four volumes, 8vo, Augsburg,
1778.

6. Christ. Wilh. Franz Walch, Enfiourf einer vollstandigen Historic der Kirchenver-
sammluYKjen, Leipzig. 1759.

7. Fabiicius, Bihliothcca Gncra, edit. Harlcss. t. xii., ]). 422 sqq., in which is con-
tained an alpliabetical table of all the councils, and an estimate of the value of the prin-
cipal collections.

8. AUetz, Concilien-Lexilcon, translated from French into German by Father Maurus
Disch, a Benedictine and professor at Augsburg, 1843.

9. Dictionnaire universci et complet des Conciles, taut generaux que particidiers, etc.,

redige parM. I'abbe P , pretre du Diocese de Paris, published by the Abbe Migne

(Paris, 1846), two volumes, 4to.

In the great works on ecclesiastical history — for example, in the A^ouvelle Bibho-
theqne des Antcurs Ecclcsiasligucs, by El. Dupin, and the Hisfnrid Literaria of Cave, and
particularly in the excellent Histoirc des Auteurs Sacres, by Remi Ceillier — we find mat-
ter relating to the history of the councils. Salmon, 1. c, p. 387, and Walch in his His-
toric der Kirr/icnv('rsariiinl'iiii/<')i, pp. 48-67, have pointeil out a large number of works
on the history of the councils. There are also very valuable dissertations on the same
subject in —

1. Christian Lupus, Synodorum generalium ac provincicdium decrcta et canones,
scholiis, notis ac historica actorum dissertatione illiistrata, Louv., 1665 ; Brussels, 1673 ;
five volumes, 4to.


' Salmon, I. c, pp. 315-331, 7S6-831. ^ Hefele, Hist. Councils, vol. i. p. 72.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION xxi

2. Liid. Tkomassin, Dissertationutn in Concilia generalia et particularia, t. i., Paris,
1667 ; reprinted in Eocaberti, Bibl. pontijicia, tr. XV.

3. Van Espen, Tradatus Historicus exhibens scholia in omnes canones conciliorum, etc.,
in liis complete works.

4. Bar til. Caranza lias written a very complete and useful abstract of the acts of the
councils in his Summa Conciliorum, which has often been re-edited.

5. George Daniel Fuchs, deacon of Stuttgart, has, in his Bibliothek der Kirchenver-
sammlungen, four volumes, Leipsic, 1780-1784, given German translations and abstracts
of the acts of the councils in the fourth and fifth centuries.

6. Francis Salmon, Doctor and Librarian of the Sorbonne, has published an Intro-
duction to the Study of the Councils, in his Traite de V Etude des Oonciles et de leurs
collections, Paris, 1724, in 4to, which has often been reprinted.

To these I would add the following :

1. Fleury, Histoire Ecclesiastique. This work in many volumes, part of which
has been translated into English, is most useful and accurate, and contains a resume of
the separate canons and dehnitious as well as the history of the proceedings.

2. Deuziger, Enchiridion Symbolorum et Dejinitionum quce de rebus Jidei et morum
a Conciliis (Ecumenicis et Summis Pontificihus emanarunt. A most useful handbook in
the original.

3. Hefele, Conciliengeschicte. This, the most recent work upon the subject, is also
in some respects the most satisfactory, and it is a matter of real regi-et that only the
first part of the work, down to the end of the Seventh CEcumenical Council, has been
translated into English. The last volume of the author's revised edition appeared in
1890. The first volume of the first edition was published in 1855, and the seventh and
last in 1874. The entire book was translated into French some years ago (with full
indices) by M. I'abbe Goschlerand and M. I'abbe Delarc (Paris, Adrien le Clere et Cie).
It should in fairness, however, be remarked that Bishop Hefele was one of the minority
who opposed the opportuneness of the definition of Papal infallibility at the Vatican
Council, and while indeed afterwards he submitted to the final decree, yet he has been
a somewhat suspected person since to those who held extreme views on this doctrine.

So far as I am aware no serious work has been done upon the councils by any writer
using the English tongue in recent times, with the exception of the useful Notes on the
Canons of tJie Eirst Four General Councils, by Canon Wm. Bright.

The following is a list of the English translations which I have consulted or fol-
lowed :

John Johnson, The Clergyman s Vcuie-mecum (London, 2d Ed., 1714).

Wm. A. Hammond, The Definitions of Faith and Canons of Discipline of the Six
(Ecumeniccd Councils, etc.

William Lambert, The Canons of the Fi^'st Four General Councils of the Church
and those of the Early Greek Synods (London, s. d. Preface dated 1868).

John Fulton, Index Ganonum. [This work ends with the Council of Chalcedon.]
(New York, 1872. 3d Ed., 1892.)

John Mendham, The Seventh General Council, the Second of Nice (Loudon, s. d.).

H. R. Percival, The Decrees of the Seven Ecumenical Synods. Appendix I. to A
Digest of Theology (London, Masters, 1893).

It only remains that I mention two other works.

Dr. Pusey's book, The Councils of the Church from the Council of Jeruscdem A.D. 51
to the Council of Constantinople, 381 (1857) should not be omitted, and cei*tainly the
reader's attention should be called to that most accurate and valuable volume by
Herm. Theod. Bruns, Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum Veterum Selecti (Berolini,
1839), which has been constantly referred to in preparing this work.


APPENDED NOTE ON THE EASTERN EDITIONS OF SYNOD-

ICAL LITERATURE.

From the presses of the East, especially those at Athens, a number of editions more
or less complete of the Greek text of the Canons of the Ecumenical and of the Local
Councils have been issued, and the notes of Balsamon, Zonaras, and Aristenus ha^e
been added in some cases. Professor Bolotoli" writes however that so far as Greek litera-
ture on the subject is concerned, with the exception of purely topographical researches
in the environs of Constantinople, it is simply putting into Greek what was originally
in German.

The Russian Church has done somewhat more and as will be seen from the follow-
ing table, some attempts have been made at providing scholia, but when the scheme of
this i)resent work was shewn him, Professor Bolotoff said : " We have nothing analo-
gous to this undertaking in Russia." The learned professor remarks that all the best
Russian literature upon the subject is contained in magazine articles, especially those
of Prt)fessor Zaozersky of the Moscow Theological Academ}^ and of Professor A. S.
Pavlolf, of the University of Moscow ; he mentions also the latter's article in the Ortho-
dox Bcvleic, and adds that " An Essay on a Course of Church Legislation," by Joann
Smolensk (St. Petersburg, 1851) should be referred to.

BIBLIOGRAFICESKIJ UKAZATEL' PECATNYH IZDANLJ APOSTOL'SKIH
I SOBORNYH PRAVIL NA SLAVJANSKOM I RUSSKOM JAZYKAH.

V pravoslavnoj Russkoj Cerkvi izdanija sobornyh pravil i opredelenij soversalis'
tol'ko po neposredstvennomu rasporjazeniju i soizvoleniju vyssej cerknovnoj vlasti i
fakticeski izjaty iz kompetencii castnoj ucenoj predpriimcivosti. Poetomu podrobnyja
izdanija vypuskalis' v Rossii lis' po mere prakticeskoj potrebnosti.

(1) Pervoe po vremeni pecatnoe izdanie nazvannyh pravil bylo v slavjanskoj "Kormcej
Knige" (i=grec. Ilr]Bd\Lov), kotoraja nacata pecataniem pri Moskovskom patriarhe losife
V ^Nloskve 7go oktjabrja 1649 g. i okoncena Igo ijulja 1650 g., no patr. iS^ikon podverg
ego sobornomu peresmotru, pri cem neskol'ko listov bylo perepecatano i vneseno vnov'.^
Po semu ekzempljary etoj "Kormcej" byli razoslany po cerkvam dlja cerkovnago upotre-
blenija i postupili v obrascenie ne ranee 1653 g. Vtoroe izdanie "Kormcej" bylo v 1787 g.
posle peresmotra eja mitropolitom Novgorodskim i S. Peterburgsldm Gavriilom,^ a
zatem i drugija (napr., v 1804 g., 1816 g. i 1823 g.) bez osobyh peremen. Pozdnejsija
izdanija otlicajutsja ot Nikonovskago v castnostjah, no eto ne kasaetsja cerkovnyh pravil,
kotoryja pomescajutsja v pervoj casti "Kormcej" i soderzat 85 apostol'skih pravil, pos-
tanovlenija 16 -i sohoroY (Mkejskago,An\uvs,kiigo, Neokesarijskago, Gangrskago, Antiohij-
skago, Laodikijskago, Il-go, Ill-go, IV-go vselenskih, Sardikskago, Karfagenskago, Kon-
stantinopol'skago, pri Nekoparge, TrulVskago 692 g., Vll-go vseUnskago, Dvuki^atnago i v
cerkvi sv. Sofii) i pravila 13-ti sv. otcov.

(2) V pecatnoj "Kormcej" kanony izlozeny ne v polnom tekste, a v sokrascennom,
inogda dajuscem lis' ves'ma nedostatocnoe predstavlenie o soderzanii podlinnika. Poetomu
izdavna delalis' popytki celostnj^i perevodov,'^ no poslednie ne pojavljalis' v pecati. ToFko
uze v 1839 g. sv. Sinodom vypusceno bylo v S. Peterburge takoe izdanie: "Kniga pravil

1 Poetomu nekotorye bibUografy spraveillivo scitajut zdes' dva izdanija, iz koih 1653 g. — in folio — sostoit iz 37 + 1 +
60 + 1 + 16 -f 679 listov i bylo perepecatano staroobrjadcami (raskol'nikami) v 1785 g. v Varsave.

2 Eto izdanie in folio'v Mosk ve v d vuh castjah i knigah — v 1-j 2 nenum. +38 + 5 + 60 + 300 + 39 numerovannyh listov,
— vo 'l-i 1+2 + 235 + 16 + 37 listov.

3 Vo vtoroj polovine XVII v. perevodil kanony Epifanij Slavineckij, a v pervoj polovine XVIII v. pravila apostol'ski-
ja i sobornyja byli perevedeny Vasiliem Kozlovskim i Origoriem Poletikoju po greceskomu tekstu " Synodicon " a
Beveregii, s kakovago izdanija sdelan byl novyj perevod v 1782 g.


xxiv APPENDED NOTE ON SYNODICAL LITERATURE

sv. apostol, sv. soborov vselenskih i pomestnyh i sv. otec", napecatannaja v bol'soj list v
"carstvujuscem grade sv. Petra pervyni tisneniem, v leto ot sozdaiiija niira 7347, ot
Rozdestva ze po plot! Boga Slova 1889, indikta 12"; v nem 4 nenumerovannye lista i
455 numerovannyli strannie. Na kazdoj strannice dve kolonny dlja podlinnika i novago
slavjanskago perevoda po polnoinu tekstu, no bez tolkovanij vizantijskih kanonistov;
redko na osnovanii Zonary ili Varsanionu dajutsja piimecanija, ne vsegda tocnyja isto-
riceski (na[)r. k 10 praviln Ankirsk., 3 Sard., 4 Kartag. i o dvnkratnom sobore 861 g,),
a po mestani i samyj tekst ne ispraven (napr., v 13 -ni i)rav. I-go vsel, solx)ra). Eta
"Kniga" imehi potom sledujuscija izdanija: (2) v Moskve v ISinodarnoj tipografii v 1862,
ill folio 8 11.+ 672 + 74 numer. strn., s tekstoui greceskini i slavjanskim (3) ibid, v 1866 g.
in quarto, 3 11.+ 373 strn.+ l 1.+ 59 strn., s odnim slavjanskini tekstom; (4) ibid, v 1874 g.,
in octavo, 4 11. + 455 strn. + 2 11.+ 104 + 4 strn., toze s odnim slavjanskini tekstom;
(5) ibid. V 1886 g., in folio, 3 11.+ 395 +42 strn.+ l 1., opjat' v odnoni slavjanskom tekste.
(3) "Kniga pravil" nicut' ne predstavljaet avtorizovannago textus receptus, i posle eja
izdanija sam Sv. Sinod ne redko privodil v svoih nkazah pravila po slavjaiLskoj redakcii
"Korincej knigi," a potom rekoniendoval Afinskoe izdanie "Sintagmy" dlja vsehduhovno-
ucebnyh zavedenij. Eto otkryvalo mesto dlja iiovoj obrabotki, kotoraja s razresenija
vj'ssej duliovnoj vlasti i byla predprinjata iNIoskovskim "Obscestvom Ijubitelej duhov-
nago prosvescenija". Objavlenie ob etom bylo sdelano v N-re 3 "^loskovskih Eparhialnyh
Cerkovnyh Vedomostej" za 1875 g., a v janvarskoj knizke togoze goda IMoskovskago
zurnala "Ctenija v Obscestve Ijubitelej duliovnago prosvesceiiija" l)yla napecatana i samaja
'•programma" izdanija (strn. 79-90 v otdele bibliogratii. Po povodu eja i)rofessor kanoni-
ceskago prava v Novororossijskom Universitete (skoncavsijsja 16go avgusta 1898 g. pro-
fessorom Moskovskago Universiteta) Aleksej Stepanovic Pavlov sdelal "Zamecanija na
programmu izdanija, v russkom perevode, cerkovnyli pravil s tolkovanijami" v ''Zapiskah
Imperatoi-skago Novorossijskago Universiteta", t. XVI (Odessa 1875 g.) strn. 1-17
prilozenij (i v otdel'noj brosure), a posle perepecatal ih — s nekotorymi dopolnenijami —
V Moskovskom zurnale "Pravoslavnoe Obozrenie" za aprel' 1876 g. (strn. 730-746) pod
zaglaviem •'•O novom perevode tolkovanij na cerkovnyja pravila". Na eti vozrazenija
otvecal professor cerkovnago prava v Moskovskoj Duliovnoj Akademii Alel^andr Feo-
dorovic Lavrov v zurnale "Ctenija v Obscestve Ijubitelej duhovnago prosvesceiiija" (c. II,
strn. 158-194 za 1877 g.) "Pecatnym pis'moni k Alekseju Stepanovicu Pavlovu". Tak
postepenno opredelilsja plan izdanija, kotoroe pecatalos' snacala v prilozenijah k zurnalu
"Ctenija v Obscestve i pr.", a potom javilos' i otdel'no in octavo v sledujuscih V3'j:)uskali:
(a) I-j "Pravila svjatih Apostol s tolkovaniiami" v dvuli izdanijab — Moskva 1876 g.
iz "Ctenij 1875 g., strn. 1-163) 4+12 + 175 strn., i ibid. 1887 g., 5+12 + 163 strn.; Il-j
"Pravila svjatyli vselennyli soborov s tolkovanijami" (iz "Ctenij" 1875 g.. strn. 165-328;
1876 g., strn. 329-680; 1877 g., strn. 681-900) v dvuh castjah: 1-ja "pravila soborov
1-4" Moskva 1877 g., 260 strn., 2-ja "pravila soborov 5-7" ibid., 736 strn.; b) "Pravila
svjatyli pomestnyh soborov s tolkovanijami" toze v dvuh vypuskah(iz "Ctenij" 1877 g.,
strn. 900-1066; 1878 g., strn. 1067-1306; 1879 g., strn. 1307-1410: 1-j (pravila soborov
Ankirskago, Neokesarijskago, Gangrskago. Antiohijskago, Laodildjskago i Sardikijskago)
Moskva 1880, strn. 359; 2-j (pravila soborov Karfagenskago [s poslaijijanii k pape
Vonifatiju i pape Kelestinu], Konstantinopol'skago, Dviiki-atnago i vo hranie premudrosti
slova Bozija) ibid. 1881, strn. 876; e) "Pravila svjatyli otec s tolkovanijami" ibid. 1884,
strn. 626. Pri nih imeetsja otdel'nyj "Ukazatel' predmetov, soderzascihsja v izdanii
pravil apostol'skih, sobornyh i svjatyli otcev s tolkovanijami", IMoskva 1888, 58 strn. in
octavo. Greceskij tekst pravil privoditsja po izdaniju "EvvTay/xa to)v Seicov koI lepojv
Kavovwv . . . uTTo F. A. PaXA.77 Kal M. IIo'tXt;, 'AO^vrjaiv 1852-1854, rjadom s iiiiii po-
me.scajetsja doslovnyj slavjanskij perevod tolkovanij vizantijskili kommentatorov (Zonary,
Aristina, Val'samona), tekst i tolkovanija slavjanskoj Kormcej; vse eto soprovozdaetsja
vydanijami i vsjakago roda pojasnenijami (istoriceskimi, lilologiceskimi. i t. p.). Izdanie


APPENDED NOTE ON SYNODICAL LITEKATURE xxv

eto specialistanii spravedlivo scitaetsja ves'ma cennym v naucnom otnosenii. Glavnym
redaktorom i dejatelem ego byl prof. A. F. Lavrov (v monasestve Aleksij, skoncavsijsja
arhiepLskopom Litovskim i Vilenskim), no pi'ivlekalis' k ucastiju mnogija drugija lica i
mezdu nimi prof. A. S. Pavlov.

(4) Russkij perevod pravil imeetsja tol'ko pri izdanijali Kazanskoj Duhovnoj Akademii:
a) "Dejanija vselenskih soborov v perevode na russkij jazyk", t. I VII (7), Kazan' 1859-
1878 (nekotorye tomy vo vtorom izdanii) i b) "Dejanija devjati pomestnyh soborov v
perevode na russkij jazj^k", odin torn, Kazan' 1878. Etot perevod sdelan po porucenii
Sv. Sinoda, a pravila peredajutsja v nem po tekstu sobornyh dejanij.

Iz predstavlennago ocerka pecatnyli izdanij sobornyh pravil vidno, cto oni — v predelah
svoej fakticeskoj primenimosti — pocitajutsja istocnikom dejstvujuscago prava v
Russkoj pravoslavnoj cerkvi, pocemu dlja neja osobennuju vaznost' imejut lis' av-
toritetnyja vizantijskija, tolkovanija, o kotoryli suscestvujut izsledovanija l". Bemidova,
harakter i znacenie tolkovanij na kanonieeskij kodeks greceskoj cerkvi — Aristina,
Zonary i Val'samona — v "Pravoslavnom Obozrenii" t. II -j za 1888 g., Kazanskago
prof. V. A. Narhskago, Tolkovanija Val'samona na nomokanon Fotija, Kazan' 1889, i
Jur'evskago (= Derptskago) prof. M. E. Krasnozena, Tolkovateli kanoniceskago kodeksa
vostocnoj cerkvi: Aristin, Zonara i Val'samon, jNIoskva 1892.

Otdel'nyh naucnyh tolkovanij vseh sobornyh pravil v russkoj literature net, no oni
izlagajutsja i razjasnjajutsja v kursah cerkovnago prava (arhimandrit. [fep. Sniolens-
kago] Joanna, prof. N. S. Suvorova, I. S. Berdnikova, P. A. Laskareva, M. A. Ostrou-
mova), V socinenijah po istorii vselenskih soborov (ep. loanna, prof. Alekseja Petrovica
Lebedeva), v kanoniceskih i cerkovno-istoriceskih monografijah. Kasatel'no kriticeskago
izdanija podlinnago teksta pravil est' ucenaja i poleznaja stat'ja (o knige Fr. Lauchert,
Die Kanones usw., Freiburg i. Br. und Leipzig 1896) professora cerkovnnoj istorii v
S. Peterburgskoj Duhovnoj Akademii Vasilija Vasilievica Bolotova v " Hristianskom
Ctenii", vyp. IV- j za 1896 g., strn. 178-195.

Professor S. -Peterburgskoj Duhovnoj Akademii
po kafedre Sv. Pisanija Novago Zaveta
NiKOLAJ Glubokovskij.
S.-Peterburg, 1898, X, ll-voskresenie.

A BIBLIOGRAPHICAL INDEX OF THE PRINTED EDITIONS OF THE
CANONS OF THE APOSTLES AND OF THE COUNCILS IN THE
SLAVONIC AND RUSSIAN LANGUAGES.

(Prepared by Nicolas Glubokoffski, Professor of the Chair of the Holy Scriptures of
the New Testament in the Ecclesiastical Academy of St. Petersburgh.) ^

In the orthodox Russian Church, editions of the Conciliar Canons and Decrees
have only been issued under the immediate disposition and sanction of the supreme
ecclesiastical authority, and, in fact, are amongst those things which it is not within
the competence of private scholars to undertake. Such editions therefore have been
published in Russia only in accordance with practical requirements.

1. The earliest printed edition of the afore-mentioned canons appeared in the Sla-
vonic " Kormchaja Kniga "^ (= Gk. 7rr]8d\iov), the printing of which was commenced at
Moscow, on October 7th, 1649, under the Patriarch Joseph of Moscow, and was finished
on July 1, 1650 ; but the Patriarch Nicon caused it to be submitted to a Council for
revision, in consequence of which certain pages were reprinted and inserted afresh into
it.^ Thereupon copies of this "Kormchaja" were distributed for use amongst the

> TraBslated into English by W. J. Birkbeck. Esq., F. S. A. ^ Steering- Book. W. J. B.

'Accordingly some bibliographers correctly reckon this as two editions, of which that of 1653 in folio consists of 37 + 1 + 60 + 1
+ 16 + 679 pages, and was reprinted by the " Old Ritualists" (Rascolniki*), in 1785 at Warsaw.

* Rascolniki, lit. Schismatics ; i.e., the Russian Dissenting sects which in the 17th century left the Church rather than accept
the eervice-books as corrected by the Patriarch Nicon.— W. J B.


xxvi APPENDED NOTE ON SYNODIC AL LITERATURE

churches, and came into general circulation not earlier than the year 1G53. The second
edition of the " Kornichaja " a])peari!d in 1787, after a revision under the Metropolitan
Crabriel of Novgorod and St. Petersbiu'gh/ and was followed by others (e.g., those of
1804, 1816, and 1823) without any alterations of imi)ortance. The latest editions diHer
from that of Nicon in certain particulars, but these particulars do not concern the ec-
clesiastical Canons, which are ])laced in the first part of the "Kornichaja" and include
the 85 Apostolic Canons, the decrees of the sixteen councils (of A^icucu, Ancyra, Neo-
caesarea, Gangra, Antioch, Laodicea, /he 2d, 3d, mid J^tJt Ecumenical, Sardica, Carthage,
Constantinople und(!r Nectarius, in TruUo, A.D. 69 J, the 7th Eciuiwnical, the First-
•ind-Second [council of Constantinople] and that in the church of St. Sophia) and the
Canons of the 13 Holy Fathers.

2. In the printed " Kormchaja " the canons are set forth, not in their full text, but
in a shortened form which sometimes gives but a very insufficient representation of the
contents of the original. On this account attempts at full translations were made many
years back, but these never appeared in print. It was not until 1839 that such an
edition as this was put forth by the Holy Synod at St. Petersburgh, under the title :
" The Book of the Canons of the Holy Apostles, of the Holy Fcumenical and local
Councils, and of the Holy Fathers," printed in larger folio in " the Imperial city of St.
Peter, tlie first impression in the 7317th year from the creation of tlie world, and the
1839th from the Birth in the liesh of God the "Word, indict. 1'2." In this edition there
are 4 unnumbered leaves and 455 numbered pages. On each page there are two col-
umns, for the original text and the new translation of the whole text into the Slavonic
respectivelj', but without the commentaries of the Byzantine Canonists ; occasionally,
but rarely, notes based upon Zonaras or Balsamon are given, which are not always his-
torically accurate (for instance, that to the lOtli Canon of Ancyra, the 3d of Sardica the
4th of Carthage, and the one which deals with the First-and-Second Coiuicil of a.d. SGI)
while in some places the text itself is not correct (for instance, in the 13th Canon of the
1st Ecumenical Council). This " Book of the Canons " subsequently went through the
following editions : the !2d, printed in Moscow at the Synodal Pn^ss in 1862, in folio
8 leaves + 672 + 74 numbered pages, with Greek and Slavonic texts ; the 3d ibid in
1S66, in quarto, 3 leaves + 373 pages + 1 leaf + 59 pages, with the Slavonic text only ;
the 4th, ibid in 1874, in octavo, 4 leaves + 455 pages + 2 leaves + 104 + 4 pages, also
with the Slavonic text only ; the 5th, ibid, in 1886, in folio, 3 leaves + 395 + 42 pages
+ 1 leaf, again with Slavonic text only.

3. The " Book of Canons " by no means represents an authorized textns receptus, and
after its publication, the Holy Synod itself not unfrequently introduced the Canons as
given in the Slavonic edition of the " Kormchaja Kniga " into its edicts, and moreover
recommended the Athenian Edition of the " Syntagma " for all the ecclesiastico-educa-
tional establishments. This opened the way for a new work, which, with the ]iermis-
sion of the supreme eccU^siastical authority, was undertaken b}' the Moscow " Society
of Amateurs of Spiritual Enlightenment." The announcement of this was made in No. 3
of the " Moscow Diocesan Church Gazette " of the year 1875, whilst in the same year
in the January number of th(! Moscow Journal, "Lectures delivered in the Society of
Amateurs of Spiritual Enlightenment," the " ]ir()gramnie " of the edition itself was printed
(pages 79-90 in the section d(?voted to bibliograi)hy). In criticism of it the Professor
of Canonical Law in the University of Novorossiisk, Alexis Stepanovich Pavloff (who
ilicd on August 16, 1898, as Professor of the University of INIoscow) wrote "Notes on
the programme of an edition, in a Ilussian translation of the Canons of the Church with
Commentaries " in the sixteenth volume of " Memoirs of the Imperial University of
Novorossiisk " (Odessa, 1875), pages 1-17 of the Appendix (and in a separate pamphlet),
which was afterwards reprinttnl with C(>rtain additions in the Moscow Journal, " Ortho-
dox lleview," of April, 1876 (pages 730-746), under the title : " A \w\\ translation of the
Commentaries upon the canons of the church." To these criticisms the Professor of


• This pdition wns publiplied at Moscow in fnl.o in two parts and volumes, in the let there are 2 unnambered + 38 + 5 — 60 +
300 + 39 numbered pages ; in the 2d 1 + 2 + 235 + IG + 37 pages.


APPENDED NOTE ON SYNODICAL LITERATURE xxvii

Ecclesiastical Law in the Moscow Ecclesiastical Academy, Alexander Tbeodorovich
Lavrotf, Avrote a reply in " Lectures delivered in the Society of Amateurs of Spiritual
Enlightenment " (for the year 1877, part '2, pages 158-194), entitled " A printed letter to
Alexis Stepanovich Pavloff." Thus the plan of the edition gradually took shape. It
was iirst printed in the Appendices to the Journal " Lectures in the Society, etc.," and
subsequently was published separately in octavo in the following parts (A) I. " The
Canons of the Holy Apostles with Commentaries " in two editions — Moscow^ 1876,
(from " Lectures," 1875, pages 1-103) 4 + 12 + 175 pages, and ibid., 1887, 5-12 + 163
pages; XL "Canons of the Holy Ecumenical Councils with Commentaries " (from
"Lectures" 1875, pages 165-325 ; 1876, pages 329-680; 1877, pages 891-900), in two
parts: 1st "The Canons of the Councils I.-IV.," Moscow, 1877, 260 pages; 2d. "The
Canons of Councils V.-VIL," ibid., 736 pages ; (B) " The Canons of the Holy Local
Councils with Commentaries," also in two parts (from " Lectures" 1877, pages 900-
1066 ; 1878, pages 1067-1306 ; 1879, pages 1307-1410) : the 1st (The Canons of the
Councils of Ancyra, Neocsesarea, Gangra, Autioch, Laodieea, and Sardica) Moscow,
1880, 359 pages ; the 2d (The Canons of the Councils of Carthage [with the letters to
Pope Boniface and to Pope Celestine], Constantinople, the First-and-Secoud, and that
in the Temple of the Wisdom of the Word of God) ibid., 1881, 876 pages; (C) "The
Canons of the Holy Fathers with Commentaries," ibid., 1884, 626 pages. Together
with these is a separate " Index of subjects contained in the edition of the Canons of
the Apostles, Councils and Holy Fathers with Commentaries," Moscow, 1888, 58 pages
in octavo. The Greek text of the canons follows the edition ^vvray/xa tmv S^eixov koX lepcov
Kavovwv . . . inro F. A. PdWrj kol M. TlorXr), AS^/jvi^atv 1852-1854, and alongside
of it is placed a literal Slavonic translation, after which follows a Russian translation of
the Commentaries of the Byzantine Canonists (Zonaras, Aristeuus, Balsamon), and the
text and commentaries of the Slavonic " Kormchaja ; " all this is accompanied by in-
troductions and explanations of all sorts (historical, philological, etc.). This edition is
rightly considered by specialists to be of very great value from a scientific point of
view. Professor A. Th. Lavro£f (who became a monk under the name Alexis, and died
Archbishop of Lithuania and Vilna) w^as its chief editor and had most to do with it,
but many others took part in the w'ork, and amongst these Professor A. S. Pavloff.

4. The only Russian translation of the canons which exists is contained in the pub-
lications of the Ecclesiastical Academy of Kazan : (a) " The Acts of the Ecumenical
Councils translated into Russian," 7 volumes. Kazan, 1859-1878 (some of these
volumes have run into a second edition) and (b) " Acts of the nine local councils trans-
lated into Russian," 1 volume, Kazan, 1878. This translation was made under the
direction of the Holy Synod, and the Canons are reproduced in it according to the text
of the Acts of the Councils.

From the outline here presented of the printed editions of the Canons of the Coun-
cils, it will be seen that, within the limits of their practical applicability, they are rev-
erenced as the source of the operative law in the Russian orthodox church, and therefore
for her it is only the authoritative Byzantine commentaries which have any particular
importance. There are works upon these by V. Demidoff, " The character and sig-
nificance of the commentaries upon the Canonical Codex of the Greek Church — of
Aristenus, Zonaras, and Balsamon," in the " Orthodox Review," vol. ii. of 1888, and
of Professor V. A. Narhel'ojf^ of Kazan, "The commentaries of Balsamon upon tne
Nomocanon of Photius," Kazan, 1889, and of Professor M. E. Krasnozhen, of Jurieff
(Dorpat) " The Commentators of the Canonical Codex of the Eastern Church : Aris-
tenus, Zonaras, and Balsamon." Moscow, 1892.

No separate scientific commentaries upon all the canons of the councils exist in
Russian literature, but they are described, and explained in courses of Ecclesiastical
law (of the Archimandrite John [who, when he died, Avas Bishop of Smolensk]
of Professors N. S. Suvoroff, T. S. Berdnikoff. N. A. Lashkareff, M. A. Ostroiimofi')


xxviii APPENDED NOTE ON SYNODICAL LITERATURE

in our works upon the history of the Ecumenical Councils (by Bishop John, and
Professor Alexis Petrovich Lebodeff), and in mono<jjra]>lis dcalinfjj with Canon Law and
Church History. As far as a critical edition of the <)rijj;inal text of the canons is con-
cerned, there is a learned and useful article (upon a book by Fr. Lauchert, Die Kauones
usw., Freiberg i. Br. und Leipsig, 1896), by Vasili Vasilievich Bolototl", Professor of
Ecclesiastical History in the St. Petersburgh Ecclesiastical Academy in the " Christian
Eeading," yol. iv. for 1890, j^p. 178-195.


EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW AND
ITS RELATION TO THE CANON LAW.

The foregoing bibliographical outline would be entirely incomplete did I not give
the reader at least a sketch of how those canons adopted by the various councils gradu-
ally won admission to the law-code of the Empire, and how that code itself came into
being. For those wishing to study the matter in detail I would name as the most recent
authorities upon the Roman Law, Mr. Muirhead, who has published with additions and
notes his article on the subject in the " Encyclopaedia Britannica," and Mr. Bury's new
edition of Gibbon's Rome just being issued with most learned notes.

But neither of these writers has put the matter exactly as I desire for this purpose,
and I have therefore been forced to seek elsewhere the information I now lay before
the reader.

The study of Jurisprudence did not form a separate department among the ancient
Greeks, but among the Romans it was quite otherwise, and a very elaborate system
was developed, so elaborate as to demand the care of a special class of men, who de-
voted themselves to this business alone and handed down to their successors a con-
stantly increasing mass of legal matter.

When Greece fell under the Roman yoke the laws of the victor were imposed upon
the vanquished, but even then the Greeks did not take to legal studies. In fact not un-
til the seat of the Empire was removed to Constantinople did the East become a centre
of jurisprudence or the residence of the chief legal experts. In the whole period before
the fourth century of our era we know of but one barrister who wrote in Greek, and he
came from the West, Herennius Modestinus. He was a disciple of Ulpian and precep-
tor to the Emperor Maximiau the Younger.

From the time of Hadrian to that of Alexander Severus the influence of the legal
schools of Rome had been paramount. The Emperors consulted them and asked them
to decide difficult points. But after the death of Alexander this custom fell into entire
disuse, and the Emperors themselves decided the matters formerly entrusted to the
lawyers. After this time the Imperial Constitutions became the chief sources of Ro-
man law. It is only in the time of Constantine the Great that Me find once again the
lawyers rising into prominence and a flourishing school at Beyroot in Syria. It was
at this time that the Imperial Constitutions or Edicts were first collected, for until then
they existed only in detached documents. This collection was made by two lawyers,
Gregory or Gregorian, and Hermogenes. Gregory's collection contains the laws set
forth from the time of Hadrian to Constantine, and Hermogenes wrote a supplement.
Although this was but a private enterprise, yet it was cited in the courts of law, just as
Lord Lyndwood's Provinciale is with us to-day.

It is interesting to note that it was about this same time that the first attempt was
made to collect the ecclesiastical canons, and so the Civil Law and the Canon Law (as
we know them in after times) had their rise about the same period.

The law of the Empire was not, however, to be left to private and unofiicial action,
but by the care of Theodosius the Younger its first official collection was made. This
prince directed eight men learned in the law to gather into one body of laws all the Im-
perial Constitutions published since the last included in the collections of Gregory and
Hermogenes. This is the " Theodosian Code," and contains the laws set forth by Con-
stantine and his successors. It was promulgated in 438 in the East, and received by
the then Emperor of the West, Yalentinian III. To this were subsequently added such
laws as each set forth, under the title of " New Constitutions."

The Emperor Justinian determined still further to simplify the attaining of judicial
decisions. It is true that the making of the legal collections referred to had added
greatly to the ease of determining the law in any given case, but there was a source of
great confusion in the endless number of legal decisions which by custom had acquired


XXX EXCURSUS OX THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAX LAW

the force of l;i\v, iiiul which were by no nieaus alwiiys consisteut between themselves;
these were the famous trsponsii J urispcriforion. To clear iip this difficulty was no small
task, but the EiujxMor went about it in the most ik'terminod fashion and appointed a
commission, consisting:; of Tribonian ami ten other experts, to make a new collection of
all the imperial constitutions from Hadrian to his own da}'. This is the famous Jus-
tinian Code, which was promnlpited in 529, and abrogated all ])revious collections.'

This, however, was not sulHcicnt to remove the difficulty, and Tril)onian next, together
with sixteen lawyers, spent three years in making extracts from the great mass of deci-
sions of the ancient jurists, tilling as they did nearly two thousand volumes. These
they digested and did their best to clear away the contradictions. When the work was
finisheil it aj)peartHl to the world as the " Pandects," because it was intended to contain
all tliere was to be said upon the subject. It is also known as the " Digest." This
work was set forth in 533 and from that time such of the former decisions as were not
incorporated ceased to have any force.

It must however be remembered that, while this was the case, all the decisions con-
tained in the Pandects did not obtain the force of law. The Pandects are not a code of
laws, but a system of ])ublic jurisprudence composed by public authority. To the Pan-
dects were added by the Emperor two ordinances, the first to forbid any copyist to
write them in an abl)reviated form ; and the second forbidding commentators to treat
them in anything but their literal sense.

While this work was in progress some points were so complicated and obscure that
the Emperor had to be appealed to, and his writings in these particulars are the origin
of the " Fifty Decisions."

At th(^ same time was prepared the " Institutes," containing the elements of the
whole lloman law.-

Later, new laws having been made, the Code had to be revised ; the former edition
was abrogated in 534, and a new one set forth with the title " Codex repetitte pnielec-
tionis."

The last of Justinian's labours in the field of jurisprudence (if indeed they were not
collected after his death) are his " Novels," a series of imperial constitutions issued be-
tween 535 and 559 (Neapal AtaTu^ei<). Tliere are one hundred and sixty-eight of these
Novels, but the ancient glosses only know ninety-seven, and the rest have been added
since, as they have been found.

Such is the origin of the Corpus Juris Civilis, and its history needed to be set forth
in this place on acc;ount of its close connection with the Corpus Juris Canonici. In the
foregoing I have followed M. Schoell in his admirable Hisfoire de la Litieratnre Grerque
Profane, to which I am also chietl}' indebted for the following notes upon the jurists of
the sixth and ensuing centuries.

A work which is often looked upon as the origin of the Canon Law was composed by
a lawyer of Antioch, somewhere near the middle of the sixth century. This jurist was
John of Antioch, surnamed Scholasticus. He was representative or apocrisiarius of
the Church of xVntioch at Constantino])le, and afterward was made Patriarch of that see,
over which he ruh^d from 564 until his death in 578. AVhile still a simple priest at
Antioch he made his Collerfinn of ilw. Canons of flic Councils.

" He was not the first who conceived the idea of such a work. Some writers, resting
upon a passage in Socrates, have been of o])inion that this honour belonged to Sabinus,
bishop of Heraclea, in Thrace, at the beginning of the fifth century ; but Socrates is not
speaking of a collection of canons at all, but of the synodal acts, of the letters written
by or addressed to the synods. If, however, Sabiims did not make a collection of
canons, it is certain nevertheless that before John of Antioch there existed one, for he
himself cites it many times, although he does not name the authors."^


' It was written in Latin but. payp Bury <Ai)penrtix to Vol. V. of GiI)bon'p Unmr, p. 52.%), "was also immediately after it? pub-
lication in L.'itiii. issued i perhaps ineompletelyi in n (ireek form (Cf. Znchiiria Von Lintrenthal, Or. Horn. lierhf., p. C). Most of the
later Novels are Greek, and Novel vij [l.'i. ed. Zneh.] e\pre««ly rer.ocrnizos the necessity of usins ' the common (Jreek toncue.' "

2 The Pandects or DiRest was translated into (ireek by Dorothens, and Theophilus prepared a Greek paraphrase of the Institutes.

'Schoell, Jlist. Liu. Grec, Tome vii., Lib. vi., chap. .xcv;j., p. 220.


EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW xxxi

" In gathering together thus the canons of the councils John of Antioch did not
form a complete body of ecclesiastical law. By his Novel CXLI., Justinian had indeed
given to the canons of the Church the force of law, but he himself published a great
number of constitutions ujjou Church matters. Now it was necessary to harmonize
these constitutions and canons, and to accomplish this feat was the object of a second
work undertaken by John of Antioch, to which he gave the title of Nomocanon
(No/jboKavoov),^ a word which from that time has served to designate any collection of
this sort." ~

Bury says, " In the troubles of the Vllth century the study of law, like many other
things, declined, and in the practical administration of justice the prescriptions of the
Code and Digest Avere often ignored or modified by the alien precepts of Christianity.
The religion of the Empire had exerted but very slight influence — no fundamental influ-
ence, we may say — on the Justinian law. Leo III., the founder of the Syrian (vulgarly
called Isaurian) dynasty, when he restored the Empire after a generation of anarchy,
saw the necessity of legislation to meet the changed circumstances of the time. The
settlements of foreigners — Slavs and Mardaites — in the 2:)rovinces of the Empire created
an agrarian question, which he dealt with in his Agrarian Code. The increase of Slav-
onic and Saracenic piracy demanded increased securities for maritime trade, and this
was dealt with in a Navigation Code. But it was not only for special relations that Leo
made laws ; he legislated also, and in an entirely new way, for the general relations of
life. He issued a law book (in a.d. 740 in the name of himself and his son Constantiue),
which changed and modified the Koman law, as it had been fixed by Justinian. The
Ecloga,-' as it is called, may be described as a Christian law book. It is a deliberate
attempt to change the legal system of the Empire by an application of Christian princi-
ples. Examples, to illustrate its tendency, will be given below. The horror in which
the iconoclasts were held on account of their heresy by the image-worshippers, cast dis-
credit upon all their works. This feeling had something to do with the great reaction,
which was inaugurated by Basil I., against their legal reforms. The Christian Code of
Leo prevailed in the empire for less than a century and a half ; and then, under the
auspices of Basil, the Roman law of Justinian was (partially) restored. In legal activity
the Basilian epoch faintly reflected the epoch of Justinian itself. A handbook of ex-
tracts from the Institutes, Digest, Code, and Novels, was published in a.d. 879, entitled
the Prochiron, to diffuse a knowledge of the forgotten system. But the great achieve-
ment of the Basilian epoch is the 'Basilica' — begun under Basil, completed under Leo
YI. — a huge collection of all the laws of the Empire, not only those still valid, but
those which had become obsolete. It seems that two commissions of experts were a})-
pointed to prepare the material for this work. One of these commissions compiled the
Prochiron by the way, and planned out the Basilica in sixty Books. The other com-
mission also prepared a handbook called the Epanagoge, which was never actually pub-
lished (though a sketch of the work is extant), and planned out the Basilica in forty
Books. The Basilica, as actually published, are arranged in sixty Books, compiled fronj
the materials prepared by both commissions.

" The Basilian revival of Justinianean law was permanent ; and it is outside our pur-
pose to follow the history further, except to note the importance of the foundation of a
school of law at Constantinople in the lltli century by the Emperor Constantine IX.
The law enacting the institution of this school, under the direction of a salaried Nomo-
phylax, is extant. John Xiphiliu (see above) was the first director. This foundation
may have possibly had some influence on the institution of the school at Bologna half
a century later." ^

I take from Schoell the following description of the " Basilica " :

"The 'Basilica' are a body of Roman law in the Greek language, extracted from the
Institutes, the Pandects, the Codes and the Novels of Justinian as well as from the Im-

i The two collections of John are published with a translation in the Billiotheca Juris Canonici Veteris of Voellus and Justellns,
Vol. n. ^ Ibid ut supra, p. 227

' The " Erloria " were edited in 1852 by Zacharia, and again in 1889 by Monferratus.

* Appendix to Vol. V. of Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, pp. 525 and 526.


xxxii EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW

perial Constitutions posterior to that })rince ; also extracts from the interpretations of
such jurists as had won a lixed authority in the courts, ami the canons of the councils.
Here is found togt'thcr the civil and thii ecclesiastical law of the (i reeks, these two laws
having been in an intimate union by reason of tlie authority which the Empenjrs exer-
cised over the Church ; on the other hand, in the West there was formed step by step a
canon law separate from the civil law, and having a ditlerent source." '

Such, then, were the " liasilica," but what is most singular is that this collection
was not given the force of law, neither by Leo YI. nor by Constantine VI., although it
was prepared at their order, under their authority, and was written in the language
whii'h was spoken by their subjects. The Justinian code of law, although in Latin,
still continued to be the only authority in the entire E;i.st. An anonymous writer ])re-
pared an E[)itome of the Easilica, digested into Al})habetical order, and beginning with
" Of the Ortiiodox faith of Christians."

In 883 Photius published a " Syntagma canonum" and a "Nomocanon " with the
title ripoKauwv, because it was placed before the canons. This last work at the com-
mand of Ct)nstantine VI. was revised and soon took the place of the Nomocanon of
John of Antioch, over which work it had the advantage of being more recent and of
being digested in better order. In citing the canons, only the titles are given ; but the
text of the civil laws appears in full. "As in the Eastern Church the influence of the
imperial authority increased at the expense of that of the councils, and as these princes
made ecclesiastical aflairs a principal part of their government, it came to pass that the
Nomocanon of Photius became of more frequent and more necessary use than his Syn-
tagma, [which contained the actual text of the canons of the councils down to 880].
Many commentators busied themselves with it, wdiile the collection of the councils was
neglected. Thus it has happened that the Nomocwion has become the true foundation
of the ecclesiastical law of the East." ^

But while this is true, yet there were not lacking commentators upon the Canon law,
and of the three chiefest of these some notice must be taken in this place. As I have
already pointed out it is to Bishop Beveridge that we owe the publication not only of
Photius's Collection of Canons which are found in his '■' XwohtKov sive Pandect?e," but
also of the scholia of all three of these great commentators, Zouaras, Aristenus, and
Balsamon, and fi'om his most learned Prolegomena to the same work I have chiefly
drawn the following facts, referring the curious reader to the introduction ^ itself for
further particulars.

John Zonaras was probably the same person who wrote the Byzantine History
which bears his name. He flourished under Alexis Conmenus, and enjoyed the high
oftice of Grand Drungarius Vighe {Apovyyapio^; Trj<; BijXr)<;) and Chief of the Clerks.
After some years of secular life he retired to a monastery and devoted himself to literary
pursuits. AVhile here, at the command of his superiors, and moved by the persuasion
of his friends, he wrote that great book which has made his fame, which he entitled
" An Exposition of the Sacred and Divine Canons, as well those of the holy and ven-
erable Apostles, as also those of the sacred Q^^cumenical Synods, and those of the local
or particular councils, and those of the rest of the Holy Fathers ; by the labour of John
Zonaras the monk, who was formerly Grand Drungarius Viglro and Chief of the Clerks."^

One of the greatest peculiarities of this work, and one which distinguishes it very
markedly from the later work of Balsamon U])on the same subject, is that Zonaras con-
fines himself strictly to the canon law and rarely makes any references to the civil law
whatever ; and in such canons as bear no relation to the civil law^ Balsamon often
adopts Zonaras's notes without change or addition.

These commentaries were first brought to light by John Quintin, a professor of
canon law at Paris, who published a Latin translation of the scholia upon the Apostolic


' Schcell. ut supra, p 229. The best edition of the Basilica is by W. E. Heimbach in 6 vols. (1833-70).
' Sch<pll. 7it ante. p. 2:i8.

' Bcvcridire. SufoSntbt- xive Pariderta.. Tom. I. of the original ed. Reprinted in Lib. Anglo. Cath. Theol.. appendix to Vol. XII.
of Beverid'je's Works, pp. xxi -xxxix.

' Ef 1)77)31? Tiip icpuf (tai Stiuiv KOLVovbiv Twv rt ayiuiv Ka.\ (TtnrCyv AirocrTaAiDi', k. t. \.


EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW xxxiii

Canons. This was in 1558. In 1618 Antonius Salmatia edited his commentaries on
the canons of the Councils done into Latin. To this Latin version the Paris press
added the Greek text from tlie MS. codex in the Iloyal Library and printed it in
1618. In 1622 the same press issued his commentaries upon the Epistles of the Holy
Fathers, together with those of 8t. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Macarius of Egypt, and
Basil. But Beveridge collected them in his Oxford Edition for the first time into one
work ; preparing a somewhat critical text by collation with some manuscripts he found
at home.

The second of these great Greek scholiasts is Alexis Aristenus. As Beveridge points
out, he must have flourished before or at the same time as Balsamon, for this latter
speaks of him in high terms of commendation in his scholion on the Sixth of the Apos-
tolic Canons, describing him as rov virepnixov. Aristenus was Nomophylax, Orphano-
trophe and Protecdekas, or chief of the Syndics of the Communes, called Ecdics
C'EKSiKot). He wrote the excellent series of notes upon the Epitomes of the Canons
which are given the reader in Beveridge's Pradects. Schoell says that it is an error to
attribute to him the " Extract of the Ancient Ecclesiastical Laws," " which is none of
his." ^ Aristenus was Grand Economus of the Chui-ch of Constantinople and a man of
great distinction ; and his opinion was sought after and his decision followed even when
in opposition to one of the Patriarchs, viz. : Nicephorus of Jerusalem.

Beveridge was the first to print Aristenus's Scholia, and he did so from four MSS.,
in England, for a description of which I refer the reader to the bishop's prolegomena.

Theodore Balsamon is the last of the three great Greek scholiasts. He flourished
in the time of the Emperor Isaac Angelus and bore the title of Patriarch of Antioch,
although at that time the city was in the hands of the Latins and had been so since
1100. He was looked upon as the greatest jurist of his times both in ecclesiastical and
civil matters. Somewhere about the year 1150, he wrote by the order of Manuel Com-
nenus a series of " Scholia upon the Nomocanon of Photius," and another set styled
" Scholia upon the Canons of the Apostles, of the Councils and of the Fathers of the
Church; " he also prepared a "Collection of [imperial] Constitutions upon ecclesiasti-
cal matters," ^ in three books, which has been published (by Loewenklaw) at Frankfort,
1595, under the title "Paratitles." There remains also a great number of his opinions
on cases presented to him, notably his " answers to sixty-four canonical questions by
Mark, Patriarch of Alexandria."

These most learned writings were unknown and forgotten, at least in the West,
until they were set forth in a Latin translation during the time the Council of Trent
was sitting, in 1561, and not till 1620 did the Greek text appear in the Paris edition of
that date. But this text w^as imperfect and corrupt, and Beveridge produced a pure
text from an Oxford MS., with which he compared several others. Moreover in his
Pandects he amended the Latin text as well in numberless particulars. For further
particulars of the bibliography of the matter see Beveridge.^

It may not be amiss to add that abundant proof of the high esteem in which Balsa-
mon was held is found in contemporary authors, and no words can give an exaggerated
idea of the weight of his opinion on all legal matters, religious and profane ; his works
were undertaken at the command of the Emperor and of the Patriarch, and were
received with an unmixed admiration.^

In the thirteenth century a certain Chumnus who had been Nomophylax and was
afterwards elevated to the Archiepiscopal chair of Thessalonica wrote a little book on
the "Degrees of Eelationship."^

In the fourteenth century we find Matthew Blastares writing "An Alphabetical
Table " "^ of the contents of the canons of the councils, and of the laws of the Emperors.

And in the same century we find Constantine Harmenopulus, who was born in 1320.
He was, when thirty years of age, a member of the first court of civil justice {Judex

> Schoell, Hist. Lib. Grec, Tom VTl., p. 241. « Beveridge, Pandectce. Prol. § XXX.

3 Till' (KKX-qcriacrTiKuiv Stdrafewi' 'S.vWoyr}. * Beveridge, Pandects, Prol. § XrX.-XXTI.

' Ibid.. Prol. § XVT.-XIX. ' Found in Leunclavius, Jur. Grec. Rom., Vol. ii.

' SiifTay/xa KOTa 'S.Toi.\iiav, found in Beveridgc's Synodicon, bat (says Schcell) "in a manner very little correct."


xxxiv EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW


Droiiii). Subsequently lie was appointed Couusellor of the Emperor, John Oantaouzene,
and tinally Sebastos and Curopalatos under John l^aleolo^us. In the year lo4;3 he
published a " Manual of Jurisprudence." ^ This work is of great value to the student oi
Roman law as he completes the work of the Emjjeror JJasil by adding the in)i)erial con-
stitutions since that time. But our chief conceiii with him is as the author of an
"Epitome of the Divine and Sacred Canons."'

Constantine Harmeuopulus was the hxst Greek jurist, and then Constantinople fell,
to the everlasting disgrace of a divided Ciiristendom, into the hands of the Intidel, and
the law of the false Prophet supi)lanted the lioman Law, the Code of Civilization and
Christianity.

I pass now to the history of the growth of the canon law in the AYest. No one read-
ing even cursorily the canons contained in the present volume can fail to notice that,
with the exception of those of the African code, they are ])rimarily intended for the
government of the East and of persons more immediately under the shadow of the im-
perial city. In fact in the canons of the Council in Trullo and in those of the Seventh
Synod there arc places which not even covertly are attacks, or at least reflections, upon
the Western customs of the time. And it does not seem to be an unjust view of the
inatter to detect in the Council of Chalcedon and its canon on the position of the See
of Rome, a beginning of that unhappy spirit which found its full expression in that most
lamentable breaking off of communion between East and West.

While, then, as I have pointed out, in the East the Canon Law was developed and
digested side by side and in consonance with the civil law, in the West the state of
things was wholl}' ditierent, and while in secular matters the secular power was su})-
posed to be supreme, there gi-ew up a great body of Ecclesiastical Law, often at variance
with the secular decrees upon the subject. To trace this, step b}' step, is no i)art of my
duty in this excursus, and I shall only give so brief an outline that the reader may be
able to understand tiie references in the notes which accom])any the Canons in the text.

Somewhere about the year 500 Dionysius Exiguus, Avho Avas Abbot of a Monastery
in Rome, translated a collection of Greek Canons into Latin for Bishop Stephen of Sa-
lona. At the head of these he placed fifty of what we now know as the " Canons of
the Apostles," but it must not be supposed that he was convinced of their Apostolic
origin, for in the Preface to his translation he expressly styles them " Canons which
are said to be by the Apostles," and adds " quibus plurimi consensum non proebuere
facilem."^ To these he added the canons of Chalcedon with those that council had ac-
cepted, viz., those of Sardica, and a large number passed by African Synods, and lastly
the Papal Decretals from Siricius to Anastasius II.

The next collection is that of St. Isidore of Seville, or which is supposed to have
been made by him, early in the seventh century.

About the middle of the ninth century there appeared a collection bearing the name
of Isidore Mercator, and containing the " false decretals" which have been so fruitful a
theme of controversial writing. This collection was made somewhere about the year
850, and possibly at Mayence. Many writers in treating of these decretals, which are
undoubtedly spurious, seem to forget that they must have expressed the prevailing
0})inions of the day in which they were forged, of what those early Popes would have
been likely to have said, and that therefore even forgeries as they certainly are, they
have a gr(\it historical value which no sound scholar can properly neglect.

After the collection of St. Isidore we have no great collection till that of Gratian in
115L Gratian was a Benedictine monk, and he styled his work " A Reconciling of
contradictory canons" {Concordanlia discordantium Oanonum), which well sets forth what
his chief object in view was, but his work had a great future before it, and all the wt)rld

' np6\(i.pov tSjv t'OMUK. Of this there have been many editions since the first, which was that of Paris. 1540, edited hv Snallen-
berg, without anv Latin translation and without notes. "The first Latin version was published at Colofnie in ^^A'. a second at Lyons
in 13.50, and a third at Lausanne in 1.5S0. At last in 15S7. at Geneva, there aiipearcd an I'dition in Greek and Latin.

^'EiTiToa'ri Tiui/ 9(iutv Kai ifpCiv Kavni'ujv. This work is found with a Latin version in the Collection of La>wenklaw.

' Ue'ele points out that Dr von Drey's contention tliat " plurimi "' refers to the (ireeks cannot l)e sustained if it is pushed so far
as to exchide from the West an acquaintance with these canons in their Greek form, for, as he well points out Greek was a perfectly
well understood language at this time in the West, especially in Italy, where it was largely spoken. {A /list. Christ. Councils, Vol.
I. Appendix, p. 449.)


EXCURSUS ON THE HISTORY OF THE ROMAN LAW xxxv

knows it as " Gratian's Decretiim," and with it begins the "collections" of Canon law,
if we consider it as a system in present force.

" This great work is divided into three parts. The first part, in 101 ' Distinctions,'
treats of ecclesiastical law, its origin, principles, and authority, and then of the different
ranks and duties of the clergy. The second part, in thirty-six ' Causes,' treats of eccle-
siastical courts and their forms of procedure. The third part, usually called ' De Con-
secratione,' treats of things and rites employed in the service of religion. From its
first appearance the Decretum obtained a wide popularity, but it was soon discovered
that it contained numerous errors, which were corrected under the directions of suc-
cessive Popes down to Gregory XIII. Nor, although every subsequent generation has
resorted to its pages, is the Decrehun an authority to this day — that is, whatever canons
or maxims of law are found in it possess only that degree of legality which they Avould
possess if they existed separately ; their being in the Decretum gives them no binding
force. In the century after Gratian, several supplementary collections of Decretals
appeared. These, Avith many of his own, were collected by the orders of Gregory IX.,
who employed in the work the extraordinary learning and acumen of St. Raymond of
Pennafort, into five books, known as the Decretah of Gregory IX, These are in the
fullest sense authoritative, having been deliberately ratified and published bv that Pope
(1234). The Scxi, or sixth book of the Decretals, was added by Boniface VIII. (1298).
The Clementines are named after Clement Y., who compiled them out of the canons of
the Council of Yienne (1316) and some of his own constitutions. The Extravagantes of
John XXIL, who succeeded Clement Y., and the Extra vagantes Communes, containing
the decretals of twenty-five Popes, ending with Sixtus lY. (1484), complete the list. Of
these five collections — namely the Decretals, the Sext, the Clementines, the Extrava-
gants of John XXIL and the Extravagants Common — the 'Corpus Juris Ecclesiastici '
of the West is made up." ^

Into this body of canon law of course many of the canons we shall have to treat of
in the following pages have been incorporated and so far as possible I shall give the
reader a reference which will help his research in this particular.


' Addis and Arnold, A Catholic Dictionary, sub voce Canon Law.


THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCIL


THE FIEST COUNCIL OF NICE

A.D. 325

Emperor. — Coxstantine.
Pope. — Silvester.

Elench us.

Historical Infroducfion. I Excursus to C. viij, On the Cliorepis-

The Creed and the Creed of Eusehius of copi,
Ccesarea. Excursus to C. xj, On the Public Dis-

Excicrsus on the ivord homonsios. cipline.

Excursus on the words yevvrjS^evra ov ttolt]- Excursus to C. xiij. On the Communion of
SevTa. the Sick.


Excursus to C. xv, On the Translation of
Bisho2JS.


The XX. Canons, with the Ancient Epitome
and Notes.

Excursus to C.J, On the use of the wordl Excursus to C. xvij, On Usury.
Canon. Excursus to C. xix, On Deaconesses.

Excursus to C. v, On the ivord irpo'iipe- Excursus on the Number of the Nicene


peiv.

Excursus to C. vj, On the Extent of Rome's
Jurisdiction over Suburhican Churches.

Excursus to C. vij, On the Rise of the
Patriarchate of Jerusalem.


Canons, ivith the Contents of the spurious
Arabic Canons.

Prop)osed Action on Clerical Celibacy.

Tlie Synodcd Letter with the Decree on the
Keeping of Easter.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

The history of the Council of Nice has been so often written by so many brilliant histo-
rians, from the time of its sitting down to to-day, that any historical notice of the causes
leading to its assembling, or account of its proceedings, seems quite unnecessaiy. The ed-
itor, however, ventures to call the attention of the reader to the fact that in this, as in every
other of the Seven Ecumenical Councils, the question the Fathers considered was not what
they supposed Holy Scripture might mean, nor what they, from dpriori arguments, thought
would be consistent with the mind of God, but something entirely different, to wit, what
they had received. They understood their position to be that of witnesses, not that of exe-
getes. They recognized but one duty resting upon them in this respect — to hand down to
other faithful men that good thing the Church had received according to the command of
God. The first requirement was not leai-ning, but honesty. The question they were called
upon to answer was not, What do I think probable, or even certain, from Holy Scripture ?
but, What have I been taught, what has been intrusted to me to hand do-vvn to others ?
When the time came, in the Fourth Council, to examine the Tome of Pope St. Leo, the
question was not whether it could be proved to the satisfaction of the assembled fathers
from Holy Scripture, but whether it was the traditional faith of the Church. It was not the
doctrine of Leo in the fifth century, but the doctrine of Peter in the first, and of the Church
since then, that they desired to believe and to teach, and so, when they had studied the
Tome, they cried out : *

"This is the faith of the Fathers! This is the faith of the Apostles! . . . Peter
hath thus spoken by Leo ! The Apostles thus taught ! Cyril thus taught ! " etc.

No Acts of either of the first two Ecumenical Councils have been handed down.^

'This is clearly set forth by Pope Vijrilius as follows : "No tione Trium Capitulorum. Migne, I'at. Lot., torn. Ixix., col.

one nm doubt that our fathers" believed that thev should receive 102,

with veueration the letter of blessed Leo if they declared it to ' About twenty-five years ago Mr. Eugene Revillout diecov-

agree with the doctrines of the Nicene and C'oristantinopolitan ered, iu the Museum of Turin, two frajniients in Coptic which

Councils, as also with those of blessed Cyril, set forth in the first he supposed to be portions of the Acts of this Council (of which

of Ephesus. And if that letter of so preat a Pontiff, shining the rest are still missing) incorporated into the Acts of a Council

with so bright a lisht of the orthodox Faith, needed to be ap- held at Alexandria in M2. But there is too little known about

proved by these comparisons, how can that letter to Maris the these fragments to attribute to them any fixed value. I therefore

Persian, which specially reiects the First Council of Ephesus and only refer the reader to the literature on the ^uhject— Journal

declares to be heretical the expressed doctrines of the blessed Asiatiqne, Fevrier-Mars, 1S73 ; Annales de l'hiIosi>i>hie Chriti-

Cyril, be believed to have been called orthodox by these same ennr. .Twin, 1873; lievue de Questions Historiques, Avril, 1874;

Fathers, condemning as it does tliose writings, by comparison M. W. Guettee, JlUtoire de VEglise, t. III., p. 21; Eugene R6-

with which, 'is we have said, the doctrine of so great a Pontift villout. Le Concile de Side et U Concile d'Alexandrie .

deserved to be commended ? " — Vigil., Coiistitutum pro damna- d'apris les textes Copies.


THE NICENE CREED


{Found in the Acts of the Ecumenical Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, in the Epis-
tle of Eusehius of Cccsarea to his oion Church, in the Epistle of St. Athanasius Ad
Jovianum Imp., in the Ecclesiastical Histories of Theodoret and Socrates, and elseivhere,
The variations in the text are absolutely without imjjortance.)


The Synod at Nice set forth this Creed. ^
The Ecthesis of the Synod at Nice.-
"We believe in one God, the Father Al-
mighty, maker of all things visible and in-
visible ; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, the only-begotten of his Fa-
ther, of the substance of the Father, God
of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God, begotten (yevvrjl^evTa) , not made, be-
ing of one substance {6/xoovacov, consub-
stantialem) with the Father. By whom all
things were made, both which be in heaven
and in earth. Who for us men and for our
salvation came down [from heaven] and was
incarnate and was made man. He suffered
and the third day he rose again, and as-
cended into heaven. And he shall come
again to judge both the quick and the
dead. And [we believe] in the Holy Ghost.
And whosoever shall say that there was a
time when the Son of God was not {ijv irore
ore ovK rjv), or that before he was begotten
he was not, or that he was made of things
that were not, or that he is of a different
substance or essence [from the Father] or
that he is a creature, or subject to change
or conversion ^ — all that so say, the Catho-
lic and Apostolic Church anathematizes
them.


NOTES

The Creed of Eusebius of Csesarea, which
he presented to the couucil, and which some
suppose to have suggested the creed finally
adopted.

(Found in his Epistle to his diocese; vide:
St. Athanasius and Theodoret. J

We believe in one only God, Father Al-
mighty, Creator of things visible and invisi-
ble ; and in the Lord Jesus Christ, for he is
the Word of God, God of God, Light of Light,
life of life, his only Son, the first-born of all
creatures, begotten of the Father before all
time, by whom also everything was created,
who became flesh for our redemption, who

i lived and sufi'ered amongst men, rose again

! the third day, returned to the Father, and
will come again one day in his glory to judge
the quick and the dead. We believe also in
the Holy Ghost. We believe that each of
these three is and subsists ; the Father truly
as Father, the Son truly as Son, the Holy
Ghost truly as Holy Ghost ; as our Lord
also said, when he sent his disciples to

[ preach : Go and teach all nations, and baptize
them in the name of the Father, and of the

i Son, and of the Holy Ghost.


EXCURSUS ON THE WOED HOMOUSIOS."

The Fathers of the Council at Nice were at one time ready to accede to the request of
some of the bishops and use only scriptural expressions in their definitions. But, after
several attempts, they found that all these were capable of being explained away. Athan-
asius describes with much wit and penetration how he saw them nodding and winking to
each other when the orthodox proposed expressions which they had thought of a way of
escaping from the force of. After a series of attempts of this sort it was found that some-
thing clearer and more unequivocal must be adopted if real unity of faith was to be attained ;
and accordingly the word homousios was adopted. Just what the Council intended this


• This 18 the heading in the Acts of the Hid Council. Labbe,
Cone., torn. iii.. 671.

' This is the heading in the Acts of the IVth Council. Labbe,
Cone., torn, iv., 339.

' This word, in the Greek TpftrTov, is translated in the Latin
convertibilem, but see side note in Labbe.

* Our older English writers usually wrote this word " homoou-
sion," and thus spoke of the doctrine as " the doctrine of the
homoousion." For theArian word they wrote " homoiousion."


Later writers have used the nominative masculine, " homo-
ousios ■' and •• homoiousios." The great Latin writers did not
thus transliterate the word, but, wrote " homousios," and for the
heretical word " homooesios " or " homcesios." I have kept for
the noun signifying the doctrine, our old English " Homoou-
sion," but for the adjective, I have used the ordinary latinized
form "homousios," in this copying Smith and Wace, X»icf. Chris-
tian Antiquities.


r. NICE. A.D. 325


expression to mean is set forth by St. Atlianasius as follows : " That the Son is not only
like to the Father, but that, as his image, he is the same as the Father ; that he is of the
Father; and that the resemblance of the Son to the Father, and his immutability, are
different from ours : for in us they are something acquired, and arise from our fultilling the
divine commands. Moreover, they wished to indicate by this that his g-eueration is different
from that of human nature ; that the Son is not only like to the Father, but inseparable
from the substance of the Father, that he and the Father are one and the same, as the Son
himself said : ' The Logos is always in the Father, and, the Father always in the Logos,' as
the sun and its splendour are inseparable." ^

The word homousios had not had, although frequently used before the Council of Nice,
a very happy history. It was probably rejected by the Council of Antioch,'-' and was sus-
pected of being open to a Sabellian meaning. It was accepted by the heretic Paul of Sam-
osata and this rendered it very offensive to many in the Asiatic Churches.

On the other hand the word is used four times by St. Irenseus, and Pamphilus the Martyr
is quoted as asserting that Origen used the very word in the Nicene sense. Tertullian also
uses the exj^ression ''of one sulistance " {uniux .<:nbf^tan(icv) in two places, and it would seem
that more than half a century before the meeting of the Council of Nice, it was a common
one among the Orthodox.

Vasquez treats this matter at some length in his Disputations,^ and points out how well
the distinction is drawn by Ej^iphanius between Synousios and Homousios, " for synousios
signifies such an unity of substance as allows of no distinction : wherefore the Sabellians
would admit this word : but on the contrary homousios signifies the same nature and sub-
stance but with a distinction between persons one from the other. Kightly, therefore, has
the Church adopted this word as the one best calculated to confute the Arian heresy."^

It may perhaps be well to note that these words are formed like 6/xd/5ios and 6/ioto/3io?,
ofxoyiwfxwv and oixoioyvw/XiDV, etc., etc.

The reader will find this whole doctrine treated at great length in all the bodies of
divinity; and in Alexander Natalis (H.E. t. iv., Diss, xiv.); he is also referred to Pearson,
On the Creed ; Bull, Defence of the Nicene Creed ; Forbes, An E.rjjlanatio7i of the Nicene
Creed ; and especially to the little book, wiitten in answer to the recent criticisms of Pro-
fessor Harnack, by H. B. Swete, D.D., The Apostles' Creed.

EXCUESUS ON THE WORDS yevirqSivTa oi Troir^^cVra.
(J. B. Lightfoot. TJie Apostolic Fathers — Part II. Vol. ii. Sec. I. pp. 90, et seqq.)

The Son is here Pgnat. Ad. Eph. vii.] declared to be y^vviqTo<i as man and dyeVi'T/ros as God,
for this is clearly shown to be the meaning fi'om the parallel clauses. Such language is not
in accordance with later theological definitions, which carefully distinguished between yer*;-
To? and yei'i'T^ros between dyeii7Tos and a.yivv7}To<; ; so that yeiT/ros, ayivrjTO'i respectively denied and
affirmed the eternal existence, being equivalent to ktictto?, uktio-tos, while ycivT/ros, dy€vv?;Tos
described certain ontological relations, whether in time or in eternity. In the later theolog-
ical language, therefore, the Son was yevvr/Tos even in his Godhead. See esp. Joann. Damasc.
de Fid. Orth. i. 8 [where he draws the conclusion that only the Father is uytVvTTTos, and
only the Son ycnT^ds].

There can be little doubt however, that Ignatius wrote ycvi'^Td"; koi ayei'vr)To<;, though his
editors frequently alter it into y(vqTo<; koX uycVr/ro?. For (1) the Greek MS. still retains the
double [Greek nun] v, though the claims of orthodoxy would be a temptation to scribes to


1 Athanas, Tie Decret. f-'im. ^'ic , c xix. et seq.

" Vide Swainson. in Smith and Wace. Diet. Christ. liiog.,

cap. T. " Rightly doth the Church


tuh !o-« Ilomousios, p. 134.
' Vasquez, Disput. cix.,


use the expression Iloinousiop (that is Consnbst.intial) to express
that the Father and the Son are of the same nature."

* Vasquez may also well be consulted ou the expreseions
ovo-ia, substantia, uirdo-Toa-is, etc.


I. XICE. A.D. 325


substitute the single v. And to this reading also the Latin genitus et ingenitus points. On
the other hand it cannot be concluded that translators who give /actus et non /actus had the
words with one v, for this was after all what Ignatius meant by the double v, and they would
naturally render his words so as to make his orthodoxy appai'ent. (2) "When Theodoret
writes yevi'vyros e'f ayevvrirov, it is clear that he, or the person before him who first substituted
this reading, must have read yevvv^ros kuI d.yiw-qTO'i, for there would be no temptation to alter
the perfectly orthodox yevTjTos Kal dyeVT/ros, nor (if altered) would it have taken this form.
(3) When the interpolator substitutes 6 fx.6vo-i aXr]SLv6<; 0e6s 6 dycVvy/ros , . . toD Sc ixovoyo-
j/oSs Trarvp Kal yewTyrwp, the natural inference is that he too, had the forms in double v, which
he retained, at the same time altering the whole run of the sentence so as not to do violence
to his own doctrinal views ; see Bull De/ Fid. Nic. ii. 2 § 6. (4) The quotation in Athana-
sius is more difficult. The MSS. vary, and his editors write ycvv/Tos Kal dyeVvyros. Zahn too,
who has paid more attention to this point than any previous editor of Ignatius, in his former
work {Ign. v. Ant. ]). 5G4), supposed Athauasius to have read and written the words with a
single I', though in his subsequent edition of Ignatius (p. 338) he declares himself unable to
determine between the single and double y. I believe, however, that the argument of
Athauasius decides in favour of the w. Elsewhere he insists repeatedly on the distinction
between ktiChv and yewav, justifying the use of the latter term as applied to the divinity of
the Son, and defending the statement in the Nicene Creed y^w-qrov Ik t^s ouo-tas tov Trarpo'; tov
vlov bfjioovaiov (De Synod. 54, 1, p. 612). Although he is not responsible for the language of
the Macrostich (De Synod. 3, 1, p. 590), and would have regarded it as inadequate without
the ofjioova-Lov, yet this use of terms entirely harmonizes with his own. In the passage before
us, ib. §§ 46, 47 (p. 607), he is defending the use of homousios at Nicaea, notwithstanding
that it had been previously rejected by the council which condemned Paul of Samosata, and
he contends that both councils were orthodox, since they used homousios in a different
sense. As a parallel instance he takes the word dyeVvTjros which like homousios is not a script-
ural word, and like it also is used in two ways, signifying either (1) To ov fiev, fxriTe Be yev-
vr].Tev /xT/re oAws exov tov ahiov, or (2) To aKTiarov. In the former sense the Son cannot be called
dyeVvvyTos, in the latter he may be so called. Both uses, he says, are found in the fathers.
Of the latter he quotes the passage in Ignatius as an example ; of the former he says, that
some writers subsequent to Ignatius declare eV t6 dyeVviyrovo Trarrjp, kol els 6 i$ airov vl6<; yvT^crtos,
yevvrjfxa aXrj.'iivov k. t. X. [He may have been thinking of Clem. Alex. Strom, vi. 7, which I
shall quote below.] He maintains that both are orthodox, as having in view two different
senses of the word ayevvrjroi/, and the same, he argues, is the case with the councils which
seem to take oj^posite sides with regard to homousios. It is clear from this jiassage, as Zahn
ti-uly says, that Athauasius is dealing with one and the same word throughout ; and, if so,
it follows that this word must be ayivvrjrov, since ayiv-qrov would be intolerable in some
places. I may add .by way of caution that in two other passages, de Decret. Syn. Nic. 28
(1, p. 184), Orat. c. Ariaii. i. 30 (1, p. 343), St. Athauasius gives the various senses of dyeViyrov
(for this is plain fi'om the context), and that these passages ought not to be treated as
parallels to the present passage which is concerned with the senses of ayiwrjrov. Much con-
fusion is thus created, e.g. in Newman's notes on the several passages in the Oxford transla-
tion of Athauasius (pp. 51 sq., 224 sq. ), where the three passages are treated as parallel, and
no attempt is made to discriminate the readings in the several places, but " ingenerate " is
given as the rendering of both alike. If then Athauasius who read ycwryros koI dyeWr/ros in
Ignatius, there is absolutely no authority for the spelling with one v. The earlier editors
(Voss, Ussher, Cotelier, etc.), printed it as they found it in the MS.; but Smith substituted
the forms with the single v, and he has been followed more recently by Hefele, Dressel, and
some other. In the Casanatensian copy of the MS., a marginal note is added, avayvuicniov


6 1. MCE. A.J). 325


dyeVr^Tos tout' Ictti fir] Troi.r)Sei<;. Wateilaiul {Works, III., p. 240 sq., Oxf. 1823) tries inefifectu-
ally to show that the form with the double y was inveuted by the fathers at a later date to
express their theological conception. He even " doubts whetlier there was any such word as
dyeVi'T/Tos so early as the time of Ignatius." In this he is certainly wrong.

The 3I.SS. of early Christian writers exhibit much confusion between these words spelled
with the double and the single v. See e.g. Justin Dial. 2, with Otto's note ; Athenag. Siippl.
4 with Otto's note; Theophil, o^/ Anlnl. ii. 3, 4; Ireii. iv. 38, 1. 3; Orig. c. C'els. vi. GG ;
Method. (le Lib. Arbib:, p. 57 ; Jahn (see Jahn's note 11, p. 122) ; Maximus in Euseb J'raep.
£v. vii. 22 ; Hippol. Jlafr. v. IG (from Sibylline Oracles) ; Clem. Alex. Strom v. 14 ; and veiy
frequently in lat»^r writers. Yet notwithstanding the confusion into which later transcribers
have thus thrown the subject, it is still possible to ascertain the main facts respecting the
usage of the two forms. The distinction between the two terms, as indicated bv their oritrin.
is that (lyeVrjTos denies the creation, and ayiwryro'i the generation or parentage. Both are used at
a very early date ; e.g. dyivr)To<; by Parmenides in Clem. Alex. Strom v. 14, and by Agothon in
Arist. Eth. Nic. vii. 2 (comp. also Orac. Sibyll. prooem. 7, 17) ; and ayivvqro<; in Soph. Trach.
61 (where it is equivalent to hvayf-vwv). Here the distinction of meaning is strictly preserved,
and so probably it always is in Classical writers ; for in Soph. Trach. 743 we should after
Porson and Hermann read ayivrjTov with Suidas. In Christian writers also there is no reason
to suppose that the distinction was ever lost, though in certain connexions the words might
be used convertibly, "Whenever, as here in Ignatius, we have the double v where we should
expect the single, we must ascribe the fact to the indistinctness or incorrectness of the
winter's theological conceptions, not to any obliteration of the meaning of the terms them-
selves. To this early father for instance the eternal yiw-qai^ of the Son was not a distinct
theological idea, though substantially he held the same views as the Nicene fathers respect-
ing the Person of Christ. The following passages from early Christian writers will sei*ve
at once to show how far the distinction was ai:)preciated, and to what extent the Nicene
conception prevailed in ante-Nicene Christianity ; Justin Apol ii. G, comp. ib. § 13 ; Athenag,
Suppl. 10 (comp. ib. 4) ; Theoph. ad. A at. ii. 3 ; Tatian Oi-at. 5 ; Rhodon in Euseb. H. E. v.
13 ; Clem. Alex. Strom, vi. 7 ; Orig. c. Gels. vi. 17, ib. vi. 52 ; Concil. Antioch (a.d. 2G9) in
Routh Rel. Sacr. III., p. 290; Method, de Great. 5. In no early Christian writing, however,
is the distinction more obvious than in the Glementine Homilies, x. 10 (where the distinction
is employed to support the writer's heretical theology) : see also viii. IG, and comp. xix. 3,
4, 9, 12. The following are instructive passages as regards the use of these words where
the opinions of other heretical writers are given ; Saturninus, Ireu. i. 24, 1 ; Hippol. Ifaei\
vii. 28 ; Simon Magus, Hippol. Haer. vi. 17, 18 ; the Valentinians, Hippol. Haer. vi. 29, 30 ;
the Ptolemeeus in particular, Ptol. Ep. ad. Flor. 4 (in Stieren's Ireuseus, p. 935) ; Basilides,
Hippol. Haer. vii. 22 ; Carpoci-ates, Hippol. Haer. vii. 32.

From the above passages it will appear that Ante-Nicene writers were not indifferent to
the distinction of meaning between the two words ; and when once the othodox Christology
was formulated in the Nicene Creed in the words y^w-q^ivra ov iroi-qSivTa, it became henceforth
impossible to overlook the difference. The Son was thus declared to be 7£i'n7Tos but not
yei'T/rds. I am therefore unable to agree with Zahn {Jlarcelhis, pp. 40, 104, 223, Tgn. von Ant.
p. 5G5), that at the time of the Arian controversy the disputants were not alive to the differ-
ence of meaning. See for example Epiphanius, Haer. Ixiv. 8. But it had no especial inter-
est for them. "While the orthodox party clung to the homousios as enshrining the doctrine
for which they fought, they had no liking for the terms ayei'irrjTo<; and ycvi'T/ros as applied to
the Father and the Son respectively, though unable to deny their pro]n-iety, because they
were affected by the Arians and applied in their own way. To the orthodox mind the Arian
formula ovk rjv irplv yevi'-qSrjiai or some Semiariau formula hardly less dangei'ous, seemed


I. NICE. A.D. 325


always to be lurking under the expression ©eos y€vv7jTos as applied to the Son. Hence the
language of Epiphanius Haer. Ixxiii. 19 : " As you refuse to accept our homousios because
though used by the fathers, it does not occur in the Scriptures, so will we decline on the
same grounds to accept your ayiwrjTos." Similarly Basil c. Eunom. i., iv., and especially ib.
further on, in which last passage he argues at great length against the position of the here-
tics, €t dyeVi'r/ros, cjiacrlv, 6 iranqp, yevvr/ros hi 6 vhk, ov tt}? avTrj<; oucrt'a?. See also the arguments

against the Auomoeans in [Athan.] Dial, de Trin. ii. passim. This fully explains the reluc-
tance of the orthodox party to handle terms which their adversaries used to endanger the
homousios. But, when the stress of the Arian controversy was removed, it became conven-
ient to express the Catholic doctrine by saying that the Son in his divine nature was yevvrjTos
but not yivrjTo^. And this distinction is staunchly maintained in later orthodox writers, e.g.
John of Damascus, already quoted in the beginning of this Excursus.


THE CANONS OF THE 318 HOLY FATHERS ASSEMBLED IN

THE CITY OF NICE, IN BITHYNIA.

CANON L

If any one in sickness has been subjected by physicians to a surfi;ical operation, or
if he has been castrated by barbarians, let him remain among the clergy ; but, if any
one in sound health has castrated himself, it behoves that such an one, if [already] en-
rolled among the clergy, sliould cease [from his ministry], and that from henceforth no
such person sliould be })romoted. But, as it is evident that this is said of those who
wiKully do the thing and presume to castrate themselves, so if any have been made
eunuchs by barbarians, or by their masters, and should otherwise be found worthy,
such men the Canon admits to the clergy.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome^ of Canon I.


Eunuchs may he received into the number of
the clergy, but those who castrate themselves shall
not be received.

Balsamon.
The divine Apostolic Canons xxi., xxii., xxiii.,
and xxiv,, have taught us sufficiently what
ought to be done with those who castrate
themselves, this canon provides as to what is
to be done to these as well as to those who
deliver themselves over to others to be emas-
culated by them, viz., that they are not to be
atlniitted among the clergy nor advanced to
the priesthood.

Daniel Butler.
(Smith & Cheatham, Diet. Christ. Ant.)

The feeling that one devoted to the sacred
ministry should be unmutilated was strong in
the Ancient Church. . . . This canon of
Nice, and those in the Apostolic Canons and a
later one in the Second Council of Aries (canon
vii.) were aimed against that perverted notion
of piety, originating in the misinterpretation
of our Lord's saying (Matt. xix. 12) by which
Origen, among others, was misled, and their
obsen'ance was so carefully enforced in later
times that not more than one or two instances
of the practice which they condemn are
noticed by the historian. The case was dif-
ferent if a man was born an eunuch or had
suftered mutilation at the hands of persecut-
ors ; an instance of the former, Dorotheus,
presbyter of Antioch, is mentioned by Euse-
bius (//. E. vii., c. 32) ; of the latter, Tigris,
presbyter of Constantinople, is referred to
both by Socrates {H. E. vi. 15) and Sozomen
(//. E. vi. 24:) as the victim of a barbarian
master.

1 For the authority of this epitome vide Introduction.


Hefele.

We know, by the first apology of St. Justin
(Apol. c. 29) that a century before Origen, a
young man had desired to l)e mutilated by
physicians, for the purpose of completely re-
futing the charge of vice which the heathen
brought against the worship of Christians. St.
Justin neither praises nor blames this j'oung
man : he only relates that he could not obtain
the permission of the civil authorities for his
project, that he renounced his intention, but
nevertheless remained virgo all his life. It is
very probable that the Council of Nice was in-
duced by some fresh similar cases to renew the
old injunctions ; it was perhaps the Arian bish-
op, Leontius, who was the principal cause of it.'

Lambert.
Constantine forbade by a law the practice
condemned in this canon. " If anyone shall
anywhere in the Roman Empire after this de-
cree make eunuchs, he shall be punished with
death. If the owner of the place where the
deed was perpetrated was aware of it and hid
the fact, his goods shall be confiscated."
(Const. M. Opera. Migne Patrol, vol. viii., 396.)

Beveridge.
The Nicene fathers in this canon make no
new enactment but only confirm by the au-
thority of an Ecumenical synod the Apostolic
Canons, and this is evident from the wording
of this canon. For there can be no doubt
that they had in mind some earlier canon
when they said, " such men the canon admits
to the clergy." Not, outo? o Ktivwr, but 6 Kavwv,
as if they had said "the formerly set forth

' LeontiuR while still a presbyter lived with a subintroducta at
Antioch. whose name was Eustolion, po we learn from St. Atha-
nasius, Theodori't (//. K. ii. 24) and Socrates (//. E. ii. 26) ; as
he could not part from her and wished to prevent her leaving
iiini. he mutilated himself. Uis bishoj) deposed him for this act,
but the Rmpcror Coustantius (not Constantine, as by a mistake in
the Eiitrlish llefele. 1 p. 377) praqtically forced "him into the
episcopal throne of Antioch.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


and well-known canon " admits such to the This law was frequently enacted by sub-
clergy. But no other canon then existed in sequent s^niods and is inserted in the Cor-
which this provision occurred except apostoli- pun Juris Canonici, Decretum Gratiani. Pars,
cal canon xxi. which therefore we are of opin- I. Distinctio LV., C vij.
ion is here cited.

[In this conclusion Hefele also agrees.]

EXCURSUS OX THE USE OF THE WORD "CANON."

(Bright : Notes on the Ccft^ons, pp. 2 and 3.)

Kai/oji/, as an ecclesiastical term, has a very interesting history. See Westcott's account
of it, On the Xew Testament Canon, p. 498 ff. The original sense, "a straight rod" or
"line," determines all its religious applications, which begin with St. Paul's use of it for
a prescribed sphere of apostolic work (2 Cor. x. 13, 15), or a regulative principle of Chris-
tian life (Gal. vi. IG). It represents the element of deliniteness in Christianity and in the
order of the Christian Church. Clement of Rome uses it for the measure of Christian
attainment (Ep. Cor. 7). Irenseus calls the baptismal creed " the canon of truth " (i. 9, 4) :
Polycrates (Euseb. v. 24) and probably Hippolytus (ib. v. 28) calls it " the canon of faith ; "
the Council of Antioch in a.d. 269, referring to the same standard of orthodox belief, speaks
with significant absoluteness of "the canon" (ib. vii. 30). Eusebius himself mentions
" the canon of truth " in iv. 23, and " the canon of the preaching " in iii. 32 ; and so Basil
speaks of " the transmitted canon of true religion " (Epist. 204-6). Such language, like Ter-
tullian's "regula fidei," amounted to saying, "We Christians know what we believe : it is not
a vague ' idea ' without substance or outline : it can be put into form, and by it we ' test the
spirits whether they be of God.' " Thus it was natural for Socrates to call the Nicene Creed
itself a " canon," ii. 27. Clement of Alexandria uses the phrase " canon of truth " for a stand-
ard of mystic interpretation, but proceeds to call the harmony between the two Testaments
" a canon for the Church," Strom, vi. 15, 124, 125. Eusebius speaks of " the ecclesiastical
canon " which recognized no other GosjDels than the four (vi, 25). The use of the term and
its cognates in reference to the Scrij^tures is explained by Westcott in a passive sense so
that " canonized" books, as Athanasius calls them (Test. Ej). 39), are books exj^ressly recog-
nized by the Church as j^ortions of Holy Scripture. Again, as to matters of observance,
Clement of Alexandria wrote a book against Judaizers, called " The Church s Canon " (Euseb.
vi. 13) ; and Cornelius of Rome, in his letter to Fabius, speaks of the " canon " as to w'hat we
call confirmation (Euseb. vi. 43), and Dionysius of the " canon " as to reception of converts
from heresy {ib. vii. 7). The Nicene Council in this canon refers to a standing " canon " of
discipline (comj). Nic. 2, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15, 16, 18), but it does not apply the term to its own
enactments, which are so described in the second canon of Constantinoj^le (see below), and
of which Socrates says " that it passed what are usually called ' canons ' " (i- 13), as Julius of
Rome calls a decree of this Council a "canon" (Athan. Apol. c. Ari. 25) ; so Athanasius
applies the term generally to Church laws (Encycl. 2 ; cp. Apol. c. Ari. 69). The use of
Kaiw for the clerical body (Nic. 16, 17, 19 ; Chalc. 2) is exj^lained by Westcott with refer-
ence to the rule of clerical life, but Bingham traces it to the roll or ofiicial list on which the
names of clerics were enrolled (i. 5, 10) ; and this appears to be the more natural derivation,
see " the holy canon " in the first canon of the Council of Antioch, and compare Socrates (i.
17), " the Virgins enumerated eV rw twi' iKKX-qaiuyv Kavovi," and (ib. v. 19) on the addition of a
penitentiary " to the canon of the church ; " see also Geoi-ge of Laodicea in Sozomon, iv. 13.
Hence any cleric might be called KavuviKos, see Cyril of Jerusalem, Procatech. 4 ; so we read
of "canonical singers." Laodicea, canon xv. The same notion of definiteness appears in


10 I. NICE. A.D. 325


the ritual use of the word for a series of nine " odes " in the Eastern Church sei-vice (Ncale,
Introd. East. Ch. ii. 832), for the central and unvarying element in the Liturgy, beginning
after the Tersanctus (Hammond, Liturgies East and "West, p. 377) ; or for any Church oflfice
(Ducange in v.) ; also in its application to a table for the calculation of Easter (Euseb. vi. 22 ;
vii. 32) ; to a scheme for exhibiting the common and peculiar i)arts of the several Gospels (as
the " Eusebian canons ") and to a prescribed or ordinary payment to a churcli, a use which
grew out of one found in Athauasius' Apol. c. Ari. 60.

In more recent times a tendency has appeared to restrict the term Canon to matters of
discipline, but the Council of Trent continued the ancient use of the word, calling its doc-
trinal and disciplinary determinations alike "Canons."

CANON II.

Forasmuch as, either from necessity, or through the urgency of individuals, many
things have been done contrary to the Ecclesiastical canon, so that men just converted
from heathenism to the faith, and who have been instructed Init a little while, are
straightway brought to the spiritual laver, and as soon as they have been baptized, are
advanced to the episcopate or the presbyterate, it has seemed right to us that for the
time to come no such thing shall be done. For to the catechumen himself there is
need of time and of a longer trial after baptism. For the apostolical saying is clear,
" Not a novice ; lest, being lifted up with pride, he fall into condemnation and the
snare of the devil." But if, as time goes on, any sensual sin should be found out about
the person, and he should be convicted by two or three witnesses, let liim cease from
the clerical office. And whoso shall transgress these [enactments] will imperil his own
clerical position, as a person who presumes to disobey the great Synod.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon II. I others, unless by a peculiar divine grace."

Those who have come from the heathen shaU ^^^ TrT'iTnft els T^^ ""/ h!-T\t^'^-eZ
not he immediatelii advanced to the presbijterateA^^ "^^'!'[V^^^l\ .^'^ ,. "^^^ o exp am some
rr -11 t "1 ;• ^ f It der it bv the Latin words ammale peccatam,

For icithout a probation of some time a neophiite i t • '^ ,i , ,i ^ .,1 , ^ ■ ^^^

f J \ / / 1 n , r n u believmg that the Council has here especially

IS of no advantaqe ( KaKo%). Jud if after ordi- . . - . j. .i /i i i - r, i

nation it be found out that he had sinned pre- "\V^Yi ''''' ^ - ' '''' w '''' ""l

viously, let him then be expelled from Ihr «aiJ. all sms are ^vx^.a aMapr>;/xara. ;^\e must

1^ , I J then understand the passage in question to re-


Hefele.


fer to a capital and very serious oftence, as the
penalty of deposition annexed to it points out.


It may be seen by the very text of this These words have also given oftence, «t Sc
canon, that it was already forbidden to bap- 1 Trpoioi'Tos toD ypovov ; that is to say, "It is
tize, and to raise to the episcopate or to the necessary henceforward," etc., understanding
priesthood anyone Avho had only been a cate- j that it is only those who have been too quickly
chumen for a short time : this injunction is j ordained who are threatened with deposition
in fact contained in the eightieth (seventy- in case they are guilty of crime ; but the can-
ninth) apostolical canon ; and according to on is framed, and ought to be understood,
that, it would be older than the Council of in a general manner : it applies to all other
Nicfea. There have been, nevertheless, certain clergymen, but it appears also to point out
cases in which, for urgent reasons, an excep- that greater severity should be shown toward
tion lias been made to the rule of the Conn- those who have been too quickly ordained,
cil of Nicpea — for instance, that of S. Ambrose, i Others have explained the passage in this
The canon of Nicfea does not seem to allow manner : " If it shall become known that any
such an exception, but it might be justified one who has been too quickly ordained was
by the apostolical canon, which says, at the guilty before his baptism of any serious of-
close : "It is not right that any one who has fence, he ought to be deposed." This is the
not yet been proved should be a teacher of interpretation given by Gratian, but it must


I. NICE. A.D. 325


11


be confessed that such a ti'aiislation does vio-
lence to the text. This is, I believe, the gen-
eral sense of the canon, and of this passage in
particular : " Henceforward no one shall be
baptized or ordained quickly. As to those
already in orders (without any distinction
between those who have been ordained in due
course and those who have been oi'dained too
quickly), the rule is that they shall be de-


posed if they commit a serious ojffence. Those
who are guilty of disobedience to this great
Synod, either by allowing themselves to be
ordained or even by ordaining others pre-
maturely, are threatened with deposition ipso
facto, and for this fault alone." We consider,
in short, that the last words of the canon may
be understood as well of the ordained as of
the ordainer.


CANON III.

The great Synod has stringently forbidden any bishop, presbyter, deacon, or any
one of the clergy whatever, to have a suhintroduda dwelling with him, except only a
mother, or sister, or aunt, or such persons only as are beyond all suspicion.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.


No one shall have a woman in his house ex-
cejjt his mother, and sister, and j^efsons alto-
gether beyond suspicion.

JUSTELLUS.

Who these mulieres subintroductas were
does not sufficiently appear . . . but they
were neither wives nor concubines, but wom-
en of some third kind, which the clergy kept
with them, not for the sake of offspring or
lust, but from the desire, or certainly under the
pretence, of piety.

Johnson.

For want of a proper English word to ren-
der it hj, I translate " to retain any woman in
their houses under pretence of her being a
disciple to them."

Van Espen
translates : And his sisters and aunts cannot
remain unless they be free from all suspicion.


already spread widely. In connexion with this
whole subject of the subintroductse the text
of St. Paul should be carefully considered.
1 Cor. ix. 5.

Hefele.
It is very certain that the canon of Nice
forbids such spiritual unions, but the context
shows moreover that the Fathers had not
these jDarticular cases in view alone ; and the
expression o-wet'o-aKTos shou'ld be understood
of every woman who is introduced {(rvv€L(raKTo<;)
into the house of a clergjnnan for the purpose
of living there. If by the word crvif(iaaKTo<:
was only intended the wife in this spiritual
marriage, the Council would not have said,
an}' crv(/£t(raKTos, except his mother, etc. ; for
neither his mother nor his sister could have
formed this spiritual union with the cleric.
The injunction, then, does not merely forbid
the (TuvetcraKTos in the specific sense, but orders
that " no woman must live in the house of a
cleric, unless she be his mother," etc.


Fuchs in his Bihliothek der hirchenver This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
sammlungen confesses that this canon shews i Canonici, Gratian's Decretwm, Pars I., Distinc.
that the practice of clerical celibacy had ' XXXII., C. xvj.


CANON IV.

It is by all means proper that a bishop should be appointed by all the bishops in the
province ; but should this be difficult, either on account of urgent necessity or because
of distance, three at least should meet together, and the suffrages of the absent [bishops]
also being given and communicated in writing, then the ordination should take place.
But in every province the ratification of what is done should be left to the Metropolitan.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.
A bishop is to be chosen by all the bishops of
the province, or at least by three, the rest giv-
ing by letter their assent; but this choice must
be confirmed by the Metropolitan.


ZONARAS.

The present Canon might seem to be op-
posed to the first canon of the Holy Apostles,
for the latter enjoins that a bishop be or-
dained by two or three bishops, but this by


12


I. NICE. A.D. 325


three, the absent also agreeing and testifying
their assent by Avriting. IJut tkey are not
contradictory ; for the Apostolit-al canon by
ordination (xei-poToviai') means consecration
and imposition of hands, but the present can-
on by constitution {KaTaiiTaau) and ordination
means the election, and enjoins that the elec-
tion of a bishop do not take place unless three
assemble, having tlio consent also of the absent
bv letter, or a declaration that thev also will ac-
quiesce in the election (or vote, 4'v4>v) Ji^^'^e hy
the three ^\•ho have assembled. But after the
election it gives the ratification or comple-
tion of the matter — the imposition of hands
and consecration — to the metropolitan of the
j^rovince, so that the election is to l)e ratified
by him. He does so when with two or three
bishops, according to the apostolical canon,
he consecrates with imposition of hands the
one of the elected persons whom he himself
selects.

Balsamon
also understands KaSia-TacrSaL to mean election
by vote.

Bright.

The Greek canonists are certainly in eiTor
"when they interpret x«tpoTovia of election. The
canon is akin to the 1st Apostolic canon which,
as the canonists admit, must refer to the conse-
cration of a new bishoi^, and it was cited in that
sense at the Council of Chalcedon — Session
xiii. (Mansi., vii. 807). We must follow Ru-
finus and the old Latin translators, who speak
of "ordinari" "ordinatio" and "manus im-
position em."

Hefele.

The Council of Nice thought it necessary
to define by precise rules the duties of the
bishops who took part in these episcopal
elections. It decided (r/) that a single bishop
of the province was not sufficient for the ap-
pointment of another ; (b) three at least
should meet, and (c) they were not to proceed
to election without the written permission of
the absent bisliops ; it was necessary (d) to
obtain afterward the appi'oval of the metro-
politan. The Council thus confirms the ordi-
nary metropolitan division in its two most
important jioints, namely, the nomination and
ordination of l)ishops. and the sui)erior posi-
tion of the metropolitan. Tlie third point
connected with this division — namel}', the
provincial synod — will be considered under
the next canon.

Meletius was probably the occasion of this
canon. It may be remembered that he had


nominated bishops without the concurrence
of the other bishops of the province, and
without the ajiproval of the metropolitan of
Alexandria, and had thus occasioned a schism.
This canon was intended to prevent the re-
cui'rence of such abuses. The question has
been raised as to whether the fourth canon
speaks only of the choice of the bishop, or
whether it also treats of the consecration of
the newly elected, ^^'e think, with Van Es-
pen, that it treats equally of both, — as well of
the part which the bishops of the province
should take in an episcopal election, as of the
consecration which completes it.

This canon has been interpreted in two
ways. The Gi'eeks had learnt by bitter
experience to distrust the interference of
princes and earthly potentates in episcopal
elections. Accordingly, they tried to prove
that this canon of Nice took away from the
people the right of voting at the nomination
of a bishop, and confined the nomination ex-
clusively to the bisho^DS of the i)rovince.

The Greek Commentators, Balsamon and
I others, therefore, only followed the example
of the Seventh and [so-called] Eighth Q^cu-
menieal Councils in affirming that this fourth
canon of Nice takes away from the people the
right previously possessed of voting in the
choice of bisliops and makes tlie election de-
pend entirely on the decision of the bishoj)S
of the province.

The Latin Church acted otherwise. It is
ti*ue that with it also the j^eople have been re-
^ moved from episcopal elections, but this did
I not happen till later, abovit the eleventh cen-
tury ; and it was not the people only who were
removed, but the bishojjs of the province as
well, and the election was conducted entirely'
bv the clergy of the Cathedral Church. The
Latins then interpreted the canon of Nice as
though it said nothing of the riglits of the
bishops of the province in the election of their
future colleague (and it does not speak of it
in a very explicit manner), and as though it
determined these two points only ; [a) that for
the ordination of a bishoj) three bishops at
least are necessary ; (/>) that the right of
conjirmcdion rests with the metropolitan.

The whole subject of episcopal elections is
treated fully by Van Espen and by Thomas-
sin, in Anclenne et Nouvelle Discipline de
I'Jtr/Ilse, p. II. 1. 2.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
\ Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I. Dist.
LXIV. c. j.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 13


CANON V. •

Concerning those, whether of the clergy or of the laity, who have been excommuni-
cated in the several provinces, let the provision of the canon be observed by the
bishops which provides that persons cast out by some be not readmitted by others.
Nevertheless, inquiry should be made whether they have been excommunicated through
captiousness, or contentiousness, or any such like ungracious disposition in the bishop.
And, that this matter may have due investigation, it is decreed that in every province
synods shall be held twice a year, in order that when all the bishops of the province are
assembled together, such questions may by them be thoroughly examined, that so those
who have confessedly offended against their bishop, may be seen by all to be for just
cause excommunicated, until it shall seem fit to a general meeting of the bishops to pro-
nounce a milder sentence upon them. And let these synods be held, the one before
Lent, (that the pure Gift may be offered to God after all bitterness has been put away),
and let the second be held about autumn.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.


Such as have been excommunicated by certain


Hefele.
Gelasius has given in his history of the


bishops shall not be restored by others, unless Council of Nice, the text of the canons passed
the eicommnnication was the resxdt of pusil- by the Council ; and it niust be noticed that
lanimUy, or strife, or some other similar cause. J^^^f ^^ l^ere a slig-ht difference between his

^ ^ 41 I n ■ \^ ^ 1 r.^4^^.i..i t^ n.r,.,,, ohnii text and ours. Our reading is as lollows :

And that this may be dull attended to, there Shalt . 7. - i •

be in each year two synods in every province-\;^^^ excommunication continues to be m

the one before Lent, the other toward autumn. I fo^ce until it seem good to the assembly of

•^ bishops (to) Koii/w) to soften it. Gelasius, on

„, , , , „ , , , , i the other hand, writes : yu^evp'? «'' "^"^ Kotrw rj to>

There has always been found the greatest ,^^^^^^^^ ^ ^ ^^ ^j^^^ -^ ^^ ^^^^ . ^^^^-^ ^^ ^^^^

difficulty m secunng the regular meetings of I ^^^ ^^ ^^^^ assembly of bishops, or to the
provincial and diocesan synods, and despite ^-^^ ,^^^ ^^^ ^^ ^j^^ sentence)," etc.

the very explicit canonical legislation upon ^ Dionysius the Less has also followed

the subject, and the severe penalties attached ^j^-^ variation, as his translation of the canon
to those not answering the summons, m large ^-^^^^^ j^. ^^^^ ^^^ change the essential
parts of the Church for centuries these coun- j^ganing of the passage ; for it may be well
cils have been of the rarest occurrence. Zo- uj^^lerstood that the bishop who has passed
naras complains that m his time « these synods ^^^ sentence of excommunication has also the
were everywhere treated with great con- right to mitigate it. But the variation adopted
tempt," and that they had actually ceased to ^^ ^j^^ p^-^^^ ^^^^^.^^ ^^ ^^^^ contrary, the

be held. ,„,/-( t>.t whole sense of the canon : the Prisca has not

Possibly the opinion of St. Gregory Na- ^^ ^^cviL, hnt on\j iinaK67roy: it is in this errone-
zianzen had grown common, for it will be re- ^:^^ ^^;,^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^^^ j^^s passed into the
membered that m refusing to go to the lat- Corpus jurisc an.
ter sessions 01 the Second Lcumenical lie

wrote, "I am resolved to avoid every meeting This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
of bishops, for I have never seen any synod Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
end well, nor assuage rather than aggravate XI., Qusest. III., Canon Ixxiij., and the latter
disorders." ^ part in Pars I., Distinc. XVIII., c. iij.

EXCUKSUS ON THE WOKD Ilpo<T^ip^iv.

(Dr. Adolph Harnack : Hist, of Dogma [Eng. Tr.] Vol. I. p. 209.)

The idea of the whole transaction of the Supper as a sacrifice, is plainly found in the Di-
dache, (c. 14), in Ignatius, and above all, in Justin (I. 65f.) But even Clement of Rome pre-
supposes it, when (in cc. 40-44) he draws a parallel between bishojDS and deacons and the

' Greg. Naz. Ep. ad Procop. ; Migne Pat. Grcec, No. cxxx.


14 I. NICE. A.D. 325


Priests and Levites of the Old Testament, describing as the chief function of the former
(44.4) Trpoa4)tf)€iv TO. Sujpa. This is not the place to enquire Avhether the first celebration had, in
the mind of its founder, the cliaracter of a sacrificial meal ; but, certainly, the idea, as it was
already developed at the time of Justin, had been created by the churches. Various reasons
tended towards seeing in the Supper a sacrifice. In the first place, Malaclii i. 11, demanded
a solemn Christian sacrifice : see my notes on Didache, 14.3. In the second place, all prayers
were regarded as a sacrifice, and therefore the solemn prayers at the Supper must be specially
considered as such. In the third place, the words of institution tovto iroulTe, contained a com-
mand with regard to a definite religious action. Such an action, however, could only be rep-
resented as a sacrifice, and this the more, that the Gentile Christians might suppose that they
had to understand ttoulv in the sense of Ovetv. In the fourth place, payments in kind were
necessary for the " agapsD " connected with the Supper, out of which were taken the bread
and wine for the Holy celebration ; in what other asjiect could these offerings in the Avorship
be regarded than as Trpoa-^opaiiov the purpose of a sacrifice? Yet the spiritual idea so pre-
vailed that oulj' the prayers were regarded as the Bvaia proper, even in the case of Justin
[Dial. 117). The elements are only hwpa, 7rpoo-<^oput, which obtain their value from the prayers,
in which thanks are given for the gifts of creation and redemption, as well as for the holy
meal, and entreaty is made for the introduction of the community into the Kingdom of God
(see Didache, 9. 10). Therefore, even the sacred meal itself is called ei'xa/no-Tia (Justin, Apol.
I. 66 : r] Tpocjir] avr-rj KaXetrai Trap' r^plv ev^apiarLa. Didache, 9. 1 : Ignat.), because it is rpacfir]
et'xapLaTrjBe.'iaa. It is a mistake to suppose that Justin already understood the body of Christ
to be the object of irotdv,^ and therefore thought of a sacrifice of this body (I. 66). The real
sacrificial act in the Supper consists rather, according to Justin, only in the (.vxa-puTTiav iroulv,
whereby the kolvos apros becomes the apTn<i 7-175 (ixa-picrTLa^.^ The sacrifice of the Supper in its
essence, apart from the offering of alms, whicli in the practice of the Church was closely
united with it, is nothing but a sacrifice of prayer : the sacrificial act of the Christian here
also is nothing else than an act of prayer (See Apol. I. 14, 65-67 ; Dial. 28, 29, 41, 70,
116-118).

Harnack {lib. cil. Vol. II. chapter III. p. 136) says that "Cyprian was the first to associ-
ate the specific offering, i.e. the Lord's Supjaer with the specific priesthood. Secondly, he
was the first to designate the passio Domini, nay, the sanguis Christi and the dominica hostia
as the object of the eucharistic offering." In a foot-note (on the same page) he explains that
" Sacrificare, Hacrificium celrbrare in all passages where they are unaccomjianied by any
qualifying words, mean to celebrate the Lord's Supper." But Harnack is confronted by the
very evident objection that if this was an invention of St. Cyprian's, it is most extraordinary
that it raised no protest, and he very frankly confesses (note 2, on same page) that "the
transference of the sacrificial idea to the consecrated elements which in all prol)ability Cy-
prian already found in existence, etc." Harnack further on (in the same note on p. 137) notes
that he has pointed out in his notes on the Didache that in the " Apostolic Church Order "
occurs the expression r) 7rpocr(fyopa tov o-w/xaTos Koi Tov aijxaTos.


' Harnack peems to know only the printpd (and almost certainly gian teaches that the essence of that pacrifice is to offer up the

incorrect) readinp of the modem texts of the I Apology (Chap- already present Rody of Christ, but that the essence of the Sacri-

ter LX\T) when! TouTo ecrrt has taken the place of TouTeffTi. The tice is the act of consecration; the "makinc the P^ucharistic

passage did read. toOto Troteire, ti? rqv avativiqcrii' fiov. TovreaTi to Sacrifice," US he accurately sa.vs, " whereby the common bread

aCiiid tiov ; in which it is evident that th(; words " my body " are becomes the Bread of the Eucharist." Harnack says truly that

in appostion with tovto and the object of Ti-oicire, which has "the sacrificial act of tlie Christian here also is nothing else than

its sacrificial sense "to offtT," as in the Dialogue with Tryi)ho, an act of i)rayer," but he does not seem to know that this is the

6 icupio? Tjtiiof nape&MKf noiflv (chapter xlj). Catholic doctrine to-day, nor to appreciate at its Catholic value the

* Harnack evidently d<M;s not fully appreciate the Catholic doc- " Prayer of Consecration. ' The act of consecration is the essence

trine of the Sacrifice in the Holy Eucharist. No CathoUc theolo of the Christian Sacrifice according to the teaching of all Catholics.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


15


CANON VI.

Let the ancient customs in Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis prevail, that the Bishop
of Alexandria have jurisdiction in all these, since the like is customary for the Bishop
of Rome also. Likewise in Antioch and the other provinces, let the Churches retain
their privileges. And this is to be universally understood, that if any one be made
bishop without the consent of the Metropolitan, the great Synod has declared that such
a man ought not to be a bishop. If, however, two or three bishops shall from natural
love of contradiction, oppose the common suffrage of the rest, it being reasonable and
in accordance with the ecclesiastical law, then let the choice of the majority prevail.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


The Bishop of Alexandria shall have juris-
diction over Egi/jyf, Libya, and Pentapolis. As
also the Roman bishop over those subject to
Borne. So, too, the Bishop of Antioch and the
rest over those who are binder them. If any be
a bishop contrary to the judgment of the Metro-
politan, let him be no bishop. Provided it be
in accordance with the canons by the suffrage of
the majority, if three object, their objection shall
be of no force.

Many, probably most, commentators have
considered this the most important and most
interesting of all the Nicene canons, and a
whole library of works has been written upon
it, some of the works asserting and some de-
nying what are commonly called the Papal
claims. If any one wishes to see a list of the
most famous of these works he will find it in
Phillips's Kirchenrecht (Bd. ii. S. 35). I shall
reserve what I have to say upon this subject
to the notes on a canon which seems really
to deal with it, confining myself here to an
elucidation of the words found in the canon
before us.

Hammond, W. A.

The object and intention of this canon seems
clearly to have been, not to introduce any new
powers or regulatious into the Church, but to
confirm and establish ancient customs already
existing. This, indeed, is evident from the
very first words of it : "Let the ancient cus-
toms be maintained." It appears to have been
made with particular reference to the case of
the Church of Alexandria, which had been
troubled by the irregular proceedings of Mile-
tius, and to confirm the ancient privileges of
that see which he had invaded. The latter
pai't of it, however, applies to all Metropoli-
tans, and confirms all their ancient privileges.

Ffoulkes.
{Diet. Christ. Antiq. t'oce Council of Nicsea).

The first half of the canon enacts merely
that what had long been customary with re-


spect to such persons in every province should
become law, beginning with the jorovince
where this principle had been infringed ;
while the second half declares what was in
future to be received as law on two points
which custom had not as yet expressly ruled.
Nobody disputes the meaning of this
last half ; nor, in fact, would the meaning of
the first half have been questioned, had it not
included Rome. . . . Nobody can main-
tain that the bishops of Antioch and Alexan-
dria were called patriarchs then, or that the
jurisdiction they had then was co-extensive
with what they had afterward, when they
were so called. . . . It is on this clause
["since the like is customary for the Bishops
of Rome also"] standing parenthetically be-
tween what is deci'eed for the particular cases
of Egypt and Antioch, and in consequence of
the interpretation given to it by Rufinus,
more particularly, that so much strife has been
raised. Rufinus may rank low as a translator,
yet, being a native of Aquileia, he cannot have
been ignorant of Roman ways, nor, on the
other hand, had he greatly misrepresented
them, would his version have waited till the
seventeenth century to be impeached.

Hefele.

The sense of the first words of the canon is
as follows : " This ancient right is assigned to
the Bishop of Alexandria which places under
his jurisdiction the ivhole diocese of Egypt."
It is without any reason, then, that the French
Protestant Salmasius (Saumaise), the Anglican
Beveridge, and the Gallican Launoy, try to
show that the Council of Nice gi'anted to the
Bishop of Alexandi'ia only the rights of ordi-
nary metropolitans.

Bishop Stillingfleet.

I do confess there was something peculiar
in the case of the Bishop of Alexandria, for
all the provinces of Egypt were under his im-
mediate care, which was Pati'iarchal as to ex-
tent, but Metropolical in the administration.


16


I. NICE. A.D. 325


JrSTELLUS.

This authority (efovcrta) is that of a Metro-
politan which the Nicene Fathers decreed to
be his due over the three provinces named in
this canon, Egypt, Libya, and Pentapohs,
which made uj) the whole diocese of Egypt, as
well in matters civil as ecclesiastical.

On this important question Hefele refers
to the dissertation of Dupin, in his work De
Antiqua Erde)>u(' Disvipliiia. Hefele says :
" It seems to me beyond a doubt that in this
canon there is a question about that which
was afterward called the patriarchate of the
Bishop of Alexandria ; that is to say that he
had a certain recognized ecclesiastical author-
ity, not only over several civil provinces, but
also over several ecclesiastical provinces (which
had their own metroi^olitans) ; " and further
on (p. 392) he adds : " It is incontestable that
the civil provinces of Egypt, Libya, Pentapolis
and Thebais, which were all in subjection to


the Bishop of Alexandria, were also ecclesias-
tical provinces with their own metropolitans ;
and consecjuently it is not the ordinary rights
of metropolitans that the Sixth Canon of Xice
confers on the Bishop of Alexandria, but the
rights of a superior Metropolitan, that is, of a
Patriarch."

There only remains to see what were the
bounds of the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Antioch. The civil diocese of Oriens is shewn
by the .Second Canon of Constantinoijle to be
conterminous with what was afterward called
the Patriarchate of Antioch. The see of An-
tioch had, as we know, several metropolitans
subject to it, among them Csesarea, under
whose jurisdiction was Palestine. Justellus,
however, is of opinion that Pope Innocent I.
was in error when he asserted that all the
Metropolitans of Oriens were to be ordained
by him by any peculiar authority, and goes
so far as to stigmatize his words as " contrary
to the mind of the Nicene Synotl."'


EXCrRSUS ON THE EXTENT OF THE JURISDICTION OF THE BISHOP OF

ROME OVER THE SUBURBICAN CHURCHES.

Although, as Hefele well says, " It is evident that the Council has not in view here the
primacy of the Bishop of Rome over the whole Church, but simply his jiower as a patriarch,"
yet it may not be unimportant to consider what his patriarchal limits may have been.

(Hefele, Hist. Councils, Vol. I., p. 397.)

The translation of this [VI.] canon by Rufinus has been especially an apple of discord.
E( lit apud Alexandriam et in urbe Roma vetusta consuehido servctxLV, iit tel ille Egypti vel hie
suburbicariarum ecclesiarum sollicitudinein gerat. In the seventeenth century this sentence
of Rufinus gave rise to a vei'y lively discussion between the celebrated jurist, Jacob Goth-
fried (Gothofredus), and his friend, Salmasius, on one side, and the Jesuit, Sirmoud, on the
other. The great prefecture of Italy, which contained about a third of the whole Roman
Empire, was divided into four vicariates, among which the vicariate of Rome was the first.
At its head Avere two officers, the prcefectus urbi and the vicarius urbis. The prcefectus urbi
exercised authority over the city of Rome, and further in a suburban circle as far as the hun-
dredtli milestone. The boundary of the vicarius urbis comprised ten provinces — Campania,
Tuscia with Ombria, Picenum, Valeria, Samnium, Apulia with Calabria, Lucania and that of
the Brutii, Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. Gothfried and Salmasius maintained, that by the
regiones suburbicarice the little territory of the p)ra]fectus urbi must be understood ; while,
according to Sirmond, these words designate the whole territory of the vicarius urbis. In
our time Dr. Maasen has proved in his book,'-' already quoted several times, that Gothfried and
Salmasius were right in maintaining that, by the regiones suburbicarice, the little territory of
the pripfectus urbi must be alone understood.

Hefele thinks that Phillii:)s " has proved " that the Bishop of Rome had patriarchal rights
over places outside the limits of the ten provinces of the vicarius tirbis ; but does not agree


' Contra mentem Synodi Sicnni.

'' Friedrich Maasen : Der I'rimat <U:i liischofs von Rom. und
die alten I'atriarchalkirchen. Bonn, 1S53. §'lOfr-110. Maasen


(joes on to express the opinion tbat the patriarchal power of Rome
was much larger.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 17


with Phillips in thinking Rufinus in error. As a matter of fact the point is a difficult one,
anu has little to do with the gist of the meaning of the canon. One thing is certain : the
early Latin version of the canons, called the Frisca, was not satisfied with the Greek wording
and made the Canon read thus : " It is of ancient custom that the bishop of the city of
Rome should have a primacy {principatuvi), so that he should govern with care the subui-bi-
can places, and all his own pkovince," ^ Another interesting reading is that found in several
MSS. which begins, " The Church of Rome hath always had a primacy {priniatum)" and as a
matter of fact the early date of this addition is evinced by the fact that the canon was
actually quoted in this shape by Paschasinus at the Council of Chalcedon.

Hefele further on says, " The Greek commentators Zonaras and Balsam on (of the twelfth
century) say very explicitly, in their explanation of the Canons of Nice, that this sixth canon
confirms the rights of the Bishop of Rome as patriarch over the whole West," and refers to
Beveridge's /Syodicon, Tom. I., pp. 66 and 67. After diligent search I can find nothing to
warrant the great amplitude of this statement. Balsamon's interpretation is very vague,
being simply that the Bishop of Rome is over the Western Eparchies [twv eo-Trepi'wi/ €Vap_;^iwv)
and Zonaras still more vaguely says that tCjv ia-irepLwv apx^i-v e^o<; iKparrjae. That the whole
West was in a general way understood to be in the Roman Patriarchate I have no doubt,
that the Greek scholiasts just quoted deemed it to be so I think most probably the case, but
it does not seem to me that they have said so in the particular place cited. It seems to me
that all they meant to say was that the custom observed at Alexandria and Antioch was no
piu-ely Eastern and local thing, for a similar state of affairs was found in the West.

CANON VII.

Since custom and ancient tradition have prevailed that the Bishop of ^lia [i.e.,
Jerusalem] should be honoured, let him, saving its due dignity to the Metropolis, have
the next place of honour.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.
Let the Bishop of JElia be honoured, the


the second century the idea of the holiness of
the site began to lend dignity to the occupant
of the see ; at all events Eusebius '^ tells us
that "at a synod held on the subject of the
There would seem to be a singular fitness Easter controversy in the time of Pope Victor,


rights of the Metropolis being preserved intact.


in the Holy City Jerusalem holding a very ex-
alted position among the sees of Christendom,
and it may appear astonishing that in the ear-
liest times it was only a suffragan see to the
great Church of Csesarea. It must be re-
membered, however, that only about seventy


Theophilus of Csesarea and Narcissus of Jeru-
salem were presidents."

It was this feeling of reverence which in-
duced the passing of this seventh canon. It
is very hard to determine just what was the
"precedence " granted to the Bishop of ^lia,


years after our Lord's death the city of Jeru- nor is it clear which is the metropolis referred
salem was entirely destroyed and ploughed as to in the last clause. Most writers, including
a field according to the prophet. As a holy Hefele, Balsamon, Aristenus and Beveridge
city Jerusalem was a thing of the past for consider it to be Csesarea ; while Zonaras
long years, and it is only in the beginning of j thinks Jerusalem to be intended, a view re-
the second century that we find a strong cently adopted and defended by Fuchs ; ^
Christian Church growing up in the rapidly others again suppose it is Antioch that is re-
increasing city, called no longer Jerusalem, ; f erred to.
but ^lia Capitolina. Possibly by the end of i

I ■•' Ensebias : Hist. Eccl. Lib. v., c. 23.

' Vide Labbe's Observation. Tom. n., col. 47. I ^ Fucbs : Bib. der Kirchenversammlungen. Bd. i., S. 399.


18 I. MCE. A.D. 325


EXCURSUS ON THE RISE OF THE PATRIARCHATE OF JERUSALEM.

The narrative of the successive steps by which the See of Jerusalem rose from being
nothing but ^lia, a Gentile city, into one of the five patriarchal sees is sad reading for a
Christian. It is but the record of ambition and, worse still, of knavery. No Christian can
for a moment grudge to the Holy City of the old dispensation the honour shewn it by the
Chui'ch, but he may well wish that the honour had been otherwise obtained. A careful study
of such records as we jiossess shews that until the fifth cen'jui-y the Metropolitan of Csesarea
as often took precedence of the Bishop of Jerusalem as vice versa, and Beveridge has taken
great pains to shew that the learned De Marca is in error in supposing that the Council of
Nice assigned to Jerusalem a dignity sui)t'rior to Ctesarea, and only inferior to Rome, Alex-
andria, and Antioch. It is true that in the signatures the Bishop of Jerusalem does sign
before his metropolitan, but to this Beveridge justly replies that the same is the case with the
occupants of two other of his suffragan sees. Bishop Beveridge's ojiinion is that the Council
assigned Jerusalem the second place in the province, such as London enjoys in the Province
of Canterbury. This, however, would seem to be as much too little as De Marca's contention
grants too much. It is certain that almost immediate!}' after the Council had adjourned,
the Bishop of Jerusalem, Maximus, convoked a synod of Palestine, without any reference to
Caesarea, which consecrated bishops and acquitted St. Athanasius. It is true that he was
reprimanded for doing so,' but yet it clearly shews how he intended to understand the
action of Nice. The matter was not decided for a century more, and then through the chi-
canery of Juvenal the bishop of Jerusalem. ,

(Canon Venables, Diet. Christ. Biography.)

Juvenalis succeeded Praylius as bishop of Jerusalem somewhere about 420 a.d. The exact
year cannot be determined. The e23iscopate of Praylius, which commenced in 417 a.d., was
but short, and we can hardly give it at most more than three years. The statement of Cyril
of Scythopolis, in his Life of St. Euthymius (c. 96), that Juvenal died " in the fortj'-fourth
year of his episcopate," 458 a.d., is certainly incorrect, as it would make his episcojmte begin
in 414 A.D., three years before that of his px'edecessor. Juvenal occupies a prominent posi-
tion during the Nestorian and Eutycliian troubles towards the middle of the fifth century.
But the part played by him at the councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, as Mell as at the dis-
graceful XijiTTpLKy o-iVoSos of 449, was more consj^icuous than creditable, and there are few of
the actors in these turbulent and saddening scenes who leave a more uupleasing impression.
The ruling object of Juvenal's episcopate, to which everything else was secondary, and which
guided all his conduct, was the elevation of the see of Jerusalem from the subordinate j^osi-
tion it held in accordance with the seventh of the canons of the council of Nicsea, as suffragan
to the metropolitan see of Csesarea, to a primary place in the episcopate. Not content with
aspiring to metropolitan rank, Juvenal coveted patriarchal dignity, and, in defiance of all
canonical authority, he claimed jurisdiction over the great see of Antioch, from which he
sought to remove Arabia and the two Phcenicias to his own province. At the council of
Ephesus, in 431, lie asserted for " the apostolic see of Jerusalem the same rank and author-
ity with the apostolic see of Rome " (Labbe, Concil. iii. 642). These falsehoods he did not
scruple to support with forged documents ("insolenter ausus per commentitia scripta fir-
mare," Leo. Mag. Ep. 119 [92]), and other disgraceful artifices. Scarcely had Juvenal been
consecrated bishop of Jerusalem when he proceeded to assert his claims to the metropolitan
rank by his acts. In the letter of remonstrance against the proceedings of the council of

' Socrates: Hitt. EccL. ii. 24.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 19


Ephesus, sent to Tlieodosius by the Oriental i^arty, they complain that Juvenal, whose
"ambitious designs and juggling tricks " they are only too well acquainted with, had or-
dained in provinces over which he had no jurisdiction (Labbe, Condi, iii. 728). This auda-
cious attempt to set at nought the Nicene decrees, and to falsify both history and tradition
was regarded with the utmost indignation liy the leaders of the Christian church. Cyril of
Alexandria shuddered at the impious design ("merito perhorrescens," Leo. u. s.), and wrote
to Leo, then archdeacon of Rome, informing him of what Juvenal was undertaking, and beg-
ging that his unlawful attempts might have no sanction from the apostolic See ("ut nulla
illicitis conatibus praeberetur assensio," u. s.). Juvenal, however, was far too useful an ally in
his campaign against Nestorius for Cyril lightly to discard. When the council met at Ephe-
sus Juvenal was allowed, without the slightest remonstrance, to take precedence of his met-
ropolitan of Csesarea, and to occupy the position of vice-president of the council, coming
next after Cyril himself (Labbe, Concil. iii. 445), and was regarded in all respects as the
second prelate in the assembly. The arrogant assertion of his supremacy over the bishop
of Antioch, and his claim to take rank next after Rome as an apostolical see, jorovoked no
open remonstrance, and his pretensions were at least tacitly allowed. At the next council,
the disgraceful Latrociniiim, Juvenal occupied the third place, after Dioscorus and the papal
legate, having been specially named by Theodosius, together with Thalassius of Csesarea
(who appears to have taken no umbi-age at his suffragan being preferred before him), as next
in authority to Dioscorus (Labbe, Concil. iv. 109), and he took a leading part in the violent
proceedings of that assembly. When the council of Chalcedon met, one of the matters
which came before it for settlement was the dispute as to j)riority between Juvenal and
Maximus Bishop of Antioch. The contention was long and severe. It ended in a compro-
mise agreed on in the Seventh Action, fxera TroXXrjv (juXovetKLav. Juvenal surrendered his claim
to the two Phoenicias and to Arabia, on condition of his being allowed metropolitical juris-
diction over the three Palestines (Labbe, Concil. iv. 613). The claim to patriarchal author-
ity over the Bishop of Antioch put forward at Ephesus was discreetly dropped. The diffi-
culty presented by the Nicene canon does not appear to have presented itself to the council,
nor was any one found to urge the undoubted claims of the see of Csesarea. The terms
arranged between Maximus and Juvenal were regarded as satisfactory, and received the con-
sent of the assembled bishops (ibid. 618). Maximus, however, was not long in repenting of
his too ready acquiescence in Juvenal's demands, and wrote a letter of complaint to pope
Leo, who replied by the letter which has been already quoted, dated June 11, 453 a.d., in
which he upheld the binding authority of the Nicene canons, and commenting in the strong-
est terms on the greediness and ambition of Juvenal, who allowed no opportunity of forward-
ing his ends to be lost, declared that as far as he was concerned he would do all he could to
maintain the ancient dignity of the see of Antioch (Leo Magn. Ep. ad llaximum, 119 [92]).
No further action, however, seems to have been taken either by Leo or by Maximus. Juve-
nal was left master of the situation, and the church of Jerusalem has from that epoch peace-
ably enjoyed the patriarchal dignity obtained for it by such base means.


CANON VIII.

Concerning those who call themselves Cathari, if they come over to the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, the great and holy Synod decrees that they who are ordained shall
continue as they are in the clergy. But it is before all things necessary that they should
profess in writing that they will observe and follow the dogmas of the Catholic and Apos-
tolic Church ; in particular that they will communicate with persons who have been
twice married, and with those who having lapsed in persecution have had a period [of


20


I. NICE. A.D. 325


penance] laid upon them, and a time [of restoration] fixed so that in all things they will
follow the dogmas of the Catholic Church. AVheresoever, then, whether in villages or in
cities, all of the ordained are found to be of these only, let them remain in the clergy, and
in the same rank in which they are found. But if they come over where there is a bishop
or presbyter of the Catholic Church, it is manifest that the Bishop of the Church nnist
have the bishop's dignity ; and he who was named bishop by those who are called Cathari
shall have the rank of presbyter, unless it sliall seem tit to the Bishop to admit him to
partake in the honour of the title. Or, if this should not be satisfactory, then shall the
bishop provide for him a place as Chorepiscopus, or presbyter, in order that he may be
evidently seen to be of the clergy, and that there may not be two bishops in the city.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon YIII.


If those called Cathari come over, let them
first make profession that they are ivilUng to
communicate ivith the tivice married, and to
grant pardon to the lapsed. And on this con-
dition he icho happens to he in orders, shall
continue in the same order, so that a bishoj)
shall still be bishop. Whoever ivas a bishojj
among the Cathari let liim, hotcever, become a
Chorepjiscopus, or let him enjoy the honour of a
p)resbyter or of a bishop. For in one church there
shall not be two bishops.

The Cathari or Novatians were the follow-
ers of Novatian, a presbyter of Rome, who had
been a Stoic philosopher and was delivered,
according to his own story, from diabolical
possession at his exorcising by the Church
before his baptism, when becoming a Cate-
chumen. Being in peril of death by illness
he received clinical baptism, and was ordained
pi'iest without any further sacred rites being
administered to him. During the persecution
he constantly refused to assist his brethren,
and afteiT\ards raised his voice against what
he considered their culpable laxity in admit-
ting to penance the lapsed. jNIany agreed with
him in this, especiall}' of the clergy, and event-
ually, in A.D. 251, he induced three bishops to
consecrate him, thus becoming, as Fleury re-
marks,' " the first Anti-Pope." His indigna-
tion was principally spent ui^on Pope Corne-
lius, and to overthrow the prevailing discipline
of the Church he ordained bishops and sent
them to different parts of the empire as the
disseminators of his error. It is well to re-
member that while beginning only as a schis-
matic, he soon fell into heresy, denying that
the Church had the power to absolve the lapsed.
Although condemned by several councils his
sect continued on, and like the !Montanists
they rebaptized Catholics who apostatized to
them, and absolutely rejected all second mar-
riages. At the time of flu Council of Nice


- 'Fleury, Hist. Eccles. liv. VI., liij.


the Novatian bishop at Constantinople, Ace-
sius, was greatly esteemed, and although a
schismatic, was invited to attend the council.
After having in answer to the emperor's en-
quiry whether he was willing to sign the
Creed, assured him that he was, he went on
to explain that his separation was because
the Church no longer observed the ancient
discipline which forbade that those who had
committed mortal sin should ever be read-
mitted to communion. According to the No-
vatians he might be exhorted to repentance,
but the Church had no power to assure him
of forgiveness but must leave him to the judg-
ment of God. It was then that Constantine
said, " Acesius, take a ladder, and climb up
to heaven alone."-

Aristenus.
If any of them be bishops or chorepiscopi
they shall remain in the same rank, unless
perchance in the same city there be found a
bishop of the Catholic Church, ordained be-
fore their coming. For in this case he that
was properly bishop from the first shall have
the preference, and he alone shall rettiin the
Episcopal throne. For it is not right that in
the same city there should be two bishojis.
But he who by the Cathari was called bishop,
shall be honoured as a presbyter, or (if it so
please the bishop), he shall be sharer of the
title bishop ; T)ut he sliall exercise no epis-
coi)al jurisdiction.

Zonaras, Balsamon, Beveridge and Van Es-
pen, are of opinion that x^tpo^'^'eToi'/i.fVois does
not mean that they are to receive a new laying
on of hands at their reception into the Church,
but that it refers to their already condition of
being ordained, the meaning being that as
they have had Novatian ordination they must
be reckoned among the clergy. Dionysius
Exiguus takes a different view, as does also
the Pri.^ra version, according to which the


' Socratet;. //(.^^ h'ccl, i. lo. t'ide also Tillemont, ifimmres,
etc., torn, vi., art. 17, and Sozoman, H. E. i. 22.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


31


clergy of the Novatians were to receive a lay-
ing on of hands, x^'-po^^'''(>'^h'-^^ov<;, but that it
was not to be a reordination. With this in-
terpretation Hefele seems to agree, founding


his opinion upon the fact that the article is
wanting before xetpo-^tTou/Acvous, and that avrovs
is added. Gratian ' supjjoses that this eighth
canon orders a re-ordination.


EXCUESUS ON THE CHOREPISCOPI.

There has been much difference of opinion among the learned touching the status of the
Chorepiscopus in the early Church. The main question in dispute is as to whether they
were always, sometimes, or never, in episcopal orders. Most Anglican writers, including
Beveridge, Hammond, Cave, and Routh, have affirmed the first proposition, that they were
true bishops, but that, out of respect to the bishop of the City they were forbidden the exer-
cise of certain of their episcopal functions, except upon extraordinary occasions. With this
view Binterim ^ also agrees, and Augusti is of the same opinion.^ But Thomassinus is of a
different mind, thinking, so says Hefele,^ that there were " two classes of chorepiscopi, of
whom the one were real bishops, while the other had only the title without consecration."

The third opinion, that they were merely presbyters, is espoused by Morinus and Du
Gauge, and others who are named by Bingham.^ This last opinion is now all but univer-
sally rejected, to the other two we shall now devote our attention.

For the first opinion no one can speak more learnedly nor more authoritatively than
Arthur W^est Haddon, who writes as follows ;

(Haddon, Diet. Christ. Antiq. s. v. Chorepiscopus.)

The chorepiscopus was called into existence in the latter part of the third century, and
first in Asia Minor, in order to meet the want of episcopal supervision in the country parts of
the now enlarged dioceses without subdivision. [They are] first mentioned in the Councils
of Ancyra and Neo-Csesarea a. d. 314, and again in the Council of Nice (which is subscribed
by fifteen, all from Asia Minor or Syria). [They became] sufficiently important to require re-
striction by the time of the Council of Antioch, a. d. 341 ; and continued to exist in the
East until at least the ninth century, when they were supplanted by e^ap^ot. [Chorepiscopi
are] first mentioned in the West in the Council of Riez, a. d. 439 (the Epistles of Pope Da-
masus I. and of Leo. M. respecting them being forgeries), and continued there (but not in
Africa, principally in France) until about the tenth century, after which the name occurs (in
a decree of Pope Damasus II. ap. Sigeb. in an. 1048) as equivalent to archdeacon, an office
from which the Arabic Nicene canons expressly distinguish it. The functions of chorepis-
copi, as well as their name, were of an episcopal, not of a presbyterial kind, although limited
to minor offices. They overlooked the country district committed to them, "loco episcojn,"
ordaining readers, exorcists, subdeacons, but, as a rule, not deacons or presbyters (and of
course not bishops), unless by express permission of their diocesan bishop. They confirmed
in their own districts, and (in Gaul) are mentioned as consecrating churches {vide Du Cange).
They granted ilpevLKoi, or letters dimissory, which country presbyters were forbidden to do.
They had also the honorary privilege (rt/Aw/Aei/ot) of assisting at the celebration of the Holy
Eucharist in the mother city church, which country presbyters had not {Cone. Ancyr. can.
xiii.; Neo-Ccesar. can. xiv. ; Antioeh, can. x. ; St. Basil M. Einst. 181 ; Rab. Maur. De Instit.
Cler. i. 5, etc. etc.). They were held therefore to have power of ordination, but to lack juris-
diction, save subordinately. And the actual ordination of a presbyter by Timotheus, a chor-
episcopus, is recorded (Pallad., Hist. Lausiac. 106). %


1 Gratian, Decretum, Corp. Juris Canon, Pars. II. Causa I.
Qusest. 7, Can. viij.
* Binterim, Denkwiirdigkeiten, vol. i. part ii. pp. 386-414.


3 Augusti, Denkwiirdigkeiten. vol. xi. p. 1.59 et seqq.
* Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, vol. ii. p. 322.
° Bingham, Antiquities, ii. xiv. 2, 3.


22 I. NICE. A.D. 325


In the West, i.e. chiefly in Gaul, the order appears to have prevailed more widely, to have
usurped episcopal functions without due subordination to the diocesans, and to have been
also taken advantage of by idle or worldly diocesans. In consequence it seems to have
aroused a strong feeling of hostility, which showed itself, first in a series of pap:d bulls, con-
demning them ; headed, it is true, by two forged letters respectively of Damasus I. and Leo.
M. (of which the latter is merely an interpolated version of Cone. Hispal. II. a.d. 019, can.
7, adding chorepiacopi to presbyteri, of which latter the council really treats), but continuing
in a more genuine form, from Leo III. down to Pope Nicholas I. (to llodolph, Archbishop of
Bourges, a.d. 864) ; the last of whom, however, takes the more moderate line of affirming
chorepiscopi to be really bishops, and consequently refusing to annul their ordinations of
presbyters and deacons (as previous popes had done), but orders them to keep within canoni-
cal limits ; and secondly, in a series of conciliar decrees. Cone. Ratiq^on. a.d. 800, in Capit.
lib. iv. c. 1, Paris, a.d, 829, lib. i. c. 27 ; Meld. a.d. 845, can. 44 ; Meiena. a.d. 888, can. 8, and
Capilul. V. 1G8, vi. 119, vii. 187, 310, 323, 324, annulling all episcopal acts of chorepiscopi,
and ordering them to be repeated by " true " bishops ; and finally forbidding all further
appointments of choi-episcopi at all.

That chorepiscopi as such — i.e. omitting the cases of reconciled or vacant bishops above
mentioned, of whose episcopate of course no question is made — were at first truly bishops
both in East and West, appears almost certain, both from their name and functions, and
even from the arguments of their strong oj^ponents just spoken of. If nothing more could
be urged against them, than that the Council of Neo-Csesarea compai'ed them to the Seventy
disciples, that the Council of Antioch authorises their consecration by a single bishop, and
that they actually were so consecrated (the Antiochene decree might mean merely nomina-
tion by the word yiVeo-^at, but the actual history seems to rule the term to intend consecra-
tion, and the [one] exceptional case of a chorepiscopus recorded [Aeff. Epise. Cenoman. ap.
Du Cange] in late times to have been ordained by three bishops [in order that he might be a
full bishopj merely proves the general rule to the contrary) — and that they were consecrated
for "villages," contrary to canon, — then they certainly were bishops. And Pope Nicholas
expressly says that they were so. Undoubtedly they ceased to be so in the East, and were
practically merged in archdeacons in the West.

For the second opinion, its great champion, Thomassinus shall speak.

(Thomassin, Ancienne et Nouvelle Discipline de I'Jtglise, Tom. I. Livre II. chap 1. § iii.)

The chorepiscopi were not duly consecrated bishops, unless some bishop had consecrated
a bishop for a town and the bishop thus ordained contrary to the canons was tolerated on
condition of his submitting himself to the diocesan as though he were only a chorepiscopus.
This may be gathered from the fifty-seventh canon of Laodicea.

From this canon two conclusions may be drawn, 1st. That bishops ought not to be or-
dained for villages, and tliat as Chorepiscopi could only be placed in villages they could not
be bishops. 2d. That sometimes by accident a chorepiscopus might be a bishop, but only
through having been canonically lowered to that rank.

The Council of Nice furnishes another example of a bishop lowered to the rank of a chor-
episcopus in Canon' viii. This canon shows that they should not have been bishops, for two
bishops could never be in a diocese, although this might accidentally be the case when a
chorepiscopus happened to be a bishop.

Tliis is the meaning which must be given to the tenth canon of Antioch, which directs that
chorepiscopi, even if they have received episcopal orders, and have been consecrated bishops,
shall keep within the limits prescribed by the canon ; that in cases of necessity, they ordain


I. NICE. A.D. 325 23

the lower clergy ; but that they be careful not to ordain priests or deacons, because this
power is absolutely reserved to the Diocesan, It must be added that as the councU of Anti-
och commands that the Diocesan without any other bishop can ordain the chorepiscopus, the
position can no longer be sustained that the chorepiscopi were bishops, such a method of
consecrating a bishop being contrary to canon xix. of the same council, moreover the canon
does not say the chorepiscopus is to be ordained, but uses the word yiveaSai by the bishop of
the city (canon x.). The Council of Neocsesarea by referring them to the seventy disciples
(in Canon XIV.) has shown the chorepiscopi to be only priests.

But the Council of Ancyra does furnish a difficulty, for the text seems to permit chor-
episcopi to ordain jDriests. But the Greek text must be corrected by the ancient Latin ver-
sions. The letter attributed to pope Nicholas, a.d. 8G4, must be considered a forgery since
he recognises the chorepiscopi as real bishops.

If Harmenopulus, Aristenus, Balsamon, and Zonaras seem to accord to the chorepiscopi
the power to ordain priests and deacons with the permission of the Diocesan, it is because
they are explaining the meaning and setting forth the practice of the ancient councils and
not the practice of their own times. But at all events it is past all doubt that before the
seventh century there were, by different accidents, chorepiscopi who were really bishops and
that these could, with the consent of the diocesan, ordain priests. But at the time these au-
thors wrote, there was not a single chorepiscopus in the entire East, as Balsamon frankly
admits in commenting on Canon xiii. of Ancyra.

Whether in the foregoing the reader will think Thomassinus has proved his point, I do
not know, but so far as the position of the chorepiscopi in synods is concerned there can be
no doubt whatever, and I shall allow Hefele to speak on this point.

(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. I. jop. 17, 18.)
The Chorepiscopi (xwpeTrtcrKOTrot), or bishops of countrj' places, seem to have been con-
sidered in ancient times as quite on a par with the other bishops, as far as their position in
synod was concerned. We meet with them at the Councils of Neocsesarea in the year 314,
of Nicsea in 325, of Ephesus in 431. On the other hand, among the 600 bishops of the fourth
Ecumenical Council at Chalcedon in 451, there is no chorepiscopus present, for by this time
the office had been abolished ; but in the Middle Ages we again meet with chorepiscopi of a
new kind at Western councils, particularly at those of the French Church, at Langres in 830,
at Maj^ence in 847, at Poutiou in 876, at Lyons in 886, at Douzy in 871.

CANON IX.

If any presbyters have been advanced without examination, or if upon examination
they have made confession of crime, and men acting in violation of the canon have laid
hands upon them, notwithstanding their confession, such the canon does not admit ; for
the Catholic Church requires that [only] which is blameless.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon IX. j phemy, bigamy, heresy, idolatry, magic, etc. —

Whoever are ordained loithout ea-annnatwn, \ as the Arabic paraphrase of Joseph explains.
shall be deposed if it be found out afterwards It is clear that these faults are punishable


that they had been guilty.

Hefele.


in


the bishop no less than in the priest, and that
consequently our canon refers to the bishops
as well as to the Trpecrf3vT€poi in the more re-


The crimes in question are those which stricted sense. These words of the Greek
were a bar to the priesthood — such as bias- text, " In the case in which any one might be


24


I. NICE. A.D. 325


induced, in opposition to the canon, to ordain
such persons," allude to the ninth canon of
the Svnod of Neocsesarea. It was necessary
to pass such ordinances ; for even in the fifth
century, as the twenty-second letter to Pope
Innocent the First testifies, some held that as
baptism effaces all former sins, so it takes away
all the impedimenta ordinationis which are the
result of those sins.


Balsamon.
Some say that as baptism makes the bap-
tized person a new man, so ordination takes
away the sins committed before ordination,
which opinion does not seem to agree with
the canons.

This canon occurs twice in the Corpus Juns
Canonici. Decretum Pars I. Dist. xxiv. c.
vij., and Dist. Ixxxj., c. iv.


CANON X.

If any who have lapsed have been ordained througli the ignorance, or even with the
previous knowledge of the ordainers, this shall not prejudice the canon of the Church ;
for •when they are discovered they shall be deposed.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


Whoso had lapsed are to be deposed whether
those ivho ordained and promoted them did so
conscious of their guilt or unknoicing of it.

Hefele.

The tenth canon differs from the ninth, in-
asmuch as it concerns only the lapsi and their
elevation, not only to the priesthood, but to
any other ecclesiastical preferment as well,
and requires their deposition. The punish-
ment of a bishop who should consciously per-
form such an ordination is not mentioned ;


but it is incontestable that the /cp.?? could not
be ordained, even after having performed
penance ; for, as the preceding canon states,
the Church requires those who were faultless.
It is to be observed that the word Trpoxfipt'Cf"'
is evidently employed here in the sense of
"ordain," and is used without anv distinction
from xftp'Cf'i', w^hilst in the synodal letter of
the Council of Nica-a on the subject of the
Meletians, there is a distinction Ijetween these
two words, and TrpoxupiieLi' is used to signify
eligere.

This canon is found in Corpus Juris Canon-
ici. Decretum. Pars I. Dist. Ixxxi. c. v.


CANON XI.

CoNCERNiXG those who have fallen without compulsion, without the spoiling of their
property, without danger or the like, as hapi)eued during the tyranny of Licinius, the
Synod declares that, though they have deserved no clemency, they shall be dealt with
mercifully. As many as were communicants, if they heartily repent, shall pass three
years among the hearers; for seven years they shall be ]>rostratoi's ; and for two years
they shall communicate with the people in prayers, but without oblation.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.


As many as fell xcithout necessity, even if
therefore undeserving of indulgence, yet some
indulgence shall he shown them and they shall
be prostrators for twelve years.

On the expression " without oblation "
(xwpis-?rpocr<^opas)see the notes to Ancyra, Canon
V. where the matter is treated at some length.


Lambert.


The usual position of the hearers was just
inside the church door. But Zonaras (and
Balsamon agrees with him), in his comment
on this canon, says, "they are ordered for
three years to be hearers, or to stand without
the church in the narthex."

I have read "as many as were communi-
cants" (ot TTtcrroi) thus following Dr. KoutL


I. NICE. A.D. 325


25


Vide bis Opuscula. Cai-anza translates in his
Summary of the Councils "if they were faitli-
ful " and seems to have read ei ttio-toi, which
is much simpler and makes better sense.


ZONARAS.

The prostrators stood within the body of
the church behind the ambo \i.e.
desk] and went out with the catechumens,


the reading


EXCURSUS ON THE PUBLIC DISCIPLINE OR EXOMOLOGESIS OF THE

EARLY CHURCH.

(Taken chiefly from Morinus, Z>e Disciplina in Administratione Sacramenti Poenit entice ;
Bingham, Antiquities; and Hammond, The Definitions of Faith, etc. Note to Canon XL of
Nice.)

" In the Primitive Church there was a godly discipline, that at the beginning of Lent,
such persons as stood convicted of notorious sin were put to open penance, and punished in
this world that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord ; and that others, admon-
ished by their example, might be the more afraid to offend."

The foregoing words from the Commination Service of the Church of England may
serve well to introduce this subject. In the history of the public administration of discipline
in the Church, there are three periods sufficiently distinctly marked. The first of these ends
at the rise of Novatianism in the middle of the second century ; the second stretches down
to about the eighth century ; and the third period shews its gradual decline to its j)ractical
abandonment in the eleventh century. The period with which we are concerned is the sec-
ond, when it was in full force.

In the first period it would seem that public penance was required only of those con-
vdcted of what then were called by pre-eminence " mortal sins " {crimena morialia '), viz :
idolatry, murder, and adultery. But in the second period the list of mortal sins was greatly
enlarged, and Morinus says that "Many Fathers who wrote after Augustine's time, extended
the necessity of public penance to all crimes which the civil law jDunished with death, exile,
or other grave corporal penalty."'- In the penitential canons ascribed to St. Basil and
those which pass by the name of St. Gregory Nyssen, this increase of offences requiring
public penance will be found intimated.

From the fourth century the penitents of the Church were divided into four classes.
Three of these are mentioned in the eleventh canon, the fourth, which is not here referred to,
was composed of those styled o-vyKXatWre?, flentes or weepers. These were not allowed to
enter into the body of the church at all, but stood or lay outside the gates, sometimes cov-
ered with sackcloth and ashes. This is the class which is sometimes styled xc'/^o^o/xeVot, hyber-
nantes, on account of their being obliged to endure the inclemency of the weather.

It may help to the better understanding of this and other canons which notice the differ-
ent orders of penitents, to give a brief account of the usual form and arrangement of the
ancient churches as well as of the different orders of the penitents.

Before the church there was commonly either an open area surrounded with porticoes,
called fx^cravXiov or atrium, with a font of water in the centre, styled a cantharus or phiala, or
sometimes only an open portico, or 7rpo7ruA.aioi'. The first variety may still be seen at S. Am-
brogio's in Milan, and the latter in Rome at S. Lorenzo's, and in Ravenna at the two S. Apol-
linares. This was the place at which the first and lowest order of penitents, the weepers,
already referred to, stood exposed to the weather. Of these, St. Gregory Thaumaturgus
says: "Weeping takes place outside the door of the church, where the sinner must stand
and beg the prayers of the faithful as they go in."

The church itself usually consisted of three divisions within, besides these exterior courts


"Cyprian. De JSono Patient., cap. xiv.


* Morinus, De Poenitent, lib. v., cap. 5.


i>0 I. NICE. A.D. 325


and porch. The first part after passing through " the great gates," or doors of the building,
was called the Narthex in Greek, and Fierula in Latin, and was a narrow vestibule extending
the whole width of the church. In this part, to which Jews and Gentiles, and in most places
even heretics and schismatics were admitted, stood the Catechumens, and the Energumens
or those afflicted with evil si^irits, and the second class of penitents (the first mentioned in
the Canon), who were called the dKoi/xevot, audientes, or hearers. These were allowed to hear
the Scrijitures read, and the Sermon preached, but were obliged to depart before the cele-
bration of the Divine Mysteries, with the Catechumens, and the others who went by the
general name of hearers only.

The second division, or main body of the church, was called the Naos or Nave. This
was separated from the Narthex by rails of wood, with gates in the centre, which were
called " the beautiful or royal gates." In the middle of the Nave, but rather toward the
lower or entrance part of it, stood the Ambo, or reading-desk, the place for the readers
and singers, to which they went up by steps, whence the name, Ambo. Before coming to
the Ambo, in the lowest part of the Nave, and just after passing the royal gates, was the
place for the third order of penitents, called in Greek yowKX-ivovres, or {iTroTriTrTovres, and in
Latin Genufiectentes or Prostrati, i.e., kneelers or prostrators, because they were allowed to
remain and join in certain prayers particularly made for them. Before going out they pros-
trated themselves to receive the imposition of the bishoj^'s hands Avith prayer. This class of
penitents left with the Catechumens,

In tlie otlier parts of the Nave stood the believers or faithful, i.e., those persons who were
in full communion with the Church, the men and women generalh* on oi:)posite sides, though
in some places the men were below, and the Avomen in galleries above. Amongst these were
the fourth class of penitents, who were called o-ui/eo-rwres, consistentes, i.e., co-standers,
because they were allowed to stand with the faithful, and to remain and hear the prayers
of the Church, after the Catechumens and the other penitents were dismissed, and to be
present while the faithful offered and communicated, though they might not themselves
make their offerings, nor partake of the Holy Communion. This class of penitents are fre-
quently mentioned in the canons, as "communicating in prayers," or "without the oblation ; "
and it was the last grade to be passed through previous to the being admitted again to full
communion. The practice of "hearing mass" or "non-communicating attendance" clearly
had its origin in this stage of discipline. At the upper end of the body of the church, and
divided from it by rails which were culled Cancelli, was that part which we now call the
Chancel. Tliis was anciently called by several names, as Bema or tril)unal, from its being
raised above the body of the church, and Sacrai'ium or Sanctuary. It was also called Apsis
and Concha Bematis, from its semicircular end. In this part stood the Altar, or Holy Table
(which names were indifferently used in the pi'imitive Church), behind Avhicli, and against
the wall of the chancel, was the Bishop's throne, with the seats of the Presbyters on each
side of it, called synthronus. On one side of the chancel was the repository' for the sacred
utensils and vestments, called the Diaconicum, and answering to our Vestry ; and on the
other the Prothesis, a side-table, or place, where the bread and wine were deposited before
they were offered on the Altar. The gates in the chancel rail were called the holy gates,
and none l)ut the higher orders of the clergj', i.e.. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, were allowed
to enter within them. The Emperor indeed was permitted to do so for the purpose of mak-
ing his offering at the Altar, but then he was obliged to retire immediately, and to receive
the communion without.

(Thomassin. Ancienne et Nouvelle Discipline de VEglise. Tom. I. Livre II. chap. xvj.
somewhat abridged.)


I. NICE. A.D. 325 27


In the West there existed always many cases of public penance, but in the East it is more
difficult to find any traces of it, after it was abolished by the Patriarch Nectarius in the per-
son of the Grand Penitentiaiy.

However, the Emperor Alexis Comnenus, who took the empire in the year 1080, did a
penance like that of older days, and one which may well pass for miraculous. He called
together a large number of bishops with the pati'iarch, and some holy religious ; he pre-
sented himself before them in the garb of a criminal ; he confessed to them his crime of
usurpation with all its circumstances. They condemned the Emperor and all his accomplices
to fasting, to lying prostrate upon the earth, to wearing haircloth, and to all the other ordi-
nary austerities of penance. Their wives desired to share their griefs and their sufferings,
although they had had no share in their crime. The whole palace became a theatre of sor-
row and public penance. The emperor wore the hairshirt under the purple, and lay upon
the earth for forty days, having only a stone for a pillow.

To all practical purposes Public Penance was a general institution but for a short while
in the Church. But the reader must be careful to distinguish between this Public Penance
and the private confession which in the Catholic Church both East and West is universally
practised. What Nectarius did was to abolish the office of Penitentiary, whose duty it
had been to assign public penance for secret sin ;^ a thing wholly different from what Catho-
lics understand by the " Saci-ament of Penance." It would be out of place to do more in
this place than to call the reader's attention to the bare fact, and to supply him, from a
Roman Catholic point of view, with an explanation of why Public Penance died out. " It came
to an end because it was of human institution. But sacramental confession, being of divine
origin, lasted when the penitential discipline had been changed, and continues to this day
among the Greeks and Oriental sects. "'■^ That the reader may judge of the absolute can-
dour of the writer just quoted, I give a few sentences from the same article : "An opinion,
however, did prevail to some' extent in the middle ages, even among Catholics, that confes-
sion to God alone sufficed. The Council of Chalons in 813 (canon xxxiij.), says: 'Some
assert that we should confess our sins to God alone, but some think that they should be
confessed to the priest, each of which practices is followed not without great fruit in Holy
Church. . . . Confession made to God purges sins, but that made to the priest teaches
how they are to be purged.' This former opinion is also mentioned without reprobation by
Peter Lombard {In Sentent. Lib. iv. dist. xvij.)."

CANON XII.

As many as were called by grace, and displayed the first zeal, having cast aside their
military girdles, but afterwards returned, like dogs, to tlieir own vomit, (so that some
spent money and by means of gifts regained their military stations) ; let these, after
they have passed the space of three years as hearers, be for ten years prostrators. But
iu all these cases it is necessary to examine well into their purpose and what tlieir
repentance appears to be like. For as many as give evidence of their conversions by
deeds, and not pretence, with fear, and tears, and j^erseverance, and good works, when
tliey have fulfilled tlieir appointed time as hearers, may properly communicate in
prayers ; and after that the bishop may determine yet more favourably concerning
them. But those who take [the matter] with indifference, and who think the form of
[not] entering the Church is sufficient for their conversion, must fulfil the w^hole time.

' Vide, Thomassin. Lib. cit. Livre II. Chapitre vii. § xiii. I 'Addis and Arnold. A Catholic Dictionary ; sub voce Pen-
where the whole matter of NectariuB's action is diecussed. | ance. Sacrament of.


28


I. NICE. A.D. 325


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.


Tliose who endured violence and ivere seen to
have resisted, but who afterwards yielded to
wickedness, and returned to the urnii/, t<hall be
excommunicated for ten years. But in every
case the way in which they do their penance
must be scrutinized. And if anyone icho is do-
ing i)enance shews himself zealous iji its per-
formance, the bishoj) shall treat him more leni-
ently than had he been cold and indifferent.

Lambert.

The abuse of this power, namely, of grant-
ing under certain circumstances a relaxation
in the penitential exercises enjoined by the
canons — led, in later times, to the practice of
commuting such exercises for money pay-
ments, etc.

Hefele.

In his last contests with Constantine, Li-
cinius had made himself the representative
of lieathcnism ; so that the final issue of the
•war would not be the mere triumph of one of
the two competitors, but the triumph or fall
of Christianity or heathenism. Accordingly,
a Christian who had in this war supported the
cause of Licinius and of heathenism might be
considered as a lapsus, even if he did not for-
mally fall away. With much more reason
might those Christians be treated as lapsi
who, having conscientiously given up military
service (this is meant by the soldier's belt),
afterwards retracted their resolution, and
went so far as to give money and presents for
the sake of readmission, on account of the nu-
merous advantages whieli military service then
afforded. It must not be forgotten that Li-
cinius, as Zonaras and Eusebius relate, re-
quired from his soldiers a formal apostasy ;
compelled them, for example, to take part in
the heathen sacrifices which were held in the
camps, and dismissed from his service those
who would not apostatize.

Bright.

This canon (which in the Prisca and the
Isidorian version stands as part of canon 11)
deals, like it, with cases which had arisen un-
der the Eastern reign of Licinius, who having
resolved to " purge his army of all ardent
Christians " (Mason, Persec of Diocl. p. 308),
ordered his Christian officers to sacrifice to
the gods on pain of being casliiered (compare
Euseb. H. E.X.8; Vit. Con. i. 54). It is to


be observed here that military life as such was
not deemed unchristian. The case of Corne-
lius was borne in mind. "AVe serve in your
armies, " says Tertullian, Ajjol. 42 (although
later, as a Montanist, he took a rigorist and
fanatical view, De Cor. 11), and compare the
fact wliich underlies the tale of the "Tliun-
dering Legion," — the presence of Christians
in tlie army of Marcus Aurelius. It was the
heathenish adjuncts to their calling Avhich
often brought Christian soldiers to a stand (see
Routh. Scr. Opusc. i. 410), as when ^Nlarinus'
succession to a centurionsliip was challenged
\ on the ground that he could not sacrifice to
I the gods (Euseb. H. E. vii. 15). Sometimes,
indeed, individual Cliristians thought like
Maximilian in the Martyrology, who absolutely
refused to enlist, and on being told by the
proconsul that there were Christian soldiers
in the imperial service, answered, " Ipsi sciunt
quod ipsis expediat " (Ruinart, Act. Sane. p.
341). But, says Bingham {Anfiq. xi. 5, 10),
" the ancient canons did not condemn the mil-
itary life as a vocation simply unlawful. . . .
I believe there is no instance of any man being
refused baptism merely because he was a sol-
dier, unless some unlawful circumstance, such
as idolatry, or the like, made the vocation sin-
ful." After the victory of Constantine in the
West, the Council of Aries excommunicated
those who in time of peace " threw away their
arms " (can. 2). In the case before us, some
Christian officers had at first stood firm under
the trial imposed on them by Licinius. They
had been " called bv "race " to an act of self-
sacrifice (the phrase is one which St. Augus-
tine might have used) ; and had shown " their
eagerness at the outset " (" primum suum ar-
dorem," Dionysius ; Philoand Evarestus more
laxly, " primordia bona ; " compare ttji jydirrjv
(Tov Ti]v TTpwTiji', Rev. ii. 4). Observe here how
beautifully the ideas of grace and free will are
harmonized. These men had responded to a
Divine impulse : it might seem that they had
committed themselves to a noble course : they
had cast aside the " belts " which were their
badge of office (compare the cases of Yalen-
tinian and Yalens, Soc. iii. 13, and of Bencvo-
lus tlirowing down his belt at the feet of Jus-
tina, 8oz. vii. 13). They had done, in fact,
just wliat Auxentius, one of Licinius' notaiies,
had done when, according to the graphic anec-
dote of Philostorgius {Fraym. 5), his master
bade him place a bunch of grapes before a
statue of Bacchus in the palace-court ; but
their zeal, unlike his, proved to be too impul-
sive— they reconsidered their position, and


I. NICE. A.D. 325


29


illustrated the maxim that in morals second
thoughts are not best (Butler, Serm. 7), by
making unworthy attempts — in some cases
by bribery — to recover what they had worth-
ily resigned. (Observe the Grecised Latinism
/3epe4>LKLUL'i and compare the Latinism s of St.
Mark, and others in Euseb. iii. 20, vi. 40, x.
5.) This the Council describes in proverbial
language, probably borrowed from 2 Pet. ii.
22, but, it is needless to say, without intend-
ing to censure enlistment as such. They
now desired to be received to penance : ac-
cordingly they were ordered to spend three
years as Hearers, during which time " their
purpose, and the nature (eiSos) of their re-
pentance " were to be carefully "examined."
Again we see the earnest resolution of the
Council to make discipline a moral reality,
and to prevent it from being turned into a
formal routine ; to secure, as Rufinus' abridg-
ment exj^resses it, a repentance " fi'uctuosam
et attentam." If the penitents were found to
have " manifested their conversion by deeds,
and not in outward show (o-x>?/xaTi), by awe, and
tears, and patience, and good works" (such, |
for instance, Zonaras comments, as almsgiving
according to ability), " it would be then rea-
sonable to admit them to a participation in
the prayers," to the position of Consistentes,
" with periuission also to the bishop to come
to a yet more indulgent resolution concerning
them," by admitting them to full communion.
This discretionary power of the bishop to dis-
pense with part of a penance-time is recog-
nized in the fifth canon of Ancyra and the six-
teenth of Chalcedon, and mentioned by Basil,


Ejnsf. 217, c. 74. It was the basis of " indul-
gences " in their original form (Bingham, xviii.
4, 9). But it was too possible that some at
least of these " lapsi " might take the whole
affair lightly, " with indifference " dSiat^opajs —
not seriously enough, as Hervetas renders —
just as if, in common parlance, it did not sig-
nify : the fourth Ancyrene canon speaks of
lapai who partook of the idol-feast dStac^opws
as if it involved them in no sin (see below on
Eph. 5, Chalc. 4). It was possible that they
might "deem " the outward form of " entering
the church " to stand in the narthex among
the Hearers (here, as in c. 8, 19, o-xvfj-oi de-
notes an external visible fact) sufficient to en-
title them to the character of converted peni-
tents, while their conduct out of church was
utterly lacking in seriousness and self-humili-
ation. In that case there could be no ques-
tion of shortening their penance- time, for they
were not in a state to benefit by indulgence :
it would be, as the Roman Presbyters wrote to
Cyi^rian, and as he himself wrote to his own
church, a " mere covering over of the wound "
[Epist. 30, 3), an " injury " rather than " a kind-
ness " {De Lapsis, 16) ; they must therefore
" by all means " go through ten years as Kneel-
ers, before they can become Consistentes.

There is great difficulty about the last
phrase and Gelasius of Cyzicus, the Prisca,
Dionysius Exiguus, the pseudo-Isidore, Zo-
naras and most others have considered the
" not " an interpolation. I do not see how
dropping the " not" makes the meaning mate-
rially clearer.


CANON XIII.

Concerning the departing, the ancient canonical law is still to be maintained, to wit,
that, if any man be at the point of death, he must not be deprived of the last and most
indispensable Viaticum. But, if any one should be restored to health again who has re-
ceived the communion when his life was despaired of, let him remain among those who
communicate in prayers only. But in general, and in the case of any dying person
whatsoever asking to receive the Eucharist, let the Bishop, after examination made, give
it him.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

TTie dying are to be communicated. But if
any such get well, he must be placed in the num-
ber of those ivho share in the prayers, and with
these only.

Van Espen.

It cannot be denied that antiquity used the
name " Viaticum " not only to denote the Eu-
charist which was given to the dying, but also


to denote the reconciliation, and imposition
of penance, and in general, everything that
could be conducive to the happy death of the
person concerned, and this has been shown
by Aubespine (lib. 1, Obs. cap. ii.). But while
this is so, the more usual sense of the word is
the Eucharist. For this cannot be denied
that the faithful of the first ages of the Church
looked upon the Eucharist as the complement
of Christian perfection, and as the last seal of


30 I. NICE. A.D. 325


hope and salvation. It was for this reason Balsamon and Zonaras also understand the

that at the beginning of life, after baptism canon as I have done, as is evident from their

and confirmation, the Eucharist was given commentaries, and so did Josephus^gj-ptius,

even to infants, and at the close of life the Avho in his Arabic Paraphrase gives the canon

Eucharist followed reconciliation and extreme this title : " Concerning him who is excom-

unction, so that properly and literally it could municated and has committed some deadlv

be styled "the last Viaticum." ^Moreover for sin, and desires the Eucharist to be granted

penitents it was considered especially neces- to him."
sary that through it they might return to the

peace of the Church ; for jierfect peace is This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

given by that very communion of the Eucha- Canoirici, Gratian, Decretum Pars. II. causa

rist. [A number of instances are then cited, xxvi, Quaes. VI., c. ix.

and various ancient versions of the canon.] i

EXCURSUS ON THE COMMUNION OF THE SICK

There is nothing upon which the ancient church more strenuously insisted than the oral
reception of the Holy Communion. What in later times was known as " Spiritual Commun-
ion " was outside of the view of those earlv davs ; and to them the issues of eternitv were
considered often to rest upon the sick man's receiving with his mouth " his food for the jour-
ney," the Viaticum, before he died. No greater proof of how important this matter was
deemed could be found than the present canon, which provides that even the stern and in-
variable canous of the public penance are to give way before the awful necessity of fortifying
the soul in the last hour of its earthly sojourn.

Possibly at first the holy Sacrament may have been consecrated in the presence of the sick
person, but of this in early times the instances are rare and by no means clear. In fact it
was considered a marked favour that such a thing should be allowed, and the saying of mass
in private houses was prohibited (as it is in the Eastern and Latin churches still to-day) with
the greatest rigour.

The necessity of having the consecrated bread and wine for the sick led to their resen^a-
tion, a practice which has existed in the Church from the very beginning, so far as an}' records
of which we are in possession shew.

St. Justin Martyr, writing less than a half century after St. John's death, mentions that
"the deacons communicate each of those present, and carry away to the absent the blest
bread, and wine and water." ■ It was evidently a long established custom in his day.

Tertullian tells us of a woman whose husband was a heathen and who was allowed to
keep the Holy Sacrament in her house that she might receive every morning before other
food. St. Cyprian also gives a most intei-esting example of reservation. In his treatise " On
the Lapsed " written in a.d. 251, (chapter xxvi), he saj-s : "Another woman, when she tried
with unworthy hands to open her box, in which was the Holy of the Lord, was deterred from
dax-ing to touch it by fire rising from it."

It is impossible witli any accuracy to fix the date, but certainly before the year four hun-
dred, a perj^etual reservation for the sick was made in the churches. A most interesting in-
cidental proof of this is found in the thrilling description given by St. Chrysostom of the
great ritjt in Constantinople in the year 403, when the soldiers " burst into the place where
the Holy Things were stored, and saAv all things therein," and " the most holy blood of Christ
was spilled upon their clothes." '' From this incident it is evident that in that church the
Holy Sacrament was reserved in both kinds, and separately.

Whether this at the time was usual it is hard to say, but there can be no doubt that
even in the earliest times the Sacrament was given, on rare occasions at least, in one kind,

1 Just M. Apol. I. cap. IzT. ' Chrye. Ep. ad Innoc. Sec. 3.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


31


sometimes under the form of bread alone, and when the sick persons could not swallow under
the form of wine alone. The practice called " intinction," that is the dijiping of the bread
into the wine and administering the two species together, was of very early introduction and
still is universal in the East, not only when Communion is given with the reserved Sacra-
ment, but also when the people are communicated in the Liturgy from the newly consecrated
species. The first mention of intinction in the West, is at Carthage in the fifth century. ^ We
know it was practised in the seventh century and by the twelfth it had become general, to give
place to the withdrawal of the chalice altogether in the West.^ "Regino {De Eccles. Discip.
Lib. I. c. Isx.) in 906, Burchard {Deer. Lib. V. cap. ix. fol. 95. colon. 1560.) in 996, and Ivo
{Deer. Pars. II. cap. xix. p. 56, Paris 1647) in 1092 all cite a Canon, which they ascribe to a
council of Tours ordering ' every presbyter to have a pyx or vessel meet for so great a sacra-
ment, in which the Body of the Lord may be carefully laid up for the Viaticum to those de-
parting from this world, which sacred oblation oiTght to be steeped in the Blood of Christ
that the presbyter may be able to say truthfully to the sick man. The Body and Blood of the
Lord avail thee, etc' "^

The reservation of the Holy Sacrament was usually made in the church itself, and the
learned W. E. Scudamore is of opinion that this was the case in Africa as early as the fourth
century.^

It will not be uninteresting to quote in this connection the "Apostolic Constitutions,"
for while indeed there is much doubt of the date of the Eighth Book, yet it is certainly of
great antiquity. Here we read, " and after the communion of both men and women, the
deacons take what remains and place it in the tabernacle."^

Perhaps it may not be amiss before closing the remark that so far as we are aware the
reservation of the Holy Sacrament in the early church was only for the pui-poses of com-
munion, and that the churches of the East reserve it to the present day only for this purpose.

Those who wish to read the matter treated of more at length, can do so in Muratorius's
learned "Dissertations " which are prefixed to his edition of the Roman Sacramentaries (chap-
ter XXIV) and in Scudamore's Notitia Eueharistica, a work which can be absolutely relied
upon for the accuracy of its facts, however little one may feel constrained to accept the logi-
cal justness of its conclusions.


CANON XIV.


Concerning catechumens who have lapsed, the holy and great Synod has decreed
that, after they have passed three years only as hearers, they shall pray with the cate-
chumens.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.


If any of the catechumens shall have fallen
for three years he shall be a hearer only, and
then let him pray with the catechumens.

JuSTELLUS.

The people formerly were divided into three
classes in the church, for there were catechu-

' I give the reference ae in Scudamore's Xot. Eiich. from whicn the Book of Maccabees in this sense ; but its classical use is to
I have taken it. he From, et Frad. Dei ; Dimid. Temp. c. 6 ; signify the shrine of a god, and while so distinguished a writer


mens, faithful, and penitents ; but it is clear
from the present canon there were two kinds
of catechumens : one consisting of those who
heard the Word of God, and wished to become
Christians, but had not yet desired baptism ;
these were called " hearers." Others who were
of long standing, and were properly trained
in the faith, and desired baptism — these were
called " competentes."


inter Opp. Prosperi, p. 161. ed. 1609.
'•* Of Scudamore. Not. Euch. p. 705.
3 Scudamore. Notit. Euch. p. 707.

« W. E. Scudamore. J<'otilia Eueharistica [2d. Ed ] p. 1025
* Apost. Const. Lib. viii. cap. xiij. The word used is n-ao-ro


4>6pi,a, this may possibly mean a side chapel, and does occur in i the image of a god in a shrine."


as Pierre Le Brun adopts the later meaning, the no less famous
Durant, together with most commentators, translate as I have
done above. In either case for the present purpose, the quotation
is conclusive of the practice of the primitive church in regard to
this matter. Liddell and Scott give " naaro'popo';, one carrying


32


T. NICE. A.D. 325


There is ditfei-ence of opiuiou among the
learned as to whether there was not a third or
even a fourth class of catechumens. Bing-
ham and Card. Bona, while not agreeing in
particular points, agree in atlh-ming that there
were more than two classes. Bingham's first
class arc those not allowed to enter the church,
the €$wSovfj.€\'OL, but the affirmation of the ex-
istence of such a class rests only on a very
forced explanation of canon five of Neocses-
area. The second class, the hearers, audi-
entes, rests on better evidence. These were
not allowed to stay while the Holy Mysteries
were celebrated, and their expulsion gave rise
to the distinction between the " Mass of the
Catechumens " (Jlissa Caiechamenorum) and
the " Mass of the Faithful " {Mi^xa Fidelixim).
Nor were they suffered to hear tlie Creed or
the Our Father, ^^'riters who multi})ly the
classes insert here some who knelt and prayed,
called Prosh'afi or GenufJrclrnft's (the same
name as was given to one of the grades of
penitence).

(Edw. H. Plumptre in Diet. Christ. Antiq.
s. r. Catechumens.)

After these stages liad been traversed each
with its appropriate instruction, the catechu-
mens gave in their names as ap})licants for
baptism, and were known accordingly as Com-
petentes (o-wairoSKrcs). This was done com-
monly at the beginning of the Quadragesimal
fast, and the instruction, carried on through
the whole of that period, was fuller and more
public in its nature (Cyril Hieros. C'afech. i.
5 ; Hieron. Ej). 61, ad Pammach. c. 4). To
catechumens in this stage the great articles of
the Creed, the nature of the Sacraments, the


penitential discipline of the Church, were ex-
plained, as in the Catechetical Lectures of
Cyril of Jerusalem, Avith dogmatic precision.
Special examinations and inquiries into char-
acter were made at intervals during the forty
days. It was a time for fasting and watching
and i)raver (f.'onsf/. A post. viii. 5 ; 4 C. Carth.
c. 85 ; Tertull. iJc Ikipi. c. 20; Cyril. \. c.) and,
in the case of those who were married, of the
strictest continence (August. l>i' fuJc d oj^er.
V. 8). Those wlio passed through the ordeal
were known as the pirfectiorex (reA-cioVrtpot) the
electi, or in the nomenclature of the Eastern
Church as (SaiTTi^oixevoL or cfxDTLCufKvoi, the jires-
ent participle being used of course with a fut-
ure or gerundial sense. Their names were
inscribed as such in the album or register of
the church. They were taught, but not till a
few days before their baptism, the Creed and
the Lord's Prayer which they were to use after
it. The periods for this registration varied,
naturally enough, in different churches. At
Jerusalem it was done on the second (Cyril.
Catech. iii.), in Africa on the fourth Sunday in
Lent (August. Sci'm. 213), and this was the
time at which the candidate, if so disposed,
might lay aside his old heathen or Jewish
name and take one more specifically Christian
(Socrat. //. TJ. vii. 21). . . . It is only nec-
essary to notice here that the Sacramentum
Catechumenorum of which Augustine sjjeaks
(De Fecrat. Merit, ii. 20) as given apparently
at or about the time of their first admission
by imposition of hands, was probably the
(.vXoyiai or paiiix l)ene(}ict UK, and not, as Bing-
ham and Angusti maintain, the salt which was
given with milk and honey after baptism.


CANON XV.

On account of the great disturbance and discords that occur, it is decreed that the
custom prevailing in certain places contrary to i\\v, Canon, must wholly be done away ;
so that neither Ijishoji, presbyter, nor deacon shall pass from city to city. And if any
one, after tliis decree of tlu; holy and great Synod, shall attempt any sucli thing, or con-
tinue in any such course, his proceedings shall be utterly void, and he shall be restored
to the Church for which lie was ordained bishop or presbyter.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of C.vnon XV.
Neither bishop, presbyter, nor dearon shall
pass from city to city. But they shall be sent
back, should they attempt to do so, to the Churches
in xohich they were ordained.

Hefele.

The translation of a bishop, priest, or dea-
con from one church to another, had already


been forbidden in the primitive Church.
Nevertheless, several translations had taken
place, and even at the Council of Nice several
eminent men were present who had left their
first bishoprics to take others : thus Eusebius,
Bishop of Nicomedia, had been before Bishop
of Berytus ; Eustathius. Bishop of Antioch,
had been before Bishop of Berrhfea in Syria.
The Council of Nice thought it necessary to


I. NICE. A.D. 325


33


forbid in future these translations, and to de-
clare them invalid. The chief reason of this
prohibition was found in the irregularities
and disputes occasioned by such change of
sees ; but even if such practical difficulties
had not arisen, the whole doctrinal idea, so
to speak, of the- relationship between a cleric
and the church to which he had been oi'-
dained, namelv, the contracting of a mystical
marriage between them, would be opposed to
any translation or change. In S-tl the Synod
of Antioch renewed, in its twenty-first canon,
the prohibition passed by the Council of Nice ;
but the interest of the Church often rendei-ed
it necessary to make exceptions, as happened


in the case of St. Chrysostom. These excep-
tional cases increased almost immediately
after the holding of the Council of Nice, so
that in 382, St. Gregory of Nazianzum con-
sidered this law among those which had long
been abrogated by custom. It was more
strictly observed in the Latin Church ; and
even Gregory's contemporary, Pope Damasus,
declared himself decidedly in favour of the
rule of Nice.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici. Decretum, Pars II. Causa VII, Q. 1,
e. xix.


EXCURSUS ON THE TRANSLATION OF BISHOPS.

There are few points upon which the discipline of the Church has so completely changed
as that which regulated, or rather which forbade, the translation of a bishop from the see for
which he was consecrated to some other diocese. The grounds on which such pi'ohibition
rested were usually that such changes were the outcome of ambition, and that if tolerated
the result would be that smaller and less important sees would be despised, and that there
would be a constant temptation to the bishops of such sees to make themselves popular with
the important persons in other dioceses with the hope of promotion. Besides this objection
to translation, St. Athanasius mentions a spiritual one, that the diocese was the bishop's
bride, and that to desert it and take another was an act of unjustifiable divorce, and subse-
quent adultery.^ Canon XIV. of the Apostolic Canons does not forbid the practice abso-
lutely, but allows it for just cause, and although the Council of Nice is more stringent so
far as its words are concerned, api^ai'ently forbidding translation under any circumstances,
yet, as a matter of fact, that veiy council did allow and approve a translation.'^ The general
feeling, however, of the early Church was certainh' veiy strong against all such changes of
Episcopal cure, and there can be no doubt that the chief reason why St. Gregory Nazianzen
resigned the Presidency of the First Council of Constantinople, was because he had been
translated from his obscure see Sasima (not Nazianzum as Socrates and Jerome say) to the
Imperial City.'

From the canons of some provincial councils, and especially from those of the Third and
of the Fourth Council of Carthage, it is evident that despite the conciliar and papal pro-
hibitions, translations did take place, being made by the authority of the provincial Synods,
and without the consent of the pope,^ but it is also evident that this authority was too weak,
and that the aid of the secular power had often to be invoked.

This course, of having the matter decided by the synod, was exactly in accordance Avith
the Apostolic Canon (no. xiv.). In this manner, for example, Alexander was translated from
Cappadocia to Jerusalem, a translation made, so it is narrated, in obedience to heavenly
revelation.

It will be noticed that the Nicene Canon does not forbid Provincial Councils to translate


' Athanas. Apol. \j.

" Sozora. /r. E I. 2.

3 By no one has this whole matter of the translation of bishops
been more carefully and thoroughly treated than by Thomassinus,
and in what follows I shall use his discussion asa thesaurus of
facts. The title of his book is Aneienne et SoiireUe Disriplhic
lie I'Eghse (There is also an edition in Latin). In the Third Part,
and the Second Book,

Chapter LX. treats of " Translations of bishops in the Latin
Church during the first five centuries "


Chapter LXI. "Translations in the Eastern Church, during
the first five centuries "

I'hapter LXII. "Translation of bishops and biRhoprics be-
tween the yea^s five hundred and eight hundred."

Chapter LXIIL -Translation under the empire of Charle-
magne and his descendants."

Chipter LXIV. '-Translation of bishops after the year one
thousand."

Of all this I can in the text give but a brief resume.

' Thomassin. /. c. Ix. viij.


34 I. NICE. A.D. 355


bishops, but forbids bishops to translate themselves, autl the author of the tract De Transla-
tionlbm in the Jm Orient, (i. 293, (Jit. Hacldon. Art. "Bishop," Smith and Cheetham, Did.
Chr. Antiq.) sums up the matter tersely in the statement that t/ /xeTu/Stto-t? K«KwAuTat, ov fxrjv y
fieTaStai's : i.e., the thing prohibited is " transmigration " (which arises from the bishop himself,
from selfish motives) not " translation " (wherein the will of God and the good of the Church
is the ruling cause) ; the " going," not the " being taken " to another see. And this was the
practice both of East and "West, for many centuries. Roman Catholic writers have tried to
prove that translations, at least to the chief sees, required the papal consent, but Thomas-
sinus, considering the case of St. Meletius having translated St. Gregory of Nazianzum to
Constantinople, admits that in so doing he " would only have followed the example of many
great bishops of the first ages, when usage had not yet reserved translations to the first see
of the Chinch. "'

But the same learned author frankly confesses that in France, Spain, and England, trans-
lations were made until the ninth century without consulting the pope at all, by bishoj^s and
kings. When, however, from grounds of simple ambition, Anthimus was translated from
Trebizonde to Constantinople, the religious of the city wrote to the pope, as also did the
patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, and as a result the Emperor Justinian allowed Anthi-
mus to be deposed.-^

Balsamon distinguishes three kinds of translations. The first, when a bishop of marked
learning and of equal piety is forced by a council to pass from a small diocese to one far
greater where he will be able to do the Church the most important services, as was the case
when St. Gregory' of Nazianzum was transferred from Sasima to Constantinople, /u.€Ta.9€(Tts ;
the second when a bishop, whose see has been laid low by the barbarians, is transferred to
another see which is vacant, fxenifSaai'; ; and the third when a bishop, either having or lacking
a see, seizes on a bishopric which is vacant, on his own proper authority dvu/Satrts. And it is
this last which the Council of Sardica punishes so severely. In all these remarks of Balsa-
mon there is no mention of the imperial power.

Demetrius Chomatenus, however, who was Archbishop of Tliessalonica, and wrote a
series of answers to Cabasilas, Archbishop of Durazzo, says that by the command of the
Emperor a bishop, elected and confirmed, and even read}' to be ordained for a diocese, may
be forced to take the charge of another one which is more important, and whei-e his services
will be incomparably more useful to the public. Thus we read in the Book of Eastern Law
that "If a Metropolitan with his synod, moved by a praiseworthy cause and probable pre-
text, shall give his approbation to the translation of a bishop, this can, without doubt, be
done, for the good of souls and for the better administration of the church's affairs, etc. '-^
This was adopted at a synod held by the patriarch Manuel at Constantinople, in the pres-
ence of the imperial commissioners.

The same thing appears also in the synodal response of the patriarch Michael, which
only demands for translation the authority of the Metroj)olitan and "the greatest authority
of the Church." ' But, soon after this, translation became the rule, and not the exception
both in East and West.

It was in vain that Simeon, Ai-chbishop of Tliessalonica, in the East raised his voice against
the constant translations made b}' the secular power, and the Emperors of Constantinople
were often absolute masters of the choice and translations of bishops ; and Tliomassinus
sums up the matter, "At the least we are forced to the conclusion that no translations could


> Thomnsfin. I. rit , CTinp LI., § xiij

*This is ThomaHsimis's version of the matter, in fact the
charirc of heresy was also made against Anthinuis, but his unca-
nonical translatiOD was a real count in the accusation.


^Jnru. Orient, torn. 1. p 240, 241.

* Ihid. p. 5. I am not at all clear as to what this last phrase
means.


I


1. NICE. A.D. 325


35


be made without the consent of the Emperor, especially when it was the See of Constantino-
ple that was to be filled."

The same learned writer continues : " It was usually the bishop or archbishop of another
church that was chosen to ascend the patriarchal throne of the imperial city. The Kings
of England often used this same power to apj^oint to the Primatial See of Canterbury a
bishop already approved in the government of another diocese." ^

In the West, Cardinal Bellarmine disapproved the prevailing custom of translations and
protested against it to his master, Pope Clement VIII., reminding him that they were con-
trary to the canons and contrary to the usage of the Ancient Church, excej^t in cases of
necessity and of great gain to the Church. The pope entirely agreed with these wise obser-
vations, and promised that he would himself make, and would urge princes to make, transla-
tions only " with difficulty." But translations are made universally, all the world over, to-day,
and no attention whatever is paid to the ancient canons and discipline of the Church. "^


CANON XVI.

Neither presbyters, nor deacons, nor any others enrolled among the clergy, who,
not having the fear of God before their eyes, nor regarding the ecclesiastical Canon,
shall recklessly remove from their own church, ought by any means to be received by
another church ; but every constraint should be applied to restore them to their own
parishes ; and, if they will not go, they must be excommunicated. And if anyone shall
dare surreptitiously to carry off and in his own Church ordain a man belonging to
another, without the consent of his own proper bishop, from whom although he was
enrolled in the clergy list he has seceded, let the ordination be void.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


Such preshijters or deacons as desert their
oion Church are not to he admitted, into another,
hut are to he sent hack to their own diocese.
But if any bishop shoidd ordain, one loho be-
longs to another Church ivithout the consent of
his own bishop, the ordination shall be can-
celled.

" Parish " in this canon, as so often else-
where, means " diocese."

Balsamon.

It seemed right that the clergy should have
no power to move from city to city and to
change their canonical residence withovit let-
ters dimissory from the bishop who ordained
them. But such clerics as are called by the
bishops who ordained them and cannot be
persuaded to return, are to be separated from
communion, that is to say, not to be allowed
to concelebrate {a-wLepovpyelv) Avith them, for
this is the meaning of " excommunicated " in


' Thomassin. lib cit., chap. LXTV. S x.

' I believe this is true of all churches. Catholic and Protestant,


this place, and not that they should not enter
the church nor receive the sacraments. This
decree agrees with canon xv. of the Ajoos-
tolical canons, which provides that such shall
not celebrate the liturgy. Canon xvj. of the
same Apostolical canons further provides that
if a bishop receive a cleric coming to him
from another diocese without his bishoji's let-
ters dimissorj^ and shall ordain him, such a
bishop shall be separated. From all this it is
evident that the ChavtojDhylax of the Great
Church for the time does rightly in refusing
to allow priests ordained in other dioceses to
offer the sacrifice unless they liring with them
letters commendatory and dimissory from
those who ordained them.

Zonaras had also in his Scholion given the
same explanation of the canon.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, divided into two. Decretum. Pars
II, Causa VII. Quaest. I. c. xxiij. ; and Pars
I. Dist. LXXL, c. iij.

exception of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States,
having an episcopal form of government (includinir the Protestant I in v?hich the ancient protiibitiou of the translation of diocesan
Chtirch of Sweden, and the Methodist Episcopal Church), with the '• bishops is observed in all its Nicene strictness.


36 I. NICE. A.D. 325


CANON XVII.

Forasmuch as many enrolled among the Clergy, following covetousness and lust of
gain, have forgotten the divine Scripture, which says, " He hath not given his money
upon usiiry," and in lending money ask tli(> hundrcHltli of the sum [as monthly interest],
the holy and great Synod thinks it just that if utter this decree any one be found to
receive usury, whether he accomplish it by secret transaction or otherwise, as by de-
mantling the whole and one half, or by using any other contrivance whatever for hlthy
lucre's sake, he shall be deposed from the clergy and his name stricken from the list.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII. | canon sent by the Orientals to the Sixth Coun-

cil of Carthage is in no respect ahen to the
If anyone shall receive usunj or loO j^er ^^,^^^ ^^^^^^ ^f ^^^ ^^^^n ; for in this version
cent, he shall be cast forth and deposed, accord- ^^^ luention is made of any particular kind of


usury, but generally the peuulty is assigned
to any clerics who " shall be found after this
decree taking usury " or thinking out any
other scheme for the sake of hlthy lucre.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris


ing to this decree of the Church

Van Espen.

Although the canon expresses only these two
species of usury, if we bear in mind the

grounds on which the j^rohibition was made, Canonu-i, in the first part of the Decretum, in

it will be manifest that every kind of usury is Dionysius's version. Dist. xlvii, c. ii, and

forbidden to clerics and under any circum- again in Isidore's version in Pars II, Causa

stances, and therefore the translation of this xiv. Quses. iv., c. viii.

EXCURSUS OX USURY.

The famous canonist Van Espen defines usury thus: "Usura definitur lucrum ex mutuo
exactum aut speratum ;"^ and then goes on to defend the i^roposition that, "Usury is for-
bidden by natural, by divine, and by human law. The first is proved thus. Natural law, as
far as its first principles are concerned, is contained in the decalogue ; but usury is prohibit-
ed in the decalogue, inasmuch as theft is prohibited ; and this is the opinion of the Master
of the Sentences, of St. Bouaventura, of St. Thomas and of a host of others : for by the
name of theft in the Law all unlawful taking of another's goods is prohibited ; but usury is
an unlawful, etc." For a proof of usury's being contrary to divine law he cites Ex. xxii. 25,
and Deut. xxiii. 29 ; and from the New Testament Luke vi. 34. " The third assei'tiou is
proved thus. Usury is foi'bidden by human law : The First Council of Nice in Canon VII.
deposed from the clergy and from all ecclesiastical rank, clerics who took usury ; and the
same thing is the case with an infinite number of councils, in fact with nearly all e. g. Elvira,
ij, Aries j, Carthage iij, Tours iij, etc. Nay, even the pagans themselves formerly forbid it
by their laws." He then quotes Tacitus (Annal. lib. v.), and adds, "with what severe laws
the French Kings coei'ced usurers is evident from the edicts of St. Louis, Philip IV., Charles
IX., Henry III., etc."

There can be no doubt that Van Espen in the foregoing has accurately represented and
without any exaggeration the universal opinion of all teachers of morals, theologians, doctors,
Popes, and Councils of the Christian Church for the first fifteen hundred years. All interest
exacted upon loans of money was looked upon as usury, and its reception was esteemed a
form of theft and dishonestv. Those who wish to read the historv of the matter in all its de-
tails ai-e referred to Bossuet's work on the subject, Traite de VUsxire,"^ where they will find

' Van Espen. Distertatio de Usura. Art. 1. 'Bossuet. (Huvres Comp. xxxj.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 37


the old, traditional view of the Christian religion defended by one thoroughly acquainted
with all that could be said on the other side.

The glory of inventing the new moral code on the subject, by which that which before was
looked upon as mortal sin has been transfigured into innocence, if not virtue, belongs to
John Calvin ! He made the modern distinction between "interest" and "usury," and was
the first to write in defence of this then new-fangled refinement of casuistry.' Luther
violently opposed him, and Melancthon also kept to the old doctrine, though less violently
(as was to be expected) ; to-day the whole Christian West, Protestant and Catholic alike, stake
their salvation upon the truth of Calvin's distinction ! Among Roman Catholics the new
doctrine began to be defended about the beginning of the eighteenth century, the work of
Scipio Maffei, DelV impiego dell danaro, written on the laxer side, having attracted a wide-
spread attention. The Ballerini affirm that the learned pope Benedict XIV. allowed books
defending the new morals to be dedicated to him, and in 1830 the Congregation of the Holy
Office with the approval of the reigning Pontiff, Pius VIIL, decided that those who considered
the taking of interest allowed by the state law justifiable, were " not to be disturbed." It is
entirely disingenuous to attempt to reconcile the modern with the ancient doctrine ; the
Fathers expressly deny that the State has any power to make the receiving of interest just or
to fix its rate, there is but one ground for those to take who accept the new teaching, viz.
that all the ancients, while true on the moral principle that one must not defraud his neigh-
bour nor take unjust advantage of his necessity, were in error concerning the facts, in that
they supposed that money was barren, an opinion which the Schoolmen also held, following
Aristotle. This we have found in modern times, and amid modern circumstances, to be an
entire erroi*, as Gury, the famous modern casuist, well says, "fnictum producitet multiplica-
tur per se." ^

That the student may have it in his power to read the Patristic view of the matter, I give
a list of the passages most commonly cited, together with a review of the conciliar action, for
all which I am indebted to a masterly article by Wharton B. Marriott in Smith and Cheet-
ham's Dictionary of Christian Antiquities (s. v. Usury).

Although the conditions of the mercantile community in the East and the West differed
materially in some respects, the fathers of the two churches are equally explicit and system-
atic in their condemnation of the practice of usury. Among those belonging to the Greek
church we find Athanasius (Expos, in Ps. xiv) ; Basil the Great (Horn, in Ps. xiv). Gregory of
Nazianzum (Orat. xiv. in Patrem tacentem). Gregory of Nyssa [Orat. cont. Usurarios); Cyril of
Jerusalem [Catech. iv. c. 37), Epiphanius {adv. Haeres. Epilog, c. 24), Chrysostom {Horn. xli.
in Genes), and Theodoret {Interpr. in Ps. xiv. 5, and liv. 11). Among those belonging to the
Latin church, Hilary of Poitiers (m Ps. xiv); Ambrose (de Tobia liber unus). Jerome {in Ezech.
vi. 18) ; Augustine de Baptismo contr. Donatistas, iv. 19); Leo the Great {Epist. iii. 4), and Cas-
siodorus (in Ps. xiv. 10).

The canons of later councils differ materially in relation to this subject, and indicate a
distinct tendency to mitigate the rigour of the Nicsean interdict. That of the council of
Carthage of the year 348 enforces the original prohibition, but without the penalty, and
grounds the veto on both Old and New Testament authoritj', " nemo contra prophetas, nemo
contra evangelia facit sine periculo" (Mansi, iii. 158). The language, however, when com-
pared with that of the council of Carthage of the year 419, serves to suggest that, in the inter-
val, the lower clergy had occasionally been found having recourse to the forbidden practice,
for the general terms of the earlier canon, " ut non liceat clericis fenerari," are enforced with

> Funk {Zins rmd Wurher. p. 104) saya that Eck and Hoog- | "^ Gury, Comp. Theol. Moral (Ed. Ballerini) vol. ii. p. 611.
etraten had already verbally defended this distinction at Bologna. |


38 1. :N'1CE. A.D. 335


greater particularity in the latter, "Nee omnino cuiquam clericorum liceat de qualibet re
fcenus accipere " (Mansi, iv. 423). This supposition is supported by the language of the
council of Orleans (a.d. 538), which appears to imply that deacons were not prohibited
from lending money at interest, "Et clericus adiaconatu, et supra, pecuniam noncommodet
ad usuras " (ib. ix. 18). Similarly, at the second council of Trullanum (a.d. 692) a like
liberty would appear to have been recognised among the lower clergy (Hardouin, iii. 16G3).
While, again, the Nictean canon requires the immediate deposition of the ecclesiastic found
guilty of the practice, the Apostolical canon enjoins that such dejDosition is to take place
only after he has been admonished and has disregarded the admonition.

Generally speaking, the evidence points to the conclusion that the Church imposed no
penalty on the layman. St. Basil {EpisL clxxxviii. can. 12), says that a usurer may even be
admitted to orders, provided he gives his acquired wealth to the poor and abstains for the
future from the pursuit of gain (Migne, Patrol. Gncc. xxxii. 275). Gregory of Xyssa says
that usury, unlike theft, the desecration of tombs, and sacrilege {UpoavXia), is allowed to pass
unpunished, although among the things forbidden by Scripture, nor is a candidate at ordina-
tion ever asked whether or no he has been guilty of the practice (Migne, ib. xlv. 233). A
letter of Sidonius Apollinaris [Episf. vi. 24) relating an experience of his friend Maximus,
appears to imply that no blame attached to lending money at the legal rate of interest, and
that even a bishop might be a creditor on those terms. We find also Desideratus, bishop of
Verdun, when applying for a loan to king Theodebert, for the relief of his imjjoverished dio-
cese, promising repayment, " cum usurislegitimis," an expression which would seem to imply
that in the Gallicau church usury was recognised as lawful under certain conditions (Greg.
Tur. Hist. Franc, iii. 34). So again a letter {Epist. ix. 38) of Gregory the Great seems to
shew that he did not regard the payment of interest for money advanced by one layman to
another as unlawful. But on the other hand, we find in what is known as archbishop Theo-
dore's "Penitential" {cii^c. a.d. 690) what appears to be a general law on the subject, en-
joining " Sie quis usuras undecunque exegerit . . . tres annos in pane et aqua " (c. xxv.
3) ; a penance again enjoined in the Penitential of Egbert of York(c. ii. 30). In like manner,
the legates, George and Theophylact, in reporting their proceedings in England to pope
Adrian I. (a.d. 787), state that they have prohibited "usurers," and cite the authority of the
Psalmist and St. Augustine (Haddan and Stubbs, Cone. iii. 457). The councils of Mayence,
Rheims, and Chalons, in the year 813, and that of Aix in the year 816, seem to have laid down
the same prohibition as binding both on the clergy and the laity (Hardouin, Cone. iv. 1011,
1020, 1033, 1100).

Muratori, in his dissertation on the subject (Antlchitcl, vol. i.), observes that "we do not
know exactly how commerce was transacted in the five preceding centuries," and conse-
quently are ignorant as to the terms on which loans of money were effected.

CANON XVIII.

It has come to the knowledge of the holy and great Synod that, in some districts
and cities, the deacons administer the Eucharist to the ])resbyters, whereas neither
canon nor custom permits that thov who have no riglit to offer should give tlio P)ody of
Christ to them that do offer. And this also has been made known, that certain deacons
now touch the Eucharist even befoi'e the bis]io{)S. Let all such practices be utterly done
away, and let the deacons remain within their own bounds, knowing that they are the
ministers of the bishop and the inferiors of the presbyters. Let them rectMve the
Eucharist according to their order, after the presbyters, and let either the bishop or the
presbyter administer to them. Furthermore, let not the deacons sit among the presby-
ters, for that is contrary to canon and order. And if, after this decree, any one shall
refuse to obey, let him be deposed from the diaconate.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


39


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.

Deacons must abide loithin their oion bounds.
They shall not administer the Eucharist to
presbyters, nor touch it before them, nor sit
among the 'presbyters. For all this is contrary
to canon, and to decent order.

Van Espen.


NOTES.

fixed tradition that there was a sacrifice in
which the body of Christ was offered. Thirdly
that not to all, nor even to deacons, but only
to bishops and presbyters was given the power
of offering. And lastly, that there was recog-
nized a fixed hierarch}' in the Church, made
up of bishops and presbyters and deacons in
subordination to these.


Four excesses of deacons this canon con-
demns, at least indirectly. The first was that
they gave the holy Communion to presbyters.
To understand more easily the meaning of the
canon it must be remembered that the refer-
ence here is not to the presbyters who were
sacrificing at the altar but to those who were
offering together with the bisho]) who was
sacrificing ; by a rite not unlike that which
to-day takes place, when the newly ordained
presbyters or bishops celebrate mass with the
ordaining bishop ; and this rite in old times
was of daily occurrence, for a full account of
which see Morinus De SS. Ordinal. P. III.
Exercit. viij. . . . The j^i'S^^nt canon
does not take away from deacons the author-
ity to distribute the Eucharist to laymen, or
to the minor clergy, but only re2:)roves their
insolence and audacity in presuming to ad-
minister to presbyters who were concelebrat-
ing with the bishop or another presbyter.

The second abuse was that certain deacons
touched the sacred gifts before the bishojD.
The vulgar version of Isidore reads for
"touched" "received," a meaning which Bal-
samon and Zonaras also adopt, and unless the
Greek word, which signifies " to touch," is con-
trary to this translation, it seems by no means
to be alien to the context of the canon.

"Let them receive the Eucharist according
to their order, after the presbyters, and let the
bishop or the presbyter administer to them."
In these words it is implied that some deacons
had presumed to receive Holy Communion be-
fore the presbyters, and this is the third excess
of the deacon which is condemned by the Synod.

And lastly, the fourth excess was that they
took a place among the presbyters at the very
time of the sacrifice, or " at the holy altar," as
Balsamon observes.

From this canon we see that the Nicene
fathers entertained no doubt that the faithful
in the holy Communion truly received " the
body of Christ." Secondly, that that was
" offered " in the church, which is the word
by which sacrifice is designated in the New
Testament, and therefore it was at that time a


Of course even at that early date there was
nothing new in this doctrine of the Eucharist.
St. Ignatius more than a century and a half
before, Avrote as follows : " But mark ye those
who hold strange doctrine touching the grace
of Jesus Christ which came to us, how that
they are contrary to the mind of God. They
have no care for love, none for the widow,
none for the orphan, none for the afflicted,
none for the prisoner, none for the hungry
or thirsty. They abstain from eucharist
(thanksgiving) and prayer, because they al-
low not that the Eucharist is the flesh of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for
our sins, and which the Father of his good-
ness raised up." ^

In one point the learned scholiast just
quoted has most seriously understated his
case. He says that the wording of the canon
shews " that the Nicene fathers entertained
no doubt that the faithful in the holy Com-
munion truly received ' the body of Christ.' "
Now this statement is of course true because
it is included in what the canon says, but the
doctrinal statement which is necessarily con-
tained in the canon is that " the body of
Christ is given " by the minister to the faith-
ful. This doctrine is believed by all Catho-
lics and by Lutlierans, but is denied by all
other Protestants ; those Calvinists who kept
most nearly to the ordinary Catholic phrase-
ology only admitting that ''the sacrament of
the Body of Christ " was given in the sup]3er by
the minister, while " the body of Christ," they
taught, was present only in the soul of the
worthy communicant (and in no way con-
nected with the form of In-ead, which was but
the divinely appointed sign and assurance of
the heavenly gift), and therefore could not be
" given " by the priest.^

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Decretum. Pars I, Dist. XCIII., c.
xiv.


' Jcrnat. Ad Smvr. % vi. Lirrhtfoot's translation. Apost. Fath.
Vol. II. Sec. I. p. 569.

•^Of Art. xxviij. of the "Articles of Religion" of the Church
of England, which declares that " The Body of Christ is given,
taken, and eaten in the Supper,"' etc.


40


I. Is ICE. A.D. 325


CANON XIX.

Concerning the Paulianists who have fiowu for refuge to the Catholic Church, it has
been decreed that they must by all means be rebajitized ; and if any of them who iu
past time have been numbered among their clerg}- should l)e found blameless and with-
out reproach, let them be rebaptized and ordained by the Bishop of the Catholic Church ;
but if the examination should discover them to be unfit, they ought to be deposed.
Likewise in the case of their deaconesses, and generally in the case of those who have
been enrolled among their clergy, let the same form be observed. And we mean by
deaconesses such as liave assumed the habit, but who, since they have no imposition of
hands, are to be numbered only among the laity.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.


Paulianistx niufit be rebaptised, and if such
as are dergymen seem to be blameless let them
be ordained. If they do not seem to be blame-
less, let them be dejyosed. Deaconesses loho
have been led astray, since they are not sharers
of ordination, are to be reckoned among the
laity.

Ffoulkes.

{Diet. Chr. Ant. s.v. Nica^a, Councils of.)

That this is the true meaning of the phrase
opos iKTeSiLTm, viz. "a decree has now been
made," is clear from the application of the
words opos iu Canon xvii., and wfuaev, in Canon
vi. It has been a pure mistake, therefore,
which Bp. Hefele blindly follows, to undei'-
stand it of some canon previously passed,
whether at Aries or elsewhere.

Justellus.

Here xetp"-^«o"'a is taken for ordination or
consecration, not for benediction,
for neither were deaconesses, sub-deacons,
readers, and other ministers ordained, but a
blessing was merely jjronounced over them
by prayer and imposition of hands.

Aristen'us.

Their (the Paulicians') deaconesses also,
since they have no imposition of hands, if they
come over to the Catholic Church and are
baptized, are ranked among the laity.

"With this Zonaras and Balsamon also
agree.

Hefele.

By Paulianists must be understood the fol-
lowers of Paul of Saniosata the anti-Trinita-
rian wlio, about the year 'iOO, liiul been made
bishop of Antioch, but had been deposed by
a great Synod in 2G9. As Paul of Samosata


was heretical in his teaching: on the Holy
Trinity the Synod of Nice applied to him the
decree passed by the council of Aries in its
eighth canon. " If anyone shall come from
heresj' to the Church, they shall ask him to
say the creed ; and if they shall j^erceive that
he was baptized into the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost,' he shall have a hand laid
on him only that he may receive the Holy
Ghost. But if in answer to their question-
ing he shall not answer this Trinity, let him
be baptized."

The Samosatans, according to St. Athana-
sius, named the Father, Son and Holy Spirit
in administering baptism {Oral, ii, Con frit
Arian. No. xliii), but as they gave a false
meaning to the baptismal formula and did
not use the words Son and Holy Spirit in the
usual sense, the Council of Nice, like St. Ath-
anasius himself, considered their baptism as
invalid.

There is great difficulty about the text of
the clause beginning " Likewise in the case,
etc.," and Gelasius, the P?vVo, Theilo and
Thearistus, (who in 419 translated the canons
of Nice for the African bishojis), the Pseudo-
Isidore, and Gratian have all followed a read-
ing (^KiKoviov, instead of S^aKo^■l(T(Twv This
chaii'.^e makes all clear, but mauv canonists
keep the ordinary text, including Van Espen.
with whose interpretation Hefele does not
agree.

The clause I have rendered "And we
mean by deaconesses" is most difficidt of
translation. I give the original, 'EfjuijaSrjfjxv
Se SiaKovtcrortLi' toji' iv tuJ (r^T^/xart i$€TaaS€Lcrwr,
cTTct K. T. \. Hefele's translation seems to me
im])ossible, by fr^7;/iaTt he understands the list
of the clercy just mentioned.


' Iu Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto esse baptizatum.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 41


EXCURSUS ON THE DEACONESS OF THE EAELY CHURCH.

It has been supposed by mai:y that the deaconess of the Early Church had an Apostolic
institution and that its existence may be referred to by St. Paul in his Ejiistle to the Romans
(xvi. 1) where he speaks of Phoebe as being a StaKovos of the Church of Cenchrea. It more-
over has been suggested that the " widows " of 1 Tim. v. 9 may have been deaconesses, and
this seems not unlikely from the fact that the age for the admission of women to this minis-
try was fixed by Tertullian at sixty years {De Vel. Virg. Cap. ix.), and only changed to
forty, two centuries later by the Council of Chalcedon, and from the further fact that these
" widows " spoken of by St. Paul seem to have had a vow of chastity, for it is expressly said
that if they marry they have " damnation, because they have cast off their first faith " (1 Tim.
Y. 12).

These women were called StaKoVio-o-ai, 7rpeo-/3uTtScq (which must be distinguished from the
7rp€(T/3vTepat, a poor class referred to in the Apostolic Constitutions (ii. 28) who are to be only
invited frequently to the love-feasts, while the Trpecr/JuTf'oe? had a definite allotment of the
offerings assigned to their support), XVP'^'-^ diaconissce, presbyterce, and vidua?.

The one great characteristic of the deaconess was that she was vowed to perpetual chas-
tity.^ The Apostolical Constitutions (vi. 17) say that she must be a chaste virgin {napSivo'i ayvrj)
or else a widow. The writer of the article "Deaconess " in the Dictionary of Christian Antiq-
uities savs : "It is evident that the ordination of deaconesses included a vow of celibacv."
We have already seen the language used by St. Paul and of this the wording of the
canon of Chalcedon is but an echo (Canon xv). "A woman shall not receive the laying on of
hands as a deaconess under forty years of age, and then only after searching examination.
And if, after she has had hands laid on her, and has continued for a time to minister, she
shall despise the Grace of God and give herself in marriage, she shall be anathematized and
the man who is united to her." The civil law went still further, and by Justinian's Sixth
Novel (6) those who attempted to marry are subjected to forfeiture of property and capital
punishment. In the collect in the ancient office there is a special petition that the newly
admitted deaconess may have the gift of continence.

The principal work of the deaconess was to assist the female candidates for holy baptism.
At that time the sacrament of baptism was always administered by immersion (except to
those in extreme illness) and hence there was much that such an order of women could be
useful in. Moreover they sometimes gave to the female catechumens preliminary instruc-
tion, but their work was wholly limited to women, and for a deaconess of the Early Church
to teach a man or to nurse him in sickness would have been an impossibility. The duties
of the deaconess are set forth in many ancient writings, I cite here what is commonly known
as the XII Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, which met in the year 398 :

*' Widows and dedicated women (sanctimoniales) who are chosen to assist at the baptism
of w^omen, should be so well instnicted in their oflSce as to be able to teach aptly and j^i'op-
erly unskilled and rustic women how to answer at the time of their baptism to the questions
put to them, and also how to live godly after they have been baptized." This whole matter
is treated clearly by St. Epiphanius who, while indeed speaking of deaconesses as an order
(Ta.yixa\ asserts that "the}' were only women-elders, not priestesses in any sense, that their

1 In 1836, the Lutheran Pastor Fliedner, of a little town on the I only in name. The reader who may be interested in seeing an
Rhine, opened a parish hospital the nurses of which he called elfort to connect the modern deaconess with the deaconess of an-
•' Deaconesses." This " Deaconess House " at Kaiserswerth. was tiquity is referred to The Mini.itr;/ of Deaconexses by Deaconess
the mother-house from which all the deaconess establishments of Cecilia Robinson. This book, it should be said, contains much
the present day have taken their origin. The Methodists have valuab'e and accurate information upon the subject, but accepts
adopted the system successfully. Some efforts have been made I as proven facts the suppositions of the late Bishop Lightfoot
to domesticate it, in a somewhat modified form, also in the Angli- } upon the subject ; who somewhat rashly asserted that '-the female
can Churches but thus far with but little success. Of course these d-aconate is as definite an institution as the male diaconate.
" Deaconesses '' resemble the Deaconesses of the Early Church I Phcebe is as much a deacon as Stephen or Philip is a deacon! "


42 I. NICE. A.D. 325


mission was not to interfere in any way with Sacerdotal functions, but simply to perform
certain offices in the care of women" {H(vr. Ixxix, cap. iij). From all this it is evident that
they are entirely in error who suppose that "the laying on of hands" which the deaconesses
received corresponded to that by which persons were ordained to the diaconate, presbyterate,
and episcopate at that period of the church's history. It Avas mei*ely a solemn dedication
and blessing and was not looked upon as "an outward sign of an inward grace given." For
further proof of this I must refer to Morinus, who has treated the matter most admirably.
[De Ordinationibus, Exercitatio X.)

The deaconesses existed but a short while. The council of Laodicea as early as a.d.
3-43-381, forbade the appointment of any who were called irpea-fSvTiBes ( Vide Canon xi) ; and
the first council of Orange, a.d. 441, in its twenty-sixth canon forbids the appointment of
deaconesses altogether, and the Second council of the same city in canons xvij and xviij, de-
crees that deaconesses who married were to be excommunicated unless they renounced the
men they were living with, and that, on account of the weakness of the sex, none for the
future were to be ordained.

Thomassinus, to whom I refer the reader for a very full treatment of the whole subject,
is of opinion that the order was extinct in the West by the tenth or twelfth century, but
that it lingered on a little later at Constantinople but only in conventual institutions. (Thom-
assin, Ancienne et Nouvelle Discipline de V^glise, I Partie, Livre III.)


CANON XX.

Forasmuch as there are certain persons who kneel on the Lord's Day and in the days
of Pentecost, therefore, to the intent that all things may be nniforml}- observed every-
where (in every parish), it seems good to the holy Synod that prayer be made to God
standing.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

On Lord's days and at Pentecost all must
pray standing and not kneeling.

Hammond.


rection of our Lord, and to signify the rest
and joy of our own resurrection, whicli that of
our Lord assured. This canon, as Beveridge
observes, is a proof of the importance former-
ly attached to an uniformity of sacred rites
throughout the Churcli, which made the Ni-


ish ' or diocese.

Hefele.


Although kneeling was the common posture j cene Fathers thus sanction and enforce by
for prayer in the primitive Church, yet the their authority a i:)ractice which in itself is in-
custom had prevailed, even from the earliest ditferent, and not commanded directly oi- in-
times, of standing at prayer on the Lord's directly in Scripture, and assign this as their
day, and during the fifty days between Easter reason for doing so : "In order that all things
and Pentecost. Tertullian, in a passage in his may be observed in like manner in every par-
treatise De Corona J/ Hi f is, wliich is often
quoted, mentions it amongst other observ-
ances which, though not expressly command-
ed in Scripture, yot were universally prac- All the churches did not, however, adopt
tised upon the authorit}- of tradition. " We this practice ; for we see in the Acts of tlie
consider it unlawful," he says, " to fast, or to Apostles (xx. 36 and xxi. 5) that St. Paul
pray kneeling, u])()n the Lord's day ; we en- prayed kneeling during the time between Pen-
jov the same libertv from Easter-dav to that tecost and Easter,
of' Pentecost." De' Cor. Mil. s. 3, 4^ Many

other of the Fathers notice the sanic practice, This canon is found in the Coj-pus Juris
the reason of which, as given hy Augustine ' Canonici. Decretum, Pars III, De Cone.
and others, was to commemorate the resui'- 1 Dist. III. c. x.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


43


EXCURSUS ON THE NUMBER OF THE NICENE CANONS.

There has come down to us a Latin letter purporting to have been written by St. Atha-
nasius to Pope Marcus. This letter is found in the Benedictine edition of St. Athanasius's
works (ed. Patav. ii. 599) but rejected as spurious by Montfaucon the learned editor. In this
letter is contained the marvellous assertion that the Council of Nice at first adojjted forty
canons, which were in Greek, that it subsequently added twenty Latin canons, and that after-
wards the council reassembled and set forth seventy altogether. A tradition that some-
thing of the kind had taken place was prevalent in parts of the East, and some collections
did contain seventy canons.

In the Vatican Library is a MS. which was bought for it by the famous Asseman, from
the Coptic Patriarch, John, and which contains not only seventy, but eighty canons attrib-
uted to the council of Nice. The MS. is in Arabic, and was discovered b}' J. B. Romanus,
S. J., who first made its contents known, and translated into Latin a copy he had made of it.
Another Jesuit, Pisanus, was writing a history of the Nicene Council at the time and he
received the eighty newly found canons into his book ; but, out of respect to the pseudo-
Athanasiau letter, he at first cut down the number to seventy' ; but in later editions he fol-
lowed the MS. All this was in the latter half of the sixteenth century ; and in 1578 Turi'i-
anus, who had had Father Romanus's translation revised before it was first published, now
issued an entirely new translation with a Proemium ^ containing a vast amount of informa-
tion upon the whole subject, and setting up an attempted proof that the number of the
Nicene Canons exceeded twenty. His argument for the time being carried the day.

Hefele says, " it is certain that the Orientals' believed the Council of Nice to have promul-
gated more than twenty canons : the learned Anglican, Beveridge,-' has proved this, repro-
ducing an ancient Arabic paraphrase of the canons of the first four Ecumenical Councils.
According to this Arabic paraphrase, found in a MS. in the Bodleian Library, the Council of
Nice must have put forth three books of canons. . . . The Arabic paraphrase of which
we are speaking gives a paraphrase of all these canons, but Bevei'idge took only the part
referring to the second book — that is to say, the paraphi'ase of the twenty genuine canons ;
for, according to his view, which was perfectly correct, it was only these twenty canons
which were really the work of the Council of Nice, and all the others were falsely attributed
toit."^

Hefele goes on to prove that the canons he rejects must be of much later origin, some
being laws of the times of Theodosius and Justinian according to the opinion of Renaudot.^

Before leaving this point I should notice the profound research on these Arabic canons
of the Maronite, Abraham Echellensis. He gives eighty-four canons in his Latin translation
of 1645, and was of opinion that they had been collected from different Oriental sources, and
sects ; but that originally thej^ had all been translated from the Greek, and were collected
by James, the celebrated bishop of Nisibis, who was present at Nice. But this last supisosi-
tion is utterly untenable.

Among the learned there have not been wanting some who have held that the Council of
Nice passed more canons than the twenty we possess, and have arrived at the conclusion
independently of the Arabic discovery, such are Baronius and Card. dAguirre, but their
arguments have been sufficiently answered, and they cannot present anything able to Aveaken
the conclusion that flows from the consideration of the following facts.


" Vide Labbe. Cone. ii. 28T.

2 Who exactly these "Orientals" were Hefele does not speci-
fy, but Ffoulkes well points out (Diet. Christ. Antiq. xuh voee
Councils of Nictea)that it is an entire mistake to suppose that the
Greek Church " uver quoted other canons [than the xx] as Nicene


' by mistake,' which were not Nicene, as popes Zosimus, Innocent
and Leo did." ^ Beveridge Synod, sive Pand. i. 686.

•• Hefele : Hist. Councils, I. 362.

' Renandot : Hist. Patriarcharuni Alexandrianoriim Jacob-
itarum. Paris, 1713, p. 75.


44 I. NICE. A.D. 325


(Hefele : History of the Councils, Vol. I. pp. 355 et seqq. [2d ed.])

Let us see first what is the testimony of those Greek and Latin authors who lived about
the time of the Council, concerning the number.

a. The first to be consulted among the Greek authors is the learned Theodoret, who
lived about a century after the Council of Nicsea. He says, in his History of the Church :
"After the condemnation of the Arians, the bishops assembled once more, and decreed twenty
canons on ecclesiastical discipline."

b. Twenty years later, Gelasius, Bishop of Cyzicus, after much research into the most
ancient documents, wrote a history of the Nicene Council. Gelasius also says expi-essly that
the Council decreed twenty canons ; and, what is more important, he gives the original text of
these canons exactly in the same order, and according to the tenor which we find elsewhere.

c. Rutinus is more ancient than these two historians. He was born near the period
when the Council of Nictea was held, and about half a century after he wrote his celebrated
history of the Church, in which he inserted a Latin translation of the Niceue canons. Rufi-
iius also knew only of these twenty canons ; but as he has divided the sixth and the eighth
into two i^arts, he has given twenty-two canons, which are exactly the same as the twenty fur-
nished by the other historians.

d. The famous discussion between the African bishops and the Bishop of Rome, on the
subject of appeals to Rome, gives us a very important testimony on the true number of
the Nicene canons. The presbyter Apiarius of Sicca in Africa, having been deposed for
many crimes, appealed to Rome. Pope Zosimus (417-418) took the appeal into considera-
tion, sent legates to Africa ; and to prove that he had the right to act thus, he quoted a
canon of the Council of Niciea, containing these words: " When a bishoj? thinks he has been
unjustly deposed by his colleagues he may appeal to Rome, and the Roman bishop shall have
the business decided hj judices in partibus." The canon quoted by the Pope does not belong
to the Council of Nicsea, as he affirmed ; it was the fifth canon of the Council of Sardica (the
seventh in the Latin version). What explains the error of Zosimus is that in the ancient
copies the canons of Nicrea and Sardica are written consecutively, with the same figures, and
under the common title of canons of the Council of Nictea ; and Zosimus might optima fide
fall into an error — which he shared Avith Greek authors, his contemporaries, who also mixed
the canons of Nicfea with those of Sardica. The African bishops, not finding the canon quoted
b}"^ the Pope either in their Greek or in their Latin copies, in vain consulted also the copy
which Bishop Cecilian, who had himself been present at the Council of Nicaea, had brought to
Carthage. The legates of the Pope then declared that they did not rely upon these copies,
and they agreed to send to Alexandria and to Constantinople to ask the patriarchs of these two
cities for authentic copies of the canons of the Council of Nicjca. The African bishops desired
in their turn that Pope Boniface should take the same step (Pope Zosimus had died meanwhile
in 418 ) — that he should ask for copies from the Archbishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and
Antioeh. Cyril of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, indeed, sent exact and faithful
copies of the Creed and canons of Nicasa; and two learned men of Constantinople, Theilo
and Thearistus, even translated these canons into Latin. Their translation has been pre-
served to us in the acts of the sixth Council of Carthage, and it contains only the twenty
oi'dinary canons. It might be thought at first sight tliat it contained twenty-one canons ;
but on closer consideration we see, as Hardouin has proved, that this twenty-first article is
nothing but an historical notice appended to the Nicene canons by the Fathers of Carthage.
It is conceived in these terms : " After the bishops had decreed these rules at Nicrea, and
after the holy Council had decided what was the ancient rule for the celebration of Easter,
peace and unity of faith were re-established between the East and the West. This is what
we (the African bishops) have thought it right to add according to the histo;-v nf tlie C'lniich.'


I


L NICE. A.D. 325 45


The bishops of Africa despatched to Pope Boniface the copies which had been sent to
them from Alexandria and Constantinople, in the month of November 419 ; and subsequently
in their letters to Celestine I. (423-432), successor to Boniface, they appealed to the text of
these documents.

e. All the ancient collections of canons, either in Latin or Greek, composed in the fourth,
or quite certainly at least in the fifth century, agree in giving only these twenty canons to
Nicfea. The most ancient of these collections were made in the Greek Church, and in the
course of time a very great number of copies of them were written. Many of these copies
have descended to us ; many libraries possess copies ; thus Montfaucon enumerates several
in his BihJioihcca CoisUnlnna. Fabricius makes a similar catalogue of the copies in his Biblio-
theca Gneca to those found in the libraries of Turin, Florence, Venice, Oxford, Moscow, etc.;
and he adds that these copies also contain the so-called apostolic canons, and those of the
most ancient councils. The French bishop John Tilius presented to Paris, in 1540, a MS.
of one of these Greek collections as it existed in the ninth century. It contains exactly our
twenty canons of Nicsea, besides the so-called apostolic canons, those of Ancyra, etc. Elias
Ehmger jDublished a new edition at Wittemberg in 1614, using a second MS. which was
found at Augsburg ; but the Roman collection of the Councils had before given in 1608,
the Greek text of the twenty canons of Nicsea. This text of the Roman editors, with
the exception of some insignificant variations, was exactly the same as that of the edition
of Tilius. Neither the learned Jesuit Sirmond nor his coadjutors have mentioned what
manuscripts were consulted in preparing this edition ; j)robably they were manuscripts drawn
from several libraries, and jDarticularly from that of the Vatican. The text of this Roman
edition passed into all the following collections, even into those of Hardouin and Mansi ;
while Justell in his Bibliotheca juris Canomci and Beveridge in his Si/nodicon (both of the
eighteenth century), give a somewhat different text, also collated from MSS., and very simi-
lar to the text given by Tilius. Bruns, in his recent Bibliotheca Ecciesiastica, compares the
two texts. Now all these Greek MSS. consulted at such different times, and by all these
editors, acknowledge only twenty canons of Nicsea, and always the same twenty which we
possess.

The Latin collections of the canons of the Councils also give the same result — for exam-
ple, the most ancient and the most remarkable of all, the Prisca, and that of Dionysius the
Less, which was collected about the year 500. The testimony of this latter collection is the
more important for the number twenty, as Dionysius refers to the Gneca auctoritas.

f. Among the later Eastern witnesses we may further mention Photius, Zonaras and
Balsamon. Photius, in his Collection of the Canons, and in his Nomocanon, as well as the
two other writers in their commentaries upon the canons of the ancient Councils, quote
only and know only twenty canons of Nicsea, and always those Avhich we possess.

g. The Latin canonists of the Middle Ages also acknowledge only these twenty canons of
Nicsea. We have proof of this in the celebrated Spanish collection, which is generally but
erroneously attributed to St. Isidore (it was composed at the commencement of the seventh
century), and in that of Adrian (so called because it was offered to Charles the Great by
Pope Adrian I). The celebrated Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims, the tirst canonist of the
ninth century, in his turn attributes only twenty canons to the Council of Nicsea, and even
the pseudo-Isidore assigns it no more.

I add for the convenience of the reader the captions of the Eighty Canons as given by
Turrianus, translating them from the reprint in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom, II. col. 291.
The Eighty -fovir Canons as given hy Echellensis together with numerous Constitutions and
Decrees attributed to the Nicene Council are likewise to be found in Labbe {ut supra, col. 318).


46


I. NICE. A.D. 325


THE CAPTIONS OF THE AKABIC CANONS ATTRIBUTED TO THE COUNCIL

OF NICE.


Canon I.'
Insane persons and energumens should not
be ordained.

Canon II.

Bond servants are not to be ordained.

Canon III.
Neophytes in the faith are not to be or-
dained to Holy Orders before they have a
knowledge of Holy Scripture. And such, if
convicted after their ordination of grave sin,
are to be deposed with those who ordained
them.

Canon IV.

The cohabitation of women with bishops,
presbyters, and deacons prohibited on ac-
count of their celibacy.

We decree that bishops shall not live with
women ; nor shall a presbyter who is a wid-
ower ; neither shall they escort them ; nor be
familiar with them, nor gaze upon them per-
sistently. And the same decree is made wdth
regard to every celibate priest, and the same
concerning such deacons as have no wives.
And this is to be the case whether the woman
be beautiful or ugly, whether a young girl or
beyond the age of puberty, wdiether great in
birth, or an orphan taken out of charity under
pretext of bringing her up. For the devil
with such arms slays religious, bishops, pres-
byters, and deacons, and incites them to the
fii'es of desire. But if she be an old woman,
and of advanced age, or a sister, or mother,
or aunt, or grandmother, it is permitted to
live with these because such persons are free
from all suspicion of scandal.^

Canon V.
Of the election of a bishop and of the con-
firmation of the election.

Canon VI.
That those excommunicated by one bishop
are not to be received by another ; and that
those whose excommunication has been shown
to have been unjust should be absolved by
the archbishop or patriarch.

Canon VII.
That provincial Councils should be held
twice a year, for the consideration of all things

' Turrianus calls thom "Chapters."

'' I have translated this canon in full because the caption did
not seem to irive fairly its meaning. In Labbe will be touud a
long and most curious note.


affecting the churches of the bishops of the
province.

C.\NON VIII.

Of the patriarchs of Alexandria and An-
tiocli, and of their jurisdiction.

Canon IX.

Of one who solicits the episcopate when
the people do not wish him ; or if they do
desire him, but without the consent of the
archbishop.

Canon X.

How the bishoj) of Jerusalem is to be hon-
oured, the honour, however, of the metropol-
itan church of Ca'sarea being preserved in-
tact, to which he is subject.

Canon XI.

Of those w'ho force themselves into the or-
der of presbyters without election or exam-
ination.

Canon XII.

Of the l)ishop who ordains one whom he
landerstands has denied the faith ; also of one
ordained who after that he had denied it,
crej>t into orders.

Canon Xni.

Of one who of his own will goes to another
church, having been chosen by it, and does
not wish afterwards to stay there.

Of taking jiains that he be transferred from
his own church to another.

Canon XIV.

No one shall become a monk without the
bishop's license, and why a license is required.

Canon XV.

That clerics or religious who lend on usury
■should be cast from their grade.

C.^non XVI.

Of the honour to be paid to the bishop and
to a presbyter by the deacons.

Canon XVII.

Of the system and of the manner of receiv-
ing tliose who are converted from the heresy
of Paul of Samosata.


I. NICE. A.D. 325


47


Canox XYIII.
Of the system and manner of receiving
those who are converted from the heresy of
the Novatians.

Canon XIX.
Of the system and manner of receiving
those who return after a lajjse from the faith,
and of receiving the relaiDsed, and of those
brought into peril of death by sickness before
their penance is finished, and concerning such
as are convalescent.

Canon XX.
Of avoiding the conversation of evil work-
ers and wizards, also of the penance of them
that have not avoided such.

Canon XXI.

Of incestuous marriages contrary to the
law of spiritual relationship, and of the pen-
ance of such as are in such marriages.

[The time of penance fixed is twenty years,
only godfather and godmother are mentioned,
and nothing is said of separation.]

Canon XXII.

Of sponsors in baptism.

Men shall not hold females at the font,
neither women males; but women females,
and men males.

Canon XXIII.

Of the prohibited marriages of spiritual
brothers and sisters from receiving them in
baptism.

Canon XXIV.

Of him who has married two wives at the
same time, or who through lust has added
another woman to his wife ; and of his pun-
ishment.

Part of the canon. If he be a priest he is
forbidden to sacrifice and is cut off from the
communion of the faithful until he turn out
of the house the second woman, and he ought
to retain the first.

Canon XXV.

That no one should be forbidden Holy
Commvinion unless such as are doing penance.

Canon XXVI.
Clerics are forbidden from suretyship or
witness-giving in criminal causes.

Canon XXVII.

Of avoiding the excommunicate, and of not
receiving the oblation from them ; and of the


excommunication of him who does not avoid
the excommunicated.

Canon XXVIII.
How anger, indignation, and hatred should
be avoided by the priest, especially because
he has the power of excommunicating others.

Canon XXIX.
Of not kneeling in pi-ayer.


Canon XXX.

Of giving [only] names of Christians in
baptism, and of heretics who retain the faith
in the Trinity and the perfect form of bap-
tism ; and of others not retaining it, worthy
of a worse name, and of how such are to be
received when they come to the faith-

Canon XXXI.

Of the system and manner of receiving con-
verts to the Orthodox faith from the heresy
of Arius and of other like.

Canon XXXII.

Of the system of receiving those who have
kept the dogmas of the faith and the Church's
laws, and yet have separated from us and
afterwards come back.

Canon XXXIII.
Of the place of residence of the Patriarch,
and of the honour which should be given to
the bishop of Jerusalem and to the bishop of
Seleucia.

Canon XXXIV.

Of the honour to be given to the Archbishop
of Seleucia in the Synod of Greece.

Canon XXXV.

Of not holding a provincial synod in the
province of Persia without the authority of
the patriarch of Antioch, and how the bishops
of Persia are subject to the metropolitans of
Antioch.

Canon XXXVI.

Of the creation of a patriarch for Ethiopia,
and of his power, and of the honour to be jaaid
him in the Synod of Greece,

Canon XXXVII.
Of the election of the Archbishop of Cyprus,
who is subject to the patriarch of Antioch.

Canon XXXVIII.
That the ordination of ministers of the
Church by bishops in the dioceses of stran-
gers is forbidden.


48


I. >;ICE. A.D. 325


Canon XXXIX.

Of the care and power which a Patriarch
has over the bishops and archbishops of liis
patriarchate ; and of the jiriniacy of the Bishop
of Kome over all.

Let the patriarch consider what thinpcs are
done by the archbishops and bishops in their
provinces ; and if he shall find anything done
by them otherwise than it should be, let him
change it, and order it, as scemeth him fit ;
for he is the father of all, and they are his
sons. And although the archbishop be among
the bishops as an elder brother, who hath the
care of his brethren, and to whom they owe
obedience because he is over them ; yet the
patriarch is to all those who are under his
power, just as he who holds the seat of Rome,
is the head and jDrince of all patriarchs ; in-
asmuch as he is first, as was Peter, tb whom
power is given over all Christian princes, and
over all their peoples, as he who is the Vicar
of Christ our Lord over all peoples and over
the whole Christian Church, and whoever shall
contradict this, is excommunicated by the
Synod.'

[I add Canon XXXVIL of Echellensis's
Novd Veraio LXXXIV. Anibic. Canonum Cone.
Nicceni, that the reader may comj^are it with
the foregoing.]

Let there be only four patriarchs in the
whole world as there are four w-riters of the
Gospel, and four rivers, etc. And let there
be a prince and chief over them, the lord of
the see of the Divine Peter at Rome, accord-
ing as the Apostles commanded. And after
him the lord of the great Alexandria, which
is the see of Mark. And tlie third is the lord
of Ephesus, which is the see of John the
Divine who speaks divine things. And the
fourth and last is my loi'd of Antioch, which
is another see of Peter. And let all the bish-
ops be divided under the hands of these four
patriai'chs ; and the bishops of the little towns
which are under the dominion of the great
cities let them be under the authority of these
metropolitans. But let every metroi)olitan
of these great cities appoint the bishops of
his province, but let none of the bislio])s ap-
point him, for he is greater than they. There-
fore let every man know his own rank, and
let him not usui-p the rank of another. And
"whosoever shall contradict this law which we
have established the Fathers of the Synod
subject him to anathema.-


'I have tmnslated the whole canon literally; the reader will
JQdsre of it? antiquity.

2 Canon XXXIX. of thip Heries» has nothinL' t<i do with the Pa-
triarchs or with the see of Kome and its prerogatives.


Canon XL.
Of the provincial synod which should be
held twice every year, and of its utility ; to-
gether with the excommunication of such as
opjjose the decree.

C.XNON XLI.

Of the synod of Archbishops, which meets
once a year with the Patriarch, and of its
utility ; also of the collection to be made for
the support of the patriarch throughout the
provinces and places subject to the patriarch.

Canon XLII.
Of a cleric or monk who when fallen into
sin, and summoned once, twice, and thrice,
does not px'esent himself for trial.

Canon XLIII.
What the patriarch should do in the case
of a defendant set at liberty unpunished by
the decision of the bishop, presbyter, or even
of a deacon, as the case may be.

Canon XLIY.
How an archbishop ought to give trial to
one of his suffragan bishops.

Canon XLV.
Of the receiving of complaints and con-
demnation of an archbishop against his pa-
triarch.

Canon XLVI.

How a patriarch should admit a complaint
or judgment of an Archbishop against an
Archbishop.

C.\NON XLYII.

Of those excommunicated by a certain one,
when they can be and when they cannot be
absolved by another.

Canon XLVIH.
No bishop shall choose his own successor.

C.\NON XLIX.
No simoniacal ordinations shall be made.

C.\NON L.

There shall be but one bishop of one city,
and one parochus of one town ; also the in-
cumbent, whether bisho]) or i)arish priest,
shall not be removed in favour of a successor
desired by some of the people unless he has
been convicted of manifest crime.

Canon LI.
Bishops shall not allow the separation of a
wife from her husband on account of discord
— [in American, "incompatibility of tem-
per"].


I. NICE. A.D. 325


49


Canon LII.
Usury and the base seeking of -worldly gain
is forbidden to the clergy, also conversation
and fellowship with Jews.

Canon LIII.
Marriages with infidels to be avoided.

Canon LIV.
Of the election of a chorepiscopus, and of
his duties in towns, and villages, and monas-
teries.

Canon LV.

How a chorepiscopus should visit the
churches and monasteries which are under
his jurisdiction.

Canon LVI.
Of how the jjresbyters of the towns and vil-
lages should go twice a year with their chor-
episcopus to salute the bishop, and how re-
ligious should do so once a year from their
monasteries, and how the new abbot of a
monastery should go thrice.

Canon LVII.
Of the rank in sitting during the celebra-
tion of service in church by the bishop, the
archdeacon and the chorepiscopus ; and of
the office of archdeacon, and of the honour
due the archpresbyter.

Canon LVIII.
Of the honour due the archdeacon and the
chore2)iscopus when they sit in church during
the absence of the bishop, and when they go
about with the bishop.

Canon LIX.

How all the grades of the clergy and their
duties should be jDubliclv described and set
forth.

Canon LX.

Of how men are to be chosen from the dio-
cese for holy orders, and of how they should
be examined.

Canon LXI.

Of the honour due to the deacons, and how
the clerics must not put themselves in their
way.

Canon LXII.

The number of presbyters and deacons is
to be adapted to the work of the church and
to its means.

Canon LXIII.
Of the Ecclesiastical Economist and of the
others who with him care for the church's
possessions.


Canon LXIV.
Of the offices said in the church, the night
and day offices, and of the collect for all those
who rule that church.

Canon LXV.
Of the order to be obsei-ved at the funeral
of a bishop, of a chorepiscopus and of an arch-
deacon, and of the office of exequies.

Canon LXVI.

Of taking a second wife, after the former
one has been disowned for any cause, or even
not put aw^ay, and of him who falsely accuses
his wife of adultery.

If any priest or deacon shall put away his
wife on account of her fornication, or for other
cause, as aforesaid, or cast her out of doors
for external good, or that he may change her
for another more beautiful, or better, or richer,
or does so out of his lust which is displeasing
to God ; and after she has been put away for
any of these causes he shall contract matri-
mony with another, or without having put
her away shall take another, whether free or
bond ; and shall have both equally, they living
separately and he sleeping every night with
one or other of them, or else keeping both in
the same house and bed, let him be deposed.
If he were a layman let him be deprived of
communion. But if anyone falsely defames
his wife charging her with adultery, so that
he turns her out of doors, the matter must
be diligently examined ; and if the accusation
was false, he shall be deposed if a cleric, but
if a layman shall be prohibited from entering
the church and from the communion of the
faithful ; and shall be compelled to live with
her whom he has defamed, even though she
be deformed, and poor, and insane ; and who-
ever shall not obey is excommunicated by
the Synod.

[Note. — The reader will notice that by this
canon a husband is deposed or excommuni-
cated, as the case may be, if he marry another
woman, after putting away his wife on ac-
count of hei' adultery. It is curious that in
the parallel canon in the collection of Echel-
lensis, which is numbered LXXL, the reading
is quite diiferent, although it is very awkward
and inconsequent as given. Moreover, it
should be remembered that in some codices
and editions this canon is lacking altogether,
one on the right of the Pope to receive ap-
peals taking its place. As this canon is of
considerable length, I only quote the inter-
esting parts.]

Whatever presbyter or deacon shall put
away his wife without the offence of fornica-


50


I. NICE. A.D. 325


tion, or for any other cause of which we have
sjDoken above, aud shall cast her out of doors
. . . such a jiersou shall be cast out of the
clergy, if he were a clergyman ; if a layman
he shall be forbidden the communion of the
faithful. . . But if that woman [untruly

charged by her husband with adultery], that
is to say his wife, spurns l)is society on ac-
count of the injury he has done her and the
charge he has brought against her, of which
she is innocent, let her freely be put away
and let a bill of repudiation be written for
her, noting the false accusation which had
been brought against her. And then if she
should wish to marry some other faithful
man, it is right for her to do so, nor does the
Church forbid it; and the same permission
extends as well to men as to women, since
there is equal reason for it for each. But if
he shall return to better fruit which is of the
same kind, and shall conciliate to himself the
love and benevolence of his consort, and shall
be willing to return to his pristine friendship,
his fault shall be condoned to him after he
has done suitable and sufiicient penance.
And whoever shall speak against this decree
the fathers of the synod excommunicate him.

Canox LXYII.

Of having two wives at the same time, and
of a woman who is one of the faithful marry-
ing an infidel ; and of the form of receiving
her to penance.

[Her reception back is conditioned upon
her leaving the infidel man.]

Canon LXVIII.
Of giving in marriage to an infidel a
daughter or sister without her knowledge
and contrary to her wisli.

Canon LXIX.
Of one of the faithful who departs from the
faith through lust and love of an infidel ; and
of the form of receiving him back, or admit-
ting him to penance.

Canon LXX.

Of the hospital to be established in every j
city, and of the choice of a superintendent
and concerning his duties. j

[It is interesting to note that one of the i
duties of the superintendent is — "That if the '
goods of the hospital are not sufficient for its
expenses, he ought to collect all the time and
from all Christians provision according to ,
the ability of each, "j

C.\NON LXXI.

Of the placing a bishop or archbishop in his
chair after ordination, which isenthronization.


C.^NON LXXII.

No one is allowed to transfer himself to
another church [i.e., diocese] than that in
which he was ordained ; and what is to be
done in the case of one cast out forcibly with-
out any blame attaching to him.

Canon LXXIII.

The laity shall not choose for themselves
priests in tlie towns and villages without the
authority of the chorepiscopus ; nor an abbot
for a monastery ; and that no one should give
commands as to who should be elected his
successor after his death, and when this is
lawful for a superior.

Canon LXXIV.

How sisters, widows, and deaconesses
should be made to keep their residence in
their monasteries ; and of the system of in-
structing them ; and of the election of dea-
conesses, and of their duties and utility.

Canon LXXV.

How one seeking election should not be
chosen, even if of conspicuous virtue ; and
how the election of a layman to tlie aforesaid
grades is not prohibited, and that those chosen
should not afterward be dei^rived before their
deaths, except on account of crime.

Canon LXX VI.
Of the distinctive garb and distinctive
names and conversation of monks and nuns.

Canon LXXVII.
That a bishop convicted of adultery or of
other similar crime should be deposed with-
out hope of restoration to the same grade ;
but shall not be excommunicated.

Canon LXXYIII.

Of presbyters and deacons who have fallen
only once into adultery, if they have never
been married ; and of the same when fallen
as widowers, and those who have fallen, all
the while having their own wives. Also of
those who return to the same sin as well wid-
owers as those having living wives ; and which
of these ought not to be received to penance,
and which once onl}', and which twice.

Canon LXXIX.
Each one of the faithful while his sin is yet
not public sliould be mended by private ex-
hortation and admonition ; if he will not profit
by this, he must be excommunicated.

Canon LXXX.
Of the election of a procurator of the poor,
and of his duties.


PROPOSED ACTION ON CLERICAL CELIBACY.

[The Acts are not extant.]


NOTES.


Often the mind of a delibei-ative assembly
is as clearly shown by the propositions it re-
jects as by those it adojjts, and it would seem
that this doctrine is of application in the case
of the asserted attempt at this Council to pass
a decree forbidding the priesthood to live in
the use of marriage. This attempt is said to
have failed. The particulars are as follows :

Hefele.

(Hist. Councils. Vol. I., j)p. 435 et seqq.)

Socrates, Sozomen, and Gelasius affirm that
the Synod of Nicisea, as well as that of Elvira
(can. 33), desired to pass a law resi)ecting
celibacy. This law was to forbid all bishops,
priests and deacons (Sozomen adds sub-
deacons), wlio were married at the time of
their ordination, to continue to live with their
wives. But, say these historians, the law was
opposed openly and decidedly by Paphnutius,
bishop of a city of the Upper Thebais in
Egypt, a man of a high reputation, who had
lost an eye during the persecution under
Maximian. He was also celebrated for his
miracles, and was held in so great respect by
the Emperor, that the latter often kissed the
empty socket of the lost eye. Paj^hnutius
declared with a loud voice, " that too heavy
a yoke ought not to be laid upon the clergy ;
that marriage and married intercourse are of
themselves honourable and undefiled ; that
the Church ought not to be injui-ed by an ex-
treme severity, for all could not live in abso-
lute continency : in this way (by not prohibit-
ing married intercourse) the virtue of the
wife would be much more certainly preserved
(viz the wife of a clergyman, because she
might find injury elsewhere, if her husband
withdrew from her married intercourse).
The intercourse of a man with his lawful wife
ma}' also be a chaste intercourse. It would
therefore be sufficient, according to the ancient
tradition of the Church, if those who had
taken holy orders without being mari-ied were
prohibited from marrying afterwards ; but
those clergymen who had been married only
once as laymen, were not to be separated from
their wives (Gelasius adds, or being only a
reader or cantor)." This discourse of Paph-
nutius made so much the more impression,


because he had never lived in matrimony him-
self, and had had no conjugal intercourse.
Paphnutius, indeed, had been brought up in
a monastery, and his great purit}' of manners
had rendered him especially celebrated.
Therefore the Council took the serious words

I of the Egyptian bishop into consideration,
stojoped all discussion upon the law, and left

I to each cleric the responsibility of deciding

I the point as he would.

I If this account be true, we must conclude

! that a law was proposed to the Council of
Nicsea the same as one which had been carried
twenty years previously at Elvira, in Sj^ain ;
this coincidence would lead us to believe that
it was the Spaniard Hosius who j:)roposed the
law resjjecting celibacy at Nicsea. The dis-
course ascribed to Paphnutius, and the conse-
quent decision of the Synod, agree very well
with the text of the Apostolic Constitutions,
and with the whole practice of the Greek
Church in respect to celibacy. The Greek
Church as well as the Latin accepted the prin-
ciple, that whoever had taken holy orders be-
fore marriage, ought not to be married after-
wards. In the Latin Church, bishops, priests,
deacons, and even sub-deacons, were con-
sidered to be subject to this law, because the
latter were at a very early period reckoned
among the higher servants of the Church,
which was not the case in the Greek Church.
The Greek Church went so far as to allow
deacons to niarry after their ordination, if
previously to it they had exjoressly obtained
from their bishoj) permission to do so. The

j Council of Ancyra affirms this (c. 10). We
see that the Greek Church wishes to leave the
bishop free to decide the matter ; bvit in refer-

I ence to priests, it also prohibited them from
marrying after their ordination. Therefore,
whilst the Latin Church exacted of those
presenting themselves for ordination, even as
subdeacous, that they should not continue to
live with their wives if they were married, the
Greek Church gave no such prohibition ; but
if the wife of an ordained clergvman died, the
Greek Church allowed no second marriage.
The Apostolic Constitutions decided this point
in the same way. To leave their wives from a
pretext of piety was also forbidden to Greek
priests ; and the Synod of Gangra (c. -4) took


52


I. NICE. A.D. 325


up the defence of married priests against the
Eustathians. Eustathius, however, was not
alone among the Greeks in opposing the mar-
riage of all clerics, and in desiring to introduce
into the Greek Church the Latin discipline on
this point. St. Epiphanius also inclined tow-
ards this side. The Greek Church did not,
however, adojit this rigour in rt-ference to
priests, deacons, and subdeacons, l»ut bv de-
grees it came to be required of bishojjs and
of the higher order of clergy in general, that
they should live in celibacy. Yet this was
not until after the compilation of the Apos-
tolic Canons (c. 5) and of the Constitutions;
for in those documents mention is made of
bishops living in wedlock, and Church history
shows that there were married bishops, for
instance Synesius, in the fifth century. But
it is fair to remark, even as to Synesius, that
he made it an express condition of his accep-
tation, on his election to the episcopate, that
he might continue to live the married life.
Thomassin believes that Synesius did not
seriously require this condition, and only
spoke thus for the sake of escaping the epis-
copal office ; which would seem to imply that
in his time Greek bishops had alread}^ begun
to live in celibacy. At the Trullan Synod
(c. 13.) the Greek Church liually settled the
question of the marriage of priests. Baro-
nius, Valesius, and other historians, have con-
sidered the account of the part taken by Paph-
nutius to be apocryphah Baronius says,
that as the Council of Xiciea in its third canon
gave a law upon celibacy it is quite impossi-
ble to admit that it would alter such a law on
account of Paphuutius. But Baronius is mis-
taken in seeing a law upon celibacy in that
third canon ; he thought it to be so, because,
when mentioning the women who might live
in the clergyman's house — his mother, sister,
etc. — the canon does not say a word about the
wife. It had no occasion to mention her, it
was referring to the a-vveia-aKTOL whilst these
avpeiauKTOL and married women have nothing in
common. Xatalis Alexander gives this anec-
dote about Paphnutius in full : he desired to
refute Ballarmin, who considered it to be un-
true and an invention of Socrates to please the
Novatians. Natalis Alexander often main-
tains erroneous opinions, and on the present
question he deserves no confidence. If, as St.
Epi|)hanius relates, the Novatians maintained
that the clergy might be married exactly like
the laity, it cannot be said that Socrates shared
that opinion, since he says, or rather makes
Pai)hnutius say, that, according to ancient
tradition, those not married at the time of
ordination should not be so subsequently.


Moreover, if it may be said that Socrates had
a partial sympatliy with the Novatians, he cer-
tainly cannot be considered as belonging to
them, still less can he be accused of falsifvinsr
histor}^ in their favour. He may sometimes
have propounded erroneous opinions, but
there is a great difference between that and
the invention of a whole story. Valesius es-
pecially makes use of the argument e.railentio
against Socrates." (a) Rufinus, he says, gives
many jjarticulars about Paphnutius in his
History (if tlie Church; he mentions his mar-
tyrdom, his miracles, and the Emperors rev-
erence for him, but not a single word of the
business about celibacy. (b) The name of
Paphuutius is wanting in the list of Egyptian
bishops present at the Synod. These two
arguments of Valesius are weak ; the second
has the authority of Bufinus himself against
it, who expressly says that Bishop Paphnu-
tius was present at the Council of Nicaea. If
Valesius means by //.s-/.s only the signatures at
the end of the acts of the Council, this proves
nothing ; for these lists are very imperfect,
and it is well known that many bishops whose
names are not among these signatures were
present at Nicsea. This argument exsUenth
is evidently insufficient to prove that the
anecdote about Paj)hnutius must be rejected
as false, seeing that it is in perfect harmony
with the practice of the ancient Church, and
especially of the Greek Church, on the subject
of clerical marriages. On the other hand,
Thomassin pretends that there was no such
practice, and endeavours to prove by quota-
tions from St. Epiphanius, St. Jerome, Euse-
bius,and St. John Chrysostom, that even in the
East priests who were married at the time of
their ordination were prohibited from continu-
ing to live with their wives. The texts quoted
by Thomassin prove only that the Greeks gave
especial honour to priests living in perfect
continency, but they do not prove that this
continence was a duty incumbent upon all
priests ; and so much the less, as the fifth and
twenty-fifth Apostolic canons, the fourth canon
of Gangra, and the thirteenth of the Trullan
Synod, demonstrate clearly enough what was
the universal custom of the Greek Church
on this point. Lu]nisand Phillii)S explained
the words of Paphuutius in another sense.
According to them, the Egyptian bishop was
not speaking in a general way ; he simply
desired that the contemplated law- should not
include tlie subdeacons. But this explanation
does not agree with the extracts cjuoted from
Socrates, Sozomen. and Gelasius, who believe
Pa])hnutius intended deacons and priests as
: well.


I. NICE. A.D. 325 53


THE SYNODAL LETTEE.

{Found in Gelasius, Historia Concilii Nicaeni, lib. II., cap. xxxiii. ; Socr., H. E., lib. I,
cap. 6 ; Theodo7\, H. E., lib. I., cap. 9.)

To the Church of Alexandria, by the grace of God, holy and great ; and to our well-
beloved brethren, the orthodox clergy and laity throughout Egypt, and Pentapolis, and
Lybia, and every nation under heaven, the holy and great synod, the bishops assembled
at Nicea, wish health in the Lord.

Forasmuch as the great and holy Synod, which was assembled at Nicea through the
grace of Christ and our most religious Sovereign Constantine, who brought us together
from our several provinces and cities, has considered matters which concern the faith of
the Church, it seemed to us to be necessary that certain things should be communicated
from us to you in writing, so that you might have the means of knowing what has been
mooted and investigated, and also what has been decreed and confirmed.

First of all, then, in the presence of our most religious Sovereign Constantine, inves-
tigation was made of matters concerning the impiety and transgression of Arius and his
adherents ; and it was unanimously decreed that he and his impious opinion should be
anathematized, together with the blasphemous words and speculations in which he in-
dulged, blaspheming the Son of God, and saying that he is from things that are not, and
that before he was begotten he was not, and that there was a time when he was not, and
that the Son of God is by his free will capable of vice and virtue ; saying also that he is
a creature. All these things the holy Synod has anathematized, not even enduring to
hear his impious doctrine and madness and blasphemous words. And of the charges
against him and of the results they had, ye have either already heard or will hear the
particulars, lest we should seem to be oppressing a man who has in fact received a fitting
recompense for his own sin. So far indeed has his impiety prevailed, that he has even
destroyed Theonas of Marmorica and Secundas of Ptolemais ; for they also have received
the same sentence as the rest.

But when the grace of God had delivered Egypt from that heresy and blasphemy,
and from the persons who have dared to make disturbance and division among a people
heretofore at peace, there remained the matter of the insolence of Meletius and those
who have been ordained by him ; and concerning this part of our work we now, beloved
brethren, proceed to inform you of the decrees of the Synod. The Synod, then, being
disposed to deal gently with Meletius (for in strict justice he deserved no leniency),
decreed that he should remain in his own city, but have no authority either to ordain, or
to administer aftairs, or to make appointments ; and that he should not appear in the
country or in any other city for this purpose, but should enjoy the bare title of his rank ;
but that those who have been placed by him, after they have been confirmed by a more
sacred laying on of hands, shall on these conditions be admitted to communion : that
they shall both have their rank and the right to officiate, but that they shall be altogether
the inferiors of all those who are enrolled in any church or parish, and have been
appointed by our most honourable colleague Alexander. So that these men are to have
no authority to make appointments of persons who may be pleasing to them, nor to
suggest names, nor to do anything whatever, without the consent of the bishops of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, who are serving under our most holy colleague Alex-
ander ; while those who, by the grace of God and through your prayers, have been found
in no schism, but on the contrary are without spot in the Catholic and Apostolic Church,
are to have authority to make appointments and nominations of worthy persons among
the clergy, and in short to do all things according to the law and ordinance of the
Church. I3ut, if it happen that any of the clergy who are now in the Church should die,
then those who have been lately received are to succeed to the office of the deceased ;
always provided that they shall appear to be worthy, and that the people elect them,
and that the bishop of Alexandria shall concur in the election and ratify it. This con-
cession has been made to all the rest ; but, on account of his disorderly conduct from
the first, and the rashness and precipitation of his character, the same decree was not


I. XICE. A.D. 325


made couceruiug Meletius himself, but that, inasmuch as he is a man capable of com-
mitting again the same disorders, no authority nor privilege should be conceded to him.

These are the particulars, Mhioh are of special interest to Egypt and to the most holy
Church of Alexandria ; but if in the presence of our most honoured lord, our colleague
and brother Alexander, anything else has been enacted by canon or other decree, he will
himself convey it to you in greater detail, he having been l)oth a guide and fellow-worker
in what has been done.

AVe further proclaim to you the good news of the agreement concerning the holy
Easter, that this particular also has through your prayers been rightly settled ; so that
all our brethren in the East who formerly followed the custom of the Jews are hence-
forth to celebrate the said most sacred feast of Easter at the same time with the Romans
and yourselves and all those who have observed Easter from the beginning.

Wherefore, rejoicing in these wholesome results, and in our comnum peace and
harmony, and in the cutting off of every heresy, receive ye with the greater honour and
with increased love, our colleague your Bishop Alexander, who has gladdened us by
his presence, and who at so great an age has undergone so great fatigue that peace
might be established among you and all of us. Pray ye also for us all, that the things
which have been deemed advisable may stand fast ; for they have been done, as we
believe, to the well-pleasing of Almighty God and of his only Begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.


On the Keeping of Easter.

From the Letter of the Emperor to all those
not jn-esent at the Council.

{Found in Eusebius, Vita Const., Lib. in.,
18-2U.)

When the question relative to the sacred
festival of Easter arose, it was universally
thought that it would be convenient that all
should keep the feast on one day ; for what
could be more beautiful and more desirable,
than to see this festival, through which we re-
ceive the hope of immortality, celebrated by
all with one accord, and in the same manner?
It was declared to be particularly unworthy
for this, the holiest of all festivals, to follow
the custom [the calculation] of the Jews, who
had soiled their hands with the most fearful
of crimes, and whose minds were blinded. In
rejecting their custom, ^ we may transmit to
our descendants the legitimate mode of cele-
brating Easter, which we have observed from
the time of the Saviour's Passion to the j^res-
ent day [according to the day of the week].
We ought not, therefore, to have anything in
common with the Jews, for the Saviour has
shown us another way ; our worship follows
a more legitimate and more convenient course
(the order of tlie days of the week) ; and con-
sequently, in unanimously adopting this mode,
we desire, dearest brethren, to separate our-
selves from the detestable oompany of the
Jew^s, for it is truly shameful for us to hear

' We must read «eov«, not i8vovi, as the Mayence impression
of the edition of Valerius has it.


them boast that without their direction we
could not keep this feast. How can they be in
the right, the}' who, after the death "of the
Saviour, have no longer been led by reason but
by wild violence, as their delusion may uro^e
them? They do not possess the truth in this
Easter question ; for, in their blindness and
repugnance to all improvements, they fre-
quently celebrate two passovers in the same
year. We could not imitate those who are
openly in error. How, then, could we follow
I these Jews, who are most certainly blinded by
error ? for to celebrate the passover twice in
! one year is totally inadmissible. But even if
this were not so, it would still be your duty
'not to tarnish your soul by communications
with such wicked people [the Jews]. Besides,
' consider well, that in such an important mat-
ter, and on a subject of such great sok'nmity,
, there ought not to be any division. Our
1 Saviour has left us only one festal day of our
redemption, that is to say. of his holy passion,
and he desired [to establish] ou\y one Catholic
Church. Think, then, how unseendy it is, that
on the same day some should be fasting whilst
others are seated at a banquet ; and that after
Easter, some should be rejoicing at feasts,
whilst others are still obseiwing a strict fast.
For this reason, a Divine Providence wills that
this custom should be rectified and regulated
in a uniform way ; and everyone, I hope, will
agree uf)ou this point. As, on the one hand,
it is our duty not to have anything in common
with the murderers of our Lord ; and as, on
the other, the custom now followed by the
Churches of the West, of the South, and of


I. NICE. A.D. 325 55'


the North, and by some of those of the East, holy a thing there should be any division. As
is the most acceptable, it has appeared good this is the state of the case, accept joyfully the
to all ; and I have been guarantee for your divine favour, and this truly divine command ;
consent, that you would accept it with joy, as for all which takes place in assemblies of the
it is followed at Rome, in Africa, in all Italy, bishops ought to be i-egarded as proceeding
Egypt, Spain, Gaul, Britain, Libya, in all from the will of God. Make known to your
Aciiaia, and in the dioceses of Asia, of Pontus, brethren what has been decreed, keep this
and Cilicia. You should consider not only most holy day according to the prescribed
that the number of churches in these prov- mode ; we can thus celebi'ate this holy Easter
inces make a majority, but also that it is right day at the same time, if it is granted me, as I
to demand what our reason approves, and that desire, to unite myself with you ; we can re-
we should have nothing in common with the joice together, seeing that the divine power
Jews. To sum up in few words : By the has made use of our instrumentality for de-
unanimous judgment of all, it has been de- stroying the evil designs of the devil, and
cided that the most holy festival of Easter thus causing faith, peace, and unity to flour-
should be everywhere celebrated on one and ish amongst us. May God graciously protect
the same day, and it is not seemly that in so you, my beloved brethren.

EXCURSUS ON THE SUBSEQUENT HISTORY OF THE EASTER QUESTION.

(Hefele : Hist, of (he Councils, Vol. I., pjD. 328 et seqq.)

The differences in the way of fixing the period of Easter did not indeed disappear after
the Council of Nicea. Alexandria and Rome could not agree, either because one of the two
Churches neglected to make the calculation for Easter, or because the other considered it
inaccurate. It is a fact, proved by the ancient Easter table of the Roman Church, that
the cycle of eighty-four years continued to be used at Rome as before. Now this cycle dif-
fered in many ways from the Alexandrian, and did not always agree with it about the period
for Easter — in fact (a), the Romans used quite another method from the Alexandrians ; they
calculated from the epact, and began from the feria jjrima of January, (b.) The Romans
were mistaken in placing the full moon a little too soon ; whilst the Alexandrians placed it
a little too late, (c.) At Rome the equinox was supposed to fall on March 18th ; whilst the
Alexandrians placed it on March 21st. (d.) Finally, the Romans differed in this from the
Greeks also ; they did not celebrate Easter the next day when the full moon fell on the
Saturday.

Even the year following the Council of Nicea — that is, in 32G — as well as in the years 330,
333, 340, 341, 343, the Latins celebrated Easter on a different day from the Alexandrians.
In order to put an end to this misunderstanding, the Synod of Sardica in 343, as we learn
from the newly discovered festival letters of S. Athanasius, took up again the question of
Easter, and brought the two i)arties (Alexandrians and Romans) to regulate, by means of
mutual concessions, a common day for Easter for the next fifty years. This compromise,
after a few years, was not observed. The troubles excited by the Arian heresy, and the
division which it caused between the East and the West, prevented the decree of Sardica
from being put into execution ; therefore the Emperor Theodosius the Great, after the
re-establishment of peace in the Church, found himself obliged to take fresh steps for
obtaining a complete uniformity in the manner of celebrating Easter. In 387, the Romans
having kept Easter on March 21st, the Alexandrians did not do so for five weeks later— that
is to say, till April 25th — because with the Alexandrians the equinox was not till March 21st.
The Emperor Theodosius the Great then asked Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria for an
explanation of the difference. The bishop responded to the Emperor's desire, and drew up
a chronological table of the Easter festivals, based upon the principles acknowledged by the
Church of Alexandria. Unfortunately, we now possess only the prologue of his work.


56


T. XTCE. A.D. 325


Upon an invitation from Rome, S. Ambrose also mentioned the period of this same
Easter in 387, in his letter to the bishops of Emilia, and he sides with the Alexandrian
computation. Cyril of Alexandria abridged the paschal table of his uncle Theophilus, and
fixed the time for the ninety-five following Easters — that is, from 436 to 531 after Christ.
Besides this Cyril showed, in a letter to the Pope, what was defective in the Latin calcula-
tion ; and this demonstration was taken up again, some time after, by order of the Emperor,
by Paschasiuus, Bishop of Lilyb;eum and Proterius of Alexandria, in a letter written by
them to Pope Leo I. In consequence of these communications. Pope Leo often gave the
preference to the Alexandrian computation, instead of that of the Church of Rome. At the
same time also was generally established, the opinion so little entertained by the ancient
authorities of the Church — one might even say, so strongly in contradiction to their teach-
ing— that Christ partook of the passover on the 14th Nisan, that he died on the 15th (not
on the 14th, as the ancients considered), that he lay in the grave on the IGth, and rose
again on the 17th. In the letter we have just mentioned, Proterius of Alexandria openly
admitted all these different points.

Some years afterwards, in 457, Victor of Aquitane, by order of the Roman Archdeacon
Hilary, endeavoured to make the Roman and the Alexandrian calculations agree together.
It has been conjectured that subsequently Hilary, when Pope, brought Victor's calculation
into use, in 456 — that is, at the time when the cycle of eighty-four years came to an end.
In the latter cycle the new moons were marked more accurately, and the chief differences
existing between the Latin and Greek calculations disapjieared ; so that the Easter of the
Latins generally coincided with that of Alexandria, or was only a xevy little removed from
it. In cases when the iS' fell on a Saturda_y, Victor did not wish to decide whether Easter
should be celebrated the next day, as the Alexandrians did, or should be postponed for a
week. He indicates both dates in his table, and leaves the Pope to decide what was to be
done in each separate case. Even after Victor's calculations, there still remained great dif-
ferences in the manner of fixing the celebration of Easter ; and it was Dionysius the Less
who first completely overcame them, by giving to the Latins a paschal table having as its
basis the cycle of nineteen years. This cycle perfectly corresponded to that of Alexandria,
and thus established that harmony which had been so long sought in vain. He showed the
advantages of his calculation so strongly, that it was admitted b}- Rome and by the whole of
Italy ; whilst almost the whole of Gaul remained faithful to Victor's canon, and Great Britain
still held the cycle of eighty-four years, a little improved by Sulpicius Sevei-us. When the
Heptarchy was evangelized by the Roman missionaries, the new converts accepted the cal-
culation of Dionysius, whilst the ancient Churches of "Wales held fast their old tradition.
From this arose the well-known British dissensions about the celebration of Easter, which
were transplanted by Columban into Gaul. In 729, the majority of the ancient British
Churches accepted the cycle of nineteen years. It had before been introduced into Spain,
immediately after the conversion of Reccared. Finally, under Charles the Great, the cycle
of nineteen years triumjihed over all opposition ; and thus the whole of Christendom was
united, for the Quartodecimans had gradually disappeared.'


' It is cnrioup that after all the attempts that have been made
to get this matter pettled, the Church is still separated into East
ana West — the latter having accepted the Gregorian Calendar
from which the Eastern Church, still using the Julian Calendar,


differs in beinp twelve days behind. And even in the West
we have succeeded in breaking the spirit of the Nicene decree,
for in 1825 the Christian Easter coincided with the Jewish Pass-
over !


THE CANONS OF THE COUNCILS OF ANCYRA, GANGRA,
NFOCtESAREA, ANTIOCH and LAODICEA, WHICH CAN-
ONS WERE ACCEPTED AND RECEIVED BY THE ECU-
MENICAL SYNODS.


4


59


INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO THE CANONS OF THE PROVINCIAL SYNODS
WHICH IN THIS VOLUME ARE INTERJECTED BETWEEN THE FIRST
AND THE SECOND ECUMENICAL COUNCILS.

The First Canon of the Fourth Ecumenical Council, Chalcedon, reads as follows : " We
have judged it right that the canons of the Holy Fathers made in every synod even until
now, should remain in force." And the Council in Trullo, in its second canon, has enu-
merated these synods in the following words. " We set our seal to all the rest of the canons
which have been established by our holy and blessed fathers, that is to say by the 318 God-
inspired fathers who met at Nice, and by those who met at Ancyra, and by those who met
at Neocaesarea, as well as by those who met at Gangra : in addition to these the canons
adopted by those who met at Antioch in Syria, and by those who met at Laodicea in Phry-
gia ; moreover by the 150 fathers who assembled in this divinely kept and imperial city,
and by the 200 who were gathered in the metropolis of Ephesus, and by the 630 holy and
blessed fathers who met at Chalcedon," etc., etc.

There can be no doubt that this collection of canons was made at a very early date, and
from the fact that the canons of the First Council of Constantinople do not appear, as they
naturally would, immediately after those of Nice, we may not improbably conclude that the
collection was formed before that council assembled. For it will be noticed that Nice,
although not the earliest in date, takes the precedence as being of ecumenical rank. And
this is expressly stated in the caption to the canons of Ancyra according to the reading in the
Paris Edition of Balsamou. " The canons of the holy Fathers who assembled at Ancyra ;
which are indeed older than those made at Nice, but placed after them, on account of the
authority [avdeuriav) of the Ecumenical Synod."

On the arrangement of this code much has been written and Archbishop Ussher has
made some interesting suggestions, but all appear to be attended with more or less difficul-
ties. The reader will find in Bp: Beveridge, in the Prolegomena to his Synodicon a very
full treatment of the point, i the gist of the matter is admirably given in the following brief
note which I take from Hammond. In speaking of this early codex of the Church he says :

(Hammond, Definitions of Faith and Canons of Discipline, pjD. 134 and 135.)

That this collection was made and received by the Chui'ch previous to the Council of
Chalcedon is evident from the manner in which several of the Canons are quoted in that
Council. Thus in the 4th Action, in the matter of Carosus and Dorotheus, who had ac-
knowledged Dioscorus as Bishop, though he had been deposed from his bishopric, " the
holy Synod said, let the holy Canons of the Fathers be read, and inserted in the records ;
and Actius the Archdeacon taking the book read the 83d Canon, If any Bishops, etc. And
again the 84th Canon, concerning those who separate themselves. If any Presbyter," etc.
These Canons are the 4th and 5th of Antioch. Again, in the 11th Action, in the matter of
Bassianus and Stephanus who disputed about the Bishopric of Ephesus, both requested the
Canons to be read, " And the Judges said. Let the Canons be read. And Leontius Bishop
of Magnesia read the 95th Canon, If any Bishop, etc., and again out of the same book the
96th Canon, If any Bishop," etc. These Canons are the 16th and 17th of Antioch. Now if
we add together the different Canons in the Code of the Universal Church in the order in
which they follow in the enumeration of them by the Council of Trullo and in other docu-
ments, we find that the 4th and 5th of Antioch, are the 83d and 84th of the whole Code, and

> Beveridge, Synodicon., torn. I., p. vi. et seqq. (Bev. Works, torn. II., Append, p. xiii. et seqq. [Anglo.-Cath. Lib. J).


60 INTRODUCTORY NOTE


tlie 16th and 17th of Antioch, the 95th and 96th. Nice 20, Ancyra 25, Neoctesarea 14, Gau-
gra 20 ; all which make 79. Next come those of Antioch, the 4th and 5th of which there-
fore will be respectively the 83d and 84th, and the 16th and 17th the 95th and 9Gth.


The fact of the existence of such a code does not prove by any means that it was the
only collection extant at the time nor that it was universally known. In fact we have good
reason, as we shall see in connexion with the Council of Sardica, to believe that in many
codices, probably especially in the West, the canons of that council followed immediately
after those of Nice, and that without any break or note whatever. But we know that the
number of canons attributed to Nice must have been twenty or else the numbering of the
codex read from at Chalcedon would be quite inexplicable. It would naturally suggest
itself to the mind that possibly the divergence in the canonical codes was the result of the
local feelings of East and West with regard to the decrees of Sardica. But this supposition,
plausible as it appears, must be rejected, since at the Quinisext Council, where it is not dis-
puted there was a strong anti-Western bias, the canons of Sardica are expressly enumerated
among those which the fathers receive as of Ecumenical authority. It will be noticed that
the code set forth by the Council in Trullo differs from the code used at Chalcedon by hav-
ing the so-called " Canons of the Apostles " prefixed to it, and by having a large number of
other canons, including those of Sardica, appended, of which more will be said when treating
of that Council.

The order which I have followed may justly be considered as that of the earliest accepted
codex canonum, at least of the East.


i


THE COUNCIL OF ANCYRA

A.D. 314.
Emperors. — Constantine and LiciNros.

Blench us.

Historical Note. TJte Canons loith the Ancient Epitome and Notes.

Excursus to Canon XIX on Digamy.


HISTORICAL NOTE.

Soon after the death of the Emperor Maximin,' a council was held at Ancyra, the capital
of Galatia. Only about a dozen bishops were present, and the lists of subscriptions which
are found appended to the canons are not to be dejiended on, being evidently in their
present form of later authorship ; as has been shewn by the Ballerini. If we may at all trust
the lists, it would seem that nearly every part of Syria and Asia IVIinor Avas represented, and
that therefore the council while small in numbers was of considerable weight. It is not cer-
tain whether Vitalis, (bishop of Antioch,) presided or Marcellus, who was at the time bishop
of Ancyra. The honour is b}' the Libellus Synodicus assigned to the latter.

The disciplinary decrees of this council possess a singular interest as being the first en-
acted after the ceasing of the persecution of the Christians and as providing for the proper
treatment of the lapsed. Recently two papyri have been recovered, containing the official
certificates granted by the Roman government to those who had lapsed and offered sacrifice.
These apostates were obliged to acknowledge in public their adhesion to the national relig-
ion of the empire, and then were provided with a document certifying to this fact to keep
them from further trouble. Dr. Harnack [Prcussische Juhrbiicher) writing of the yielding of
the lapsed says :

"The Church condemned this as lying and denial of the faith, and after the termination of
the persecution, these unhappy people were jiartly excommunicated, partly obliged to sub-
mit to severe discipline. Who would ever supj^ose that the records of their shame would
come down to our time ? — and yet it has actually happened. Two of these papers have
been pi-eserved, contrary to all likelihood, by the sands of Egypt which so carefully keep
what has been entrusted to them. The first was found by Krebs in a heap of papyrus, that
had come to Berlin ; the other was found b}' Wessely in the papyrus collection of Archduke
Rainer. ' I, Diogenes, have constantly sacrificed and made offerings, and have eaten in your
presence the sacrificial meat, and I ])etition you to give me a certificate.' Who to-day, with-
out deep emotion, can read this paper and measure the trouble and terror of heart under
which the Christians of that day collapsed ? "


' Not " Maximilian," as in the English translation of Ilefele's I iniian died iu 310, Galerius in 311, Maxentius in 312,
Ilislory of the Councils, Vol.1,, p. 199 (revised edition). Max- | tiau in 313.


and Diocle-


•


I


63


THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL OF ANCYRA.


{Found in Lahhe and Cossart's Concilia, and all Collections, in the Greek text together
with several Latin versions of different dates. Also in Justellus and Beveridge. There
will also be found annotations by Routli, and. a reprint of the notes of Christopher Justellus
and of Bp. Beveridge in Vol. IV. of the Keliquiaa Sacrae, ed. altera, 1846.)

CANON I.

With regard to those presbyters who have offered sacrifices and afterwards returned
to the conflict, not with hypocrisy, but in sincerity, it has seemed good that they may
retain the honour of their chair ; provided they had not used management, arrangement,
or persuasion, so as to appear to be subjected to the torture, when it was applied only
in seeming and pretence. Nevertheless it is not lawful for them to make the oblation,
nor to preach, nor in short to perform any act of sacerdotal function.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome to Canons I. and II.

Presbyters and deacons who offered sacrifice
and afterwards renewed the contest for the truth
shall have only their seat and honour, but shall
not perform any of the holy functions.

ZONARAS.

Of those that yielded to the tyrants in the
persecution, and offered sacrifice, some, after
having been subjected to torture, being un-
able to withstand to the end its force and in-
tensity, were conquered, and denied the faith ;
some, through effeminacy, before they expe-
rienced any suffering, gave way, and lest they
should seem to sacrifice voluntarily they per-
suaded the executioners, either by bribes or
entreaties, to manifest perhaps a greater de-
gree of severity against them, and seemingly
to apply the torture to them, in order that
sacrificing under these circumstances they
might seem to have denied Christ, conquered
by force, and not through effeminacy.


Hefele.


It was quite justifiable, and in accordance
with the ancient and severe discipline of the
Church, when this Synod no longer allowed
priests, even when sincerely penitent, to dis-
charge priestly functions. It was for this
same reason that the two Spanish bishops.
Martial and Basilides, were deposed, and that
the judgment given against them was con-
firmed in 254 by an African synod held under
St. Cyprian.

The reader will notice how clearly the func-
tions of a presbyter are set forth in this canon
as they were understood at that time, they
were "to offer" (irpoucfiipeiv), "to j^reach "
(ofxiXetv), and " to perform any act of sacer-
dotal function " (^XetTovpyelv tl twv UpaTiKujv Aet-
Tovpycwi').

This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici.
Decretum, Pars I., Dist. 1., c. xxxii.


CANON II.

It is likewise decreed that deacons who have sacrificed and afterwards resumed the
conflict, shall enjoy their other honours, but shall abstain from every sacred ministry,
neither bringing forth the bread and the cup, nor making proclamations. Nevertheless,
if any of the bishops shall observe in them distress of mind and meek humiliation, it
shall be lawful to the bishops to grant more indulgence, or to take away [what has been
granted] .


For Ancient Epitome see above under
Canon I.

In this canon the work and ofiice of a dea-
con as then understood is set forth, viz.: "to


bring forth " (whatever that may mean) " bread
or wine " {aprov rj TTOTrjpLOV ava(fiip€Lv) and " to
act the herald " {Kr^pvaa-eiv). There is con-
siderable difference of opinion as to the mean-
ing of the first of these expressions. It was


64


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


always the duty of the deacon to serve the
priest, especially when he ministered the Holy
Communion, but this phrase may refer to one
of two such ministrations, either to bi'inging
the bread and wine to the jjriest at the offer-
tory, and this is the view of Van Espen, or
to the distribution of tlie Holy Sacrament to
the people. It has been urged that the dea-
con had ceased to administer the species of
bread before the time of this council, but
Hefele shews that the custom had not en-
tirely died out.

If I may be allowed to offer a suggestion,


the use of the disjunctive t; seems rather to
point to the administration of the sacrament
than to the bringing of the oblations at the
offertory.

The other diaconal function " to act the
herald " refers to the reading of the Holy
Gospel, and to the numerous proclamations
made by the deacons at mass both according
to the Greek and Latin Rite.

This canon is in the Corpus Juris Cannnici
united with the foregoing. Decrctum.y Pars I.,
Dist. 1., c. xxxii.


CANON III.

Those who have fled and been apprehended, or have been betrayed by their servants ;
or those who have been otherwise despoiled of their goods, or have endured tortures, or
have been imprisoned and abused, declaring themselves to be Christians ; or who have
been forced to receive something which their persecutors violently thrust into their
liands, or meat [offered to idols], continually professing that they were Christians; and
who, by their whole apparel, and demeanour, and humility of life, always give evidence
of grief at what has happened ; these persons, inasmuch as they are free from sin, are
not to be repelled from the communion ; and if, through an extreme strictness or
ignorance of some things, they have been repelled, let them forthwith be re-admitted.
This shall hold good alike of clergy and laity. It has also been considered whether
laymen who have fallen under the same compulsion may be admitted to orders, and we
have decreed that, since they have in no respect been guilty, they may be ordained ;
provided their past course of life be found to have been upright.

NOTES.


AxciENT Epitome of Canon III.

Those ivho have been subjected to torments
and have suffered violence, and have eaten food
offered to idols after being tyrannized over, shall
not be deprived of communion. And laymen
who have endured the same sufferings, since
they have in no ivay transgressed, if they wish
to t)e ordained, they may be, if otherwise they be
blameless.

In the translation the word " abused " is
given as the equivalent of 7r€pi(r;^to-.9£i'Tas,
which Zonaras translated, "if their clothes
have been torn from their bodies,"' and this is
quite accurate if the reading is correct, but


Routh has found in the Bodleian several MSS.
which had 7reptcr;(e^£VTa?, Hefele adopts this
reading and translates " declaring themselves
to be Christians but who have subsequently
been vanquished, Avhether their oj^pressors
have by force put incense into their hands or
have compelled them, etc." Hannuond trans-
lates "and have been harassed by their per-
secutors forcibly putting something into their
hands or who have been comi)elled, etc." The
phrase is obscure at best with either reading.

This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici
united to the two previous canons, Decretum,
Pars I., Dist. 1., c. xxxii.


CANON IV.

Concerning those who have been forced to sacrifice, and who, in addition, have par-
taken of feasts in honour of the idols ; as many as wore haled away, but afterwards
Avent up with a cheerful countenance, and wore their costliest apparel, and jiartook with
indifference of the feast provided ; it is decreed tliat all siieh be hearers for one year,
and prostrators for three years, and that they communicate in prayers only for twoyears,
and then return to full communion.


ANCYKA. A.D. 314.


65


NOTES
Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.

Such as have been led away and have with joy
gone up and eaten are to be in subjection for six
years.


denote the Holy Communion.
Thesaurus ad h. v.


Vide Suicer,


Bingham.
[The Holy Communion was so called -as


In the Greek the word for " full commun- being] that sacred mystery which unites us to
ion" is TO Te'Actov ("the perfection"), an ex- i Christ, and gives us the most consummate per-
pression frequently used by early writers to ] fection that we are capable of in this world.


CANON V.

As many, however, as went up in mourning attire and sat down and ate, weeping
throughout the whole entertainment, if they have fultilled the three years as prostrators,
let them be received without oblation ; and if they did not eat, let them be prostrators
two years, and in the third year let them communicate without oblation, so that in the
fourth year they may be received into full communion. But the bishops have the right,
after considering the character of their conversion, either to deal with them more leni-
ently, or to extend the time. But, first of all, let their life before and since be thor-
oughly examined, and let the indulgence be determined accordingly.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

Those who have gone up in mourning weeds,
and have eaten with tears, shall be prostrators
for three years ; but if they have not eaten, then
for two years. And according to their J'ormcr
and after life, whether good or evil, they shall
find the bishop gentle or severe.

Herbst and Routh have been followed by
many in svipposing that " oblation " (TTpocr4topa)
in this canon refers to the sacrament of the
altar. But this seems to be a mistake, as the
word while often used to denote the whole
act of the celebration of the Holy Eucharist,


is not used to mean the receiving alone of that
sacrament.

Suicer {Tliesaurus s. v. 7rpu(T<j>opd) translates
" They may take j)art in divine worship, but
not actively," that is, " they may not mingle
their offerings with those of the faithful."

Hefele.

But as those who cannot present their offer-
ings during the sacrifice are excluded from
the communion, the complete meaning of the
canon is : '• They may be pz-esent at divine
service, but may neither offer nor communi-
cate with the faithful."


CANON VI.

Concerning those w^ho have yielded merely upon threat of penalties and of the con-
fiscation of their goods, or of banishment, and have sacrificed, and who till this present
time have not repented nor been converted, but who now, at the time of this synod, have
approached witli a purpose of conversion, it is decreed that they be received as hearers
till the Great Day, and that after the Great Day the}^ be prostrators for three years,
and for two years more communicate without oblation, and then come to full commun-
ion, so as to complete the period of six full years. And if any have been admitted to
penance before this synod, let the beginning of the six years be reckoned to them from
that time. Nevertheless, if there should be any danger or prospect of death whether
from disease or any other cause, let them be received, but under limitation.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.
A man who yielded to threats aloyie, and has
sacrificed, and then rejiented let him for five
years be a prostrator.


NOTES.

ZONARAS.

But should any of those debarred from
communion as penitents be seized with illness
or in any other way be brought nigh to


66


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


death, they may be received to communion ;
but in accordance with this law or distinc-
tion, that if they escape death and recover
their health, they sliall be alto<>:ether deprived
again of communion until they have finished
their six years penance.

Hammond.
" The Great Day," that is, Easter Day. The


great reverence which the Primitive Church
from the earliest ages felt for the holy festi-
val of Easter is manifested by the application
of the eijithet Great, to everything connected
with it. The preceding Friday, i.e.. Good
Friday, was called the Great Preparation, the
Saturday, the Great Sabbath, and the whole
week, the Great Week.


CANON VII.

Concerning those who have partaken at a lieatheu feast in a place appointed for
heathens, but avIio have brouglit and eaten their own meats, it is decreed tliat they be
received after they have been prostrators two years ; but whether with oblation, every
bishop must determine after ho has made examination into the rest of their life.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.
If amjonc havhuj his own food, shall eat it
with heathen at their feasts, let him be a j^ros-
trator for two years.

Hefele.

Several Christians tried with worldly pru-
dence, to take a middle course. On the one
hand, hoping to escape persecution, they were
present at the feasts of the heathen sacrifices,
which were held in the buildings adjoining
the temples ; and on the other, in order to
appease their consciences, they took their own
food, and touched nothing that had been of-
fered to the gods. These Christians forgot
that St. Paul had ordered that meats sacrificed
to the gods should be avoided, not because


they were tainted in themselves, as the idols
were nothing, but from another, and in fact a
twofold reason : 1st, Because, in partaking
of them, some had still the idols in their
hearts, that is to say, were still attached to
the worship of idols, and thereby sinned ; and
2dly, Because others scandalized their breth-
ren, and sinned in that way. To these two
reasons a thii'd may be added, namely, the
hypocrisy and the duplicity of those Chris-
tians who wished to appear heathens, and
nevertheless to remain Christians. The Synod
punished them with two years of penance in
the third degree, and gave to each bishop the
right, at the expiration of this time, either to
admit them to communion, or to make them
remain some time longer in the fourth degi-ee.


CANON VIII.

Let those wh(^ have twice or thrice sacrificed under compiilsion, be prostrators four
years, and communicate without oblation two years, and the seventh year they shall be
received to full communion,

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VITI.

Whoever haa sacrificed a second or third ^
time, but has been led thereto by force, shall be a
prostrator for seven years. i

Van Espen. I

This canon shews how in the Church it
was a received princii^le that greater pen-


ances ought to be imposed for the frequent
commission of the same crime, and conse-
quently it was then believed that the number
of times the sin had been committed should
be expressed in confession, that the penance
might correspond to the sin. greater or less
as the case may be, and the time of probation
be accordingly protracted or remitted.


CANON IX.

As many as have not merely apostatized, but have risen against their brethren and
forced them [to apostatize], and have been giiilty of their being forced, let these for
three years take the place of hearers, and for another term of six years that of jirostra-


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


(37


tors, and for another year let them communicate without oblation, in order that, when
they have fulfilled the space of ten years, they may partake of the communion ; but
during this time the rest of their life must also be enquired into.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

M'Tioerer has not only sacrificed vohinfarib/
but also has forced another to sacrifice, shall
be a jyrostrator for ten years.

[It will be noticed that this epitome does
not agree with the canon, although Aristenus
does not note the discrepaucy.]

Van Espen.
From this canon we are taught that the


circumstances of the sin that has been com-
mitted are to be taken into account in assign-
ing the penance.

Aristenus.

When the ten years are past, he is worthy
of perfection, and fit to receive the divine
sacraments. Unless perchance an examina-
tion of the rest of his life demands his exclu-
sion from the divine communion.


CANON X.

They who have been made deacons, declaring when they were ordained that they
must marry, because they were not able to abide so, and who afterwards have married,
shall continue in their ministry, because it was conceded to them by the bishop. But
if any were silent on this matter, undertaking at their ordination to abide as they were,
and afterwards proceeded to marriage, these shall cease from the diaconate.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


Whoso is to be ordained deacon, if he has
before announced to the bishoj) that he cannot
persevere un7narried,lct him marry and let him
be a deacon ; but if he shall have kejyt silence,
should he take a ivife afterwards let him be cast
out.

Van Espen.

The case proposed to the synod and de-
cided in this canon was as follows : When the
bishop was willing to ordain two to the
diaconate, one of them declared that he did
not intend to bind himself to preserving per-
petual continence, but intended to get mar-
ried, because he had not the power to remain
continent. The other said nothing. The
bishop laid his hands on each and conferred
the diaconate.

After the ordination it fell out that both
got married, the question propounded is.
What must be done in each case? The
synod ruled that he who had made protesta-
tion at his ordination should remain in
his ministry, " because of the license of the
bishop," that is that he might contract matri-
mony after the reception of the diaconate.
With regard to him who kept silence the


synod declares that he should cease from his
ministry.

The resolution of the synod to the first
question shews that there was a general law
which bound the deacons to continence ; but
this synod judged it meet that the bishops
for just cause might dispense with this law,
and this license or dispensation was deemed
to have been given by the bishop if he
ordained him after his protestation at the
time of his ordination that he intended to be
married, because he could not remain as he
was ; giving by the act of ordination his tacit
approbation. Moreover from this decision it
is also evident that not only was the or-
dained deacon allowed to enter but also to
use matrimony after his ordination.
Moreover the deacon who after this pro-
testation entered and used matrimonv, not
only remained a deacon, but continued in the
exercise of his ministry.

On the whole subject of Clerical Celibacy
in the Early Church see the Excursus de-
voted to that matter.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici. Decretum Pars I., Dist. xxviii, c.
viii.


G8


ANCYEA. A.D. 314


CANON XI.

It is decreed that virgins who have been betrothed, and who have afterwards been
carried olf by others, shall be restored to those to whom they had formerly been be-
trothed, even thongh they may have suffered violence from the ravisher.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.


If a young girl icho is engaged be stolen awai/
by force by another man, let her be restored to
the former.

Hefele.

This canon treats only of betrothed women
(of the sponsalia de futuro) not of those who
are married (of the spo)isali(( de preesenti).
In the case of the latter there could be no
doubt as to the duty of restitution. The man


who was betrothed was, moreover, at liberty
to receive his affianced bride who had been
carried off or not.

Johnson.
Here Balsamon puts in a very proper cave,
viz. : If he to whom she was esjDOused demand
her to be his wife.

Compare St. Basil's twenty-second canon
in his letter to Amphilochius, where it is so
ruled.


CANON XIL

It is decreed that they who have offered sacrifice before their baptism, and were
afterwards baptized, may be promoted to orders, inasmuch as they have been cleansed.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.

^^^wso has sacrificed before his baptism, after
it shall be gidltless.

Hefele.

This canon does not speak generally of all
those who sacrificed before baptism ; for if a
heathen sacrificed before having embraced
Christianity, he certainly could not be re-


proached for it after his admission. It was
quite a different case with a catechumen, Avho
had already declared for Christiauitv, but
who, during the persecution had lost courage,
and sacrificed. In this case it might be asked
whether he could still be admitted to the
jiriesthood. The Council decided that a baj)-
tized catechumen could afterwards be pi'O-
moted to holy orders.


CANON XIIL

It is not lawful for Chorepiscopi to ordain presbyters or deacons, and most assuredly
not presbyters of a city, without the commission of the bishop given in writing, in another
parish.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

A chorepiscopus is not to ordain without the
consent of the bishop.

Hefele.
If the first part of the thirteenth canon is
easy to understand, the second, on the con-
trary, presents a great difficulty ; for a priest
of a town could not in any case have the
power of consecrating priests and deacons,
least of all in a strange diocese. Many of the
most learned men have, for this reason, sup-


posed that the Greek text of the second half
of the canon, as we have reatl it, is incorrect
or defective. It wants, say they, tj-ouIv tl, or
aliqual agere, i.e., to coni/jlrtra rcligiousfanction.
To confirm this supposition, they have ap-
pealed to several ancient versions, especially
to that of Isidore : sed nee presbyteris civifatis
sine episcopi prceccpto amj)lius aliquid imiierare,
vel sine auctoritate literarum ejus in iinaquaque
(some read iv Uaarr} instead of Iv iripa) paro-
rhia aliquid agere. The ancient Koiuan MS.
of the canons, Codex Canonum, has the same


ANCYEA. A.D. 314


69


reading-, only that it has j^rovincia instead of
pnrochia. Fulgentius Ferrandus, deacon of
Carthage, who long ago made a collection of
canons, translates in the same way in his Brc-
viatio Canonum: Ut j^rcsbyteri civitatis sine
jusiiu cpiscopi nihil juheant, nee in unaquaque
paroehid ((liquid agant. Van Espen has ex-
plained this canon in the same way,

Routh has given another interpretation.
He maintained that there was not a word
missing in this canon, but that at the com-
mencement one ought to read, according' to
several MSS. ;!(wpe7rt(rK07rots in the dative, and
further down dAAu /a^v /xTySe instead of dAAa
/xrySe then 7rp{a-/3vT€pov<; (in the accusative) -n-oXews
and finally eKaaTrj instead of irepa, and that we


must therefore translate, " Chorepii<copi are
not permitted to consecrate priests and dea-
cons (for the country) still less (dAAa fj.i^v m^^)
can they consecrate priests for the town with-
out the consent of the bishop of the place."
The Greek text, thus modified according to
some MSS., especially those in the Bodleian
Library, certainly gives a good meaning. Still
dA.A.a fxrjv fxrjSk does not mean, hut ndll less: it
means, but eertainly not, which makes a con-
siderable difference.

Besides this, it can very seldom have hap-
pened that the chorepiscopi ordained presby-
ters or deacons for a town ; and if so, they
were already forbidden, at least imj)licitly,
in the first part of the canon.


CANON XIV.


It is decreed that among the clergy, presbyters and deacons who abstain from flesh
shall taste of it, and afterwards, if they shall so please, may abstain. But if they dis-
dain it, and will not even eat herbs served with flesh, but disobey the canon, let them
be removed from their order.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.


A priest who is an abstainer from flesh, let
him merely taste it and so let him abstain. But
if he will not taste even the vegetables cooked
with the meat let him be deposed (TreTrdva^w).


There is a serious dispute about the read-
ing of the Greek text. I have followed Routh,
who, relying on three MSS. the Collcctio of
John of Antioch and the Latin versions, reads
€1 8e jSSeXvcrcroLVTO instead of the d 8e (SovXoLVTO


of the ordinary text, which as Bp. Beveridge
had pointed out before has no meaning unless
a fj-r] be introduced.

Zonaras points out that the canon chiefly
refers to the Love feasts.


I cannot agree with Hefele in his transla-


tion of the last clause. He makes the refer-
ence to "this present canon," I think it is
clearly to the 53 (52) of the so-called Canons
of the Apostles, tw kuvovl " the well-known
canon."


CANON XV.

CoNCEKNiNG things belonging to the church, which presbyters may have sold when
there was no bishop, it is decreed that the Church property shall be reclaimed ; and it
shall be in the discretion of the bishop whether it is better to receive the purchase price,
or not ; for oftentimes the revenue of the things sold might yield them the greater value.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.


Sales of Church goods made by presbyters are
null, and the matter shall rest with the bishop.

Hefele.

If the purchaser of ecclesiastical properties
has realized more by the temporary revenue
of such properties than the price of the pur-
chase, the Synod thinks there is no occasion
to restore him this price, as he has already


received a sufficient indemnity from the
revenue, and as, accoi'ding to the rules then
ill force, interest drawn from the purchase
money was not permitted. Besides, the jDur-
chaser had done wrong in buying ecclesiasti-
cal property' during the vacancy of a see {sede
vacante). Beveridge and Routh have shown
that in the text dvaKokeiaBai and Trpoaohov
must be read.'


' ai'<ucaAei<7dai< for dcajSoAcicrdai and irpocoSov for fiaoSov,


7u


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


CANON XVI.

Let those who have K^een or Mho are guilty of bestial lusts, if they have sinned
while under twenty years of age, be prostrators fifteen years, and afterwards communi-
cate in prayers ; then, having passed five years in this commnnion, let them have a
share in the oblation. But let their life as prostrators be examined, and so let them
receive indulgence ; and if any have been insatiable in their crimes, then let their time
of prostration be prolonged. And if any who have passed this age and had wives, have
fallen into this sin, let tliem be prostrators twenty-five years, and then communicate in
prayers ; and, after they have been five years in the communion of prayers, let them
share the oblation. And if any married men of more than fifty years of age have so
sinned, let them be admitted to communion only at the point of death.


NOTES.


Antiext Epitome of C.\non XVI.
MTioever shall have commerce xoith animals
devoid of reason being younger than twenty,
shall be a prostrator for fifteen years If he is
over that age and has a wife when he falls into
this iciclccdness he shall be a prostrator for
twenty five years. But the married man wlio
shall do so when over fifty years of age, shall be
a prostrator to his life's end.

It is interesting to compare with this, as
Van Espen does, the canon of the Church of


England set forth in the tenth century under
King Edgar, where. Part II., canon xvi., we
read —

'• If any one twenty years of age shall de-
file himself with a beast, or shall commit
sodomy let him fast fifteen years ; and if he
have a wife and be forty years of age, and
shall do such a deed let him abstain now and
fast all the rest of his life, neither shall he
presume until he is dying to receive the Lord's
body. Youths and fools who shall do any
such thing shall be soundly trounced."


CANON XVII.

Defilers of themselves ^dth beasts, being also leprous, who have infected others
[with the leprosy of this crime], the holy Synod commands to pray among the hie-
mantes.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.


A leper who goes in to a beast or even to
leprous women, shall pray with the hybernantes.

AeTrpoKrai'Tas is from A.€7rpdw not from XiTTpduy

and therefore cannot mean " have been
lepers," but " have made others rough and
scabby." It is only in the passive and in
Alexandrian Greek that it lias the mean-
ing to become leprous. Vtde Liddell and
Scott.

There seems but little (loul)t tliat the woi-d
is to be understood spiritually as suggestf <1
above.

The last word ( f the canon is also a source
of confusion. Botli Beveridge and Routh
understand by the x^ifxal^ufi^voi those possessed
with devils. Siiicer however (Thi'saunis)
thinks that the penitents of the lowest degree
are intended, who had no right to enter the


[ church, but were exposed in the open porch

[ to the inclemencies (x^Lfxioi) of the weather.

But, after all it matters little, as the possessed

also were forced to remain in the same place,

and shared the same name.

Besides the grammatical reason for the
meaning of AcTrpwo-aiTus given above there is
another argument of Hefele's, as follows :

j Hefele.

It is clear that X^Trpwo-ai/Tus cannot possibly
mean " tiiose who have been lei)ers " ; for
thex-e is no reason to be seen A\hy those who
were cured of that malady should have to re-

j main outside the church among the flentes.
Secondly, it is clear that the words AfTrpou?
oi'Tas, etc. are added to give force to the ex-

I pression dA.oycvo-a/i,€roi. The preceding canon
had decreed diiTerent penalties for different
kinds of dAoyeuo-a/xtvoi. But that pronounced
by canon xvii. being much severer than the


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


71


preceding ones, the aXoyeva-dfifvoi of this
canon must be greater sinners than those of
the fox'mer one. This greater guilt cannot
consist in the fact of a literal leprosy ; for
this malady was not a consequence of besti-
ality. But their sin was evidently greater


when they tempted others to commit it. It
is therefore Xeirpa in the figurative sense that
we are to understand, and our canon thus
means ; " Those who were spiritually leprous
through this sin, and tempting others to
commit it made them leprous."


CANON XYIII.

If any who have been constituted bishops, but have not been received by the parish
to which they were designated, shall invade other parishes and wrong the constituted
[bishops] there, stirring up seditions against them, let such persons be suspended from
office and communion. But if they are willing to accept a seat among the presbyterate,
where they formerly were presbyters, let them not be deprived of that honour. But if
they shall act seditiously against the bishops established there, the honour of the pres-
byterate also shall be taken from them and themselves expelled.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.


If a bishop ivho has been duly constituted, is
not received by the Church to which he ivas
elected, but gives trouble to other bishops, let
him be excommunicated.

If he ivishes to be numbered among the pres-
byters, let him be so numbered. But if he shall
be at outs with the bishops duly constituted


there, let him be deprived of the honour of being
even a presbyter.

The word I have translated " suspended
fi'om office and communion " is a.(f>opL^€a-Sai.
Suicer in his Thesaurus shews that this word
does not mean only, as some have supposed,
a deprivation of office and dignity (e.g.. Van
Espen), but also an exclusion from the com-
munion of the Church.


CANON XIX.

If any persons who profess virginity shall disregard their profession, let them fulfil
the term of digamists. And, moreover, we prohibit women who are virgins from living
with men as sisters.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.

Whoever has professed virginity and after-
tvards annuls it, let him be cut off for four
years. And virgins shall not go^ to any as
to brothers.

Hammond.

According to some of the ancient canons
digamists were to be suspended from com-
munion for one or two years, though Beve-
ridge and others doubt whether the rule was
not meant to apply to such marriages only as
were contracted before a former one was dis-
solved. Bingham thinks that it was intended
to discountenance marrying after an unlawful
divorce. {Ant, Bk. xv, c. iv., § 18.)^


' Arietenus understands this to mean to " live with," using the

verb <TVvava.aTpii^^tT9ai.

' This view of Bingham's would seem to be untenable, since


Hefele.

The first part of this canon regards all
young j)ersous — men as well as women — who
have taken a vow of virginity, and who, hav-
ing thus, so to speak, betrothed themselves
to God are guilt}- of a quasi digamy in violat-
ing that promise. They must therefore incur
the punishment of digamy (successiva) which,
according to St. Basil the Great, consisted of
one year's seclusion.

This canon is found in Gratian's Decretum
(P. II., Causa xxvii., Q. i., c. xxiv.) as follows :
"As many as have professed virginity and
have broken their vow^ and contemned their
profession shall be treated as digamists, that
is as those who have contracted a second mar-
riage. "

the penance would have been for adultery not for digamy bad
the former marriage still been in force.


72 ANCYEA. A.D. 314


EXCURSUS ON SECOND MARRIAGES, CALLED DIGAMY.

To distinguish coiitemptn-aneous from successive bigamy I shall use throughout this vol-
ume the word " digamy " to denote the latter, and shall thus avoid much confusion which
otherwise is unavoidable.

The whole subject of second, and even of third and fourth marriages has a great interest
for the student of early ecclesiastical legislation, and I shall therefore treat the matter here
(as I shall hope) sufficiently and refer the reader for its fuller treatment to books more espe-
cially upon the subject.

The general position of the Church seems to have been to discourage all second mar-
riages, and to point to a single matrimonial connexion as the more excellent way. But at
the same time the principle that the marriage obligation is severed by death was universally
recognised, and however much such fresh marriages may have been disapproved of, such
disapproval did not rest upon any supposed adulterous character in the new connexion. I
cite a portion of an admirable article upon the subject by an English barrister of Lincoln's
Inn.

(J. M. Ludlow, in Smith and Cheetham, Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, sub voce
Digamy. )

Although among the earlier Romans ' there was one form of marriage which was indis-
soluble, viz., that by confarreatio, still generally a second marriage either after death or
divorce was by no means viewed with disfavour. . . . Meanwhile an intensifying spirit of
asceticism was leading many in the Church to a condemnation of second mai'riage in all
cases. Minucius Felix {Octavius, c. 31, § 5) only professes on behalf of the Christians a
preference for monogamy. Clement of Alexandria (a.d. 150-220) seems to confine the term
marriage to the first lawful union {Slromala, Bk. ii.). ... It would seem, however, that
when these views were carried to the extent of absolute prohibition of second marriages
generally by several heretical sects, the Montanists (see Augustine, De Hceresibus, c. xxvi.),
the Cathari (/6., c. xxxviii.), and a portion at least of the Novatianists (see Cotel., Pair. ApoL,
vol. i., p. 91, n. 16) the Church saw the necessity of not fixing such a yoke on the necks of
the laity. The forbiddance of second marriage, or its assimilation to foraication, was treated
as one of the marks of heresy (Augustin. u. s. ; and see also his De Bono Vid., c. vi.). The
sentiment of Augustine (in the last referred to passage) may be taken to express the
Church's judgment at the close of the fourth century : " Second marriages are not to be
condemned, but had in less honour," and see also Epiphanius, in his Exposition of the Catho-
lic Faith.

To these remarks of Mi". Ludlow's, I may add that St. Ambrose had written {De Viduis, c.
xi.), " We do not prohibit second marriages, but we do not approve marriages frequently
reiterated." St. Jerome had spoken still more strongly (Ep. Ixvii., Apof. pn-o libris adv.
Jorin.), "I do not condemn digamists, or even trigamists or, if such a tiling can be said,
octagamists." It does not seem tliat the penance which was imposed in the East upon those
entering into second nuptials was imposed in the West. The Corpus Juris Canonici contains
two decretals, one of Alexander III. and another of Urban III., forbidding priests to give the
nuptial benediction in cases of reiterated marriage. In the East at second marriages the

» The reader may recall the words of Dido : Die meos. prinin?qni ine sibi junxit, amores"

Abstulit ; ille habeat secum servetque sepalcro.


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


73


benediction of the crown is omitted and " propitiatory prayers " are to be said. Mr. Lud-
low points out that iu the " Sanctions and Decrees," falsely attributed to the Council of
Nice and found in Mausi (vol. ii., col. 1029) it is expressly stated that widowers and widows
may marry, but that " the blessing of the crowns is not to be imparted to them, for this is
only once given, at first marriages, and is not to be repeated. . . . But if one of them
be not a widower or widow, let such one alone receive the benediction with^the paranymjihs,
those whom he will."


CANON XX.

If the wife of anyone has committed adultery or if any man commit adultery it seems
fit that lie shall be restored to full communion after seven years passed in the jsrescribed
degrees [of penance].


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.


All adulteress and an adulterer are to be cut
o^ for seven years.

Hefele.

The simplest explanation of this canon is
"that the man or woman who has violated
the marriage bond shall undergo a seven
years' penance"; but many reject this ex-
planation, because the text says avrov tvx^iv
and consequently can refer only to the hus-
band. Fleury and Eouth think the canon
speaks, as does the seventieth of Elvira, of a
woman who has broken the marriage tie with
the knowledge and consent of her husband.
The husband would therefore in this case be
punished for this permission, just as if he
had himself committed adultery. Van Espen
has given another exjjlauation : " That he
who marries a woman already divorced for
adultery is as criminal as if he had himself


committed adultery." But this explanation
appears to us more forced than that already
given ; and we think that the Greek com-
mentators Balsamon and Zonaras were right
in giving the exjDlanation we have offered
first as the most natural. They think that
the Synod punished every adulterer, whether
man or woman, by a seven years' penance.
There is no reason for making a mistake
because only the word avrov occurs in the
passage in which the penalty is fixed ; for
auToi' here means the guiltj' party, and applies
equally to the woman and the man : besides,
in the preceding canon the masculine oaoi
iTrayyeXXofjLivot includes young men and j'oung
women also. It is probable that the Trullan
Synod of 692, in forming its eighty-seventh
canon, had in view the twentieth of Ancyra.
The sixty-ninth canon of Elvira condemned to
a lighter punishment — only five years of pen-
ance— him who had been only once guilty of
adultery.


CANON XXI.

Concerning women who commit fornication, and destroy that which they have con-
ceived, or who are employed in making drugs for abortion, a former decree excluded
them until the hour of death, and to this some have assented. Nevertheless, being
desirous to use somewhat greater lenity, we have ordained that they fulfil ten years [of
penance], according to the prescribed degrees.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.

Harlots taking injnrions medicines are to he
subjected to penance for ten years.

The phrase " and to this some have as-
sented " is the translation of Hervetus, Van


suggests


to


Espen, and Hefele. Dr. Routh
understand dt and translate, " the same pun-
ishment will be inflicted on those who assist
in causing miscarriages," but this seems
rather an unnatural and strained rendering
of the Greek.


74


ANCYRA. A.D. 314


CANON XXII.

Concerning wilful murderers let them remain prostrators ; but at the end of life let
them be indulged with full communion.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.


A voluntary homicide may at the last attain
perfection}

Van Espen.

It is noteworthy liow singularly appositely
[Constantiuc] Hariuenopulus the Scholiast in
the Eiiitom. Canonian., Sect, v., tit. 3, tells the
following story : " In the time of the Pati-iarch
Luke, a certain bishop gave absolution in
Avritingf to a soldier who had committed vol-
untary homicide, after a very short time of


penace ; and afterwards when he was accused
before the synod of having done so, he de-
fended himself by citing the canon which
gives bishops the power of remitting or in-
creasing the length of their penance to peni-
tents. But he was told in answer that this
was granted indeed to pontiffs but not that
they should use it without examination, and
with too great lenity. Wherefore the synod
subjected the soldier to the canonical penance
and the bishoj:) it mulcted for a certain time,
bidding him cease from the exercise of his
ministry."


CANON XXIII.

Concerning involuntary homicides, a former decree directs that they be received to
full communion after seven years [of penance], according to the prescribed degrees;
but this second one, that they fulfil a term of five years.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII. and fixes the time of penance at twenty years

An involuntary homicide shall be subjected for voluntary and ten years for involuntary

to penance for five years. homicides. It is evident that the penance

Van Espen.


homicides.

given for this crime varied in different
churches, although it is clear from the great
Of voluntary and involuntary homicides St. length of the penance, how enormous the

Basil treats at length in his Canonical Epistle crime was considered, no light or short pen-

ad Amphilochium, can. viii., Ivi. and Ivii., ance being sufficient.


CANON XXIV.

They who practice divination, and follow the customs of the heathen, or who take
men to their houses for the invention of sorceries, or for lustrations, fall under the canon
of five years' [penance], according to the prescribed degrees; that is, three years as
prostrators, and two of pra3'er without oblation.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.

Whoso list's ijalici))fifi(iii and irJinso introduces
anyone info his house for tlic sake of making a
poison or a lustration let him be subject to pen-
ance for five years.

I read iSvuiv for xpovov and accordingly
translate " of the heathen."


Van Espen.


' That is, receive the Sacraments.


It is greatly to be desired that bishops and
pastors to-day would take example from the
fathers of Anc^'ra and devote their attention
strenuously to eliminate superstition from
the people, and would expound with ani-
mation to the people the enormity of this
crime.


ANCYKA. A.D. 314


75


CANON XXV.

One who had betrothed a maiden, corrupted her sister, so that she conceived. After
that he married his betrothed, but she Avho had been corrupted hanged herself. The
parties to this affair were ordered to be received among the co-standers after ten years
[of penance] according to the prescribed degrees.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome to Canon XXV.


A certain body after being engaged to marry
a young girl, violates her sister and then fakes
her to loife. The first is suffocated. All ivho
were cognizant of the affair are to be subject to
penance for ten years.

I have followed the usual translation
"hanged herself," which is the ordinary dic-
tionary-meaning of airdyxw, but Hefele says


that it signifies any and every variety of
suicides.

Balsamon.

In this case we have many nefarious crimes
committed, fornication, unlawful marriage
[i.e. with the sister of one's mistress] and
murder. In that case [mentioned by St.
Basil in Canon Ixxviij . where only seven years
penance is enjoined] there is only a nefarious
marriage [i.e. with a wife's sister].


THE COUNCIL OF NEOC^SAREA

A.D. 315 (circa).
(Hefele thinks somewhat later, but before 325.)

Elenclms.
Historical Note.
The Canons ivith the Ancient Epitome and Notes»


HISTORICAL NOTE.

(Zonarfis and I3alsainon prefix to the canons this note.)

The Synod gathered together at Xeocsesarea, which is a city of Pontus, is next in order
after that of Ancyra, and earlier in date than the rest, even than the First Ecumenical Synod
at Nice. In this synod the Holy Fathers gathered together, among whom was the holy
Martyr Basil, bishop of Amasea, adopted canons for the establishing of ecclesiastical order
as follow —


79


THE CANONS OF THE HOLY AND BLESSED FATHEKS WHO ASSEM-
BLED AT NEOC.ESAREA, WHICH ARE INDEED LATER IN DATE
THAN THOSE MADE AT ANCYRA, BUT MORE ANCIENT THAN THE
NICENE: HOWEVER, THE SYNOD OF NICE HAS BEEN PLACED
BEFORE THEM ON ACCOUNT OF ITS PECULIAR DIGNITY.'

(Annotations by Routh, and reprint of the Notes of CLristoplier Justellus and of Bp.
Beveridge will be found in Vol. iv. of the Reliquice Sacrce.)


CANON I.

If a presbyter marry, let him be removed from his order ; but if he commit forni-
cation or adultery, let him be altogether cast out [i.e. of communion] and put to
penance.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

If a presbyter marries he shall he deposed
from his order. If he commits adidteri/ or
tvhoredom lie shall be expelled, and shall be put
to penance.

Aristenus.

A presbyter who marries is removed from
the exercise of the priesthood but retains his
honour and seat. But he that commits for-
nication or adultery is cast forth altogether
and put to penance.

Van Espen.

These fathers [i.e. of Neocaesarea] shew
how much graver seemed to them the sin of
the presbyter who after ordination committed
fornication or adultery, than his who took a
wife. For the former they declare shall sim-
ply be deposed from his order or deprived of
the dignity of the Priesthood, but the latter
is to " be altogether cast out, and put to pen-


ance." . . . Therefore such a presbyter
not only did they remove from the priestly
functions, or the dignity of the priesthood,
but perfectly or altogether cast him out of
the Church.

This canon Gratian has inserted in the
Corpus Juris Canoniri. Becretiun. Pars I.,
Dist. xxviii., c. ix. Gratian has followed Isi-
dore in adding after the word "penance"
the words " among the laity " [inter laicos)
which do not occur in the Greek, (as is noted
by the Roman Correctors) nor in the version
of Dionysius Exiguus ; these same correctors
fall however themselves into a still graver
error in supposing that criminous clerks in
the early days of the Clmrch were sent out to
wander over the country, as Van Espen well
points out.

On the whole subject of the marriage of
the clergy in the Early Chui'ch see the Excur-
sus devoted to that subject.


CANON II.

If a woman shall have married two brothers, let her be cast out [i.e. of communion]
until her death. Nevertheless, at the hour of death she may, as an act of mercy, be re-
ceived to penance, provided she declare that she will break the marriage, should she
recover. But if the woman in such a marriage, or the man, die, penance for the survivor
shall be very difficult.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II.

A woman married to two brothers shall be ex-
pelled all her life. But if ivhen near her death
she promises that she ivill loose the marriage
shoidd she recover, she shall he admitted to penance.

' This is the title in the Paris edition of Zonaraa.


But if one of tJwse coupled together die, only with
great difficulty shall penitence be allowed to the
one still living.

It will be carefully observed that this canon
has no provision for the case of a man marry-
ing two sisters. It is the prohibited degree


80


NEOC.ESAREA. A.D. 315


of brother's wife, not that of Avife's sister
which is in consideration. Of course those
who hoUl that the affinit}- is tlie same in each
case will arjjue from this canon by parity of
reasoning,'-, and those wlio do not accept that
position will refuse to do so.

In the Greek text of Balsamou (Vide Bev-
eridge, Si/ikjcI.) after the first clause is added,
" if she will not be persuaded to loose the


iii.'irriage.


Van Espen.


The meaning of this canon seems to be tliat
which Balsam on sets forth, to wit, that if a
woman at the point of death or in c./frcn/i.s
promises that if she gets better she will dis-
solve the marriage, or make a divorce, or


abstain from the sacrilegious use of matri-
mony, then " she may be received to penance
as an act of mercy " ; and surely she is im-
mediately absolved from the excommunica-
tion inflicted upon her when she was cast out
and extruded froni the Church. For it is
certain that according to the discii)liiie of the
Fathers he was thought to be loosed from ex-
communication whoever was admitted to
penance, and it is of this tliat the canon
speaks ; ' but he did not obtain perfect recon-
ciliation until his jjenance was done.

To this performance of penance this woman
was to be admitted if she got well and dis-
solved the marriage according to her promise
made when she was in peril of death, as the
Greek commentators note ; and this too is
the sense given by Isidore.


CANON III.

CoxcERNTXG tliose who fall into many marriages, the appointed time of penance is
well known ; but their manner of living and faith shortens the time.

NOTES.


AxciEN'T Epitome of Canon III.

The time of polygamists is well known. A zeal
for penance may shorten if.

Hefele.

As the Greek commentators have remarked,
this canon speaks of those who have been
married more than twice. It is not known
what were the ancient ordinances of peni-
tence which the synod here refers to. In
later times digamists were condemned to one
year's penance, and trigamists from two to live
years. St. Basil places the trigamists for
three years among the " hearers," and then
for some time among the consistentes.

Van Espen.

"The appointed time of penance is well
known." These words Zonaras notes must
refer to a custom, for, says he, "before this
synod no canon is found wlucli prescribes the
duration of the ponance of bigamists |i.e. diga-
mists]." It is fortius reason that St. Basil says
[in Epist. ad Ampltihxjium, Can. 4) in speaking
of the penance of trigamists " we have re-
ceived this by custom and not by canon, but
from the following of precedent," hence the
Fathers received many things by tiadition,
and obsen'ed these as having the force of law.

From the last clause of this canon we see
the mind of the Fathers of this synod, which

' Van Eppen eives '■'■ fructum pamitentia: cotisequatur " as the

trauslatioil of efei ttji" iitTdvoiav.


agrees with that of Ancyra and Nice, that
with regard to the granting of indulgences,
ro in shortening the time of penance, atten-
tion must be paid to the penitence, and con-
versation, or " conversation and faith " of each,
one separately.

With this agrees Zonaras, whose remarks
are worthy of consideration. On this whole
subject of the commutation of the primitive
penance and of the rise of the modern indul-
gences of the Roman Church Van Espen has
wi'itten at length in his excursus Dc Indid-
f/cntiis (Jure Evch'S., P. I. i.. Tit. vij.) in which
he assigns the change to the end of the Xlth
century, and remarks that its introduction
caused the " no small collapse of penitential
discipline." ~

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canon ici, Gratian, Dccretum, Pars II., Causa
xxxi., QujBst. i., c. viij. where for " conver-
sio," (dvacTTpoc^r/) is read '• conversatio,"' and
the Greek word is used in this sense in
Polybius, and frequently so in the New Testa-
ment.


■•^ The reader is referred also to Auiort, De Oriahie, proqre^su,
valore ar friictu liuhdgentiarxnn, and to t\w article '" Ablaes "
in tlic Kir~licn l.cTicnv of Wotzor and Welte. Also for tlie Eng-
lish reader to T. L Green, D.T)., Imlulnenres, Ah.<ohttio>i.<, and
Tax tal>le..t, etc.. Some of tlie dillieuUies which lioman theologians
experience in ex))laininfr what are called "Plenary Indulgences"
are set forth by Dr. Littledale in his Plain lira.inns apainsi joining
the clitirrh of Hume, in which the matter is discussed in the
usual witty, and unscrupulous fashion of that brilliant writer.
But while this remark is ]ust. it should a'so be remarked that
ater the exaggeration is removed there yet remains a ditliculty
offthe most serious character.


NEOC.ESAREA. A.D. 315


81


CANON IV.

If any man lusting after a woman purposes to lie with her, and his design does not
come to effect, it is evident that he has been saved by grace.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.


WJioso lustefh hut cloth not accomplish his pleas-
ure is preserved of God.

Hefele.
Instead of iinSvfxria-aL we must read, with
Beveridge and Routb, who rely uj^on several
MSS., eVt^wjiATjo-a?. They also replace /xer
avTTJ'i by avrfj.

The meaning of the canon appears to me to
be very obscure. Hefele refers to Van Espen
and adopts his view, and Van Espen in turn
has adopted Fleury's view and given him
credit for it, referring to his Hisfoire Ecclesias-
tique, Lib. X., xvij. Zoiiaras' aud Balsamon's
notes are almost identical, I translate that of
the latter in full.

Balsamon.

In sins, the Fathers say, there are four
stages, the first-motiou, the struggle, the con-
sent, and the act : the first two of these are
not subject to punishment, but in the two
others the case is different. For neither is the
first impression nor the struggle against it to
be condemned, provided that when the rea-


son receives the impression it struggles with
it and rejects the thought. But the consent
thereto is subject to condemnation and accu-
sation, and the action to punishment. If
therefore anyone is assailed by the lust for a
woman, and is overcome so that he would
perform the act with her, he has given con-
sent, indeed, but to the work he has not
come, that is, he has not performed the act,
and it is manifest that the grace of God has
preserved him ; but he shall not go off with
im23unity. For the consent alone is worthy
of jDunishment. And this is plain from canon
Ixx. of St. Basil, which says ; " A deacon
polluted in lips (eV xft'^ecri) " or who has ajD-
proached to the kiss of a woman "and con-
fesses that he has so sinned, is to be inter-
dicted his ministry," that is to say is to be
prohibited its exercise for a time. " But he
shall not be deemed unworthy to communi-
cate in sacris with the deacons. The same is
also the case with a presbyter. But if any-
one shall go any further in sin than this, no
matter what his grade, he shall be deposed."
Some, however, interpret the pollution of the
lips in another way ; of this I shall speak in
commenting on Canon Ixx. of St. Basil. ^


CANON V.

If a catechumen coming into the Church have taken his place in the order of
catechumens, and fall into sin, let him, if a kneeler, become a hearer and sin no more.
But shoukl he again sin while a hearer, let him be cast out.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.
If a catechumen falls into a fault and if ivhile
a Jcneeler lie sins no more, let him he among tlie
hearers ; hut shoidd he sin ivhile among the hear-
ers, let him he cast out altogether.

ZONAEAS.

There ai"e two sorts of catechumens. For
some have only just come in and these, as
still imperfect, go out immediately after the
reading of the scriptures and of the Gospels.
But there are others who have been for some
time in preparation and have attained some


perfection ; these wait after the Gospel fOx*
the prayers for the catechumens, and when
they hear the words "Catechumens, bow
down your heads to the Lord," they kneel
down. These, as being moi'e perfect, having
tasted the good words of God, if they fall, are
removed from their position ; and are placed
with the " hearers " ; but if any happen to sin
while "hearers" they are cast out of the
Church altogether.


■ Balsamon's note is most curious reading, but beside being
irrelevant to the present canon of Neocsesarea, would hardly bear
translation into the vernacular.


82


NEOC^SAREA. A.D. 315


CANON VI.

Concerning a woman with child, it is determined that she ought to be baptized
whensoever she will ; for in this the woman communicates nothing to the child, since
the bringing forward to profession is evidently the individual [privilege] of every
single person.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitoaie of Canon VI.

If a icomnn with child so desires, let her he
baptized. For (he choice of each one is Judged

Van Espen.

That the reason of the canon may be
understood it must be noted that in the first
ages of the Church catechumens were
examined concerning their faith before they
were baptized, and were made publicly to
confess their faith and to renounce openly
the pomps of the world, as Albaspinseus


(Aubespine) observes on this canon, "A
short while before they were immersed they
declared with a loud voice that they desired
baptism and wished to be baptized. And
since these confessions could not be made by
those still shut up in their i)arent's womb, to
them the thing (res) and grace of baptism
could not come nor penetrate." And alto-
gether in accord with this is the translation
of Isidore — " because the free will of each
one is declared in that confession," that is, in
that confession he declares that he willingly
desires to be baptized.


CANON VII.

PRESBYTER shall not be a guest at the nuptials of persons contracting a second
for, since the digamist is worthy of penance, what kind of a presbyter shall
he be, who, by being present at the feast, sanctioned the marriage ?

NOTES.


marriage


Ancient Epitome of C-\non VII.
A preshiiier ought not to he present at the mar-
Hage of digamists. For ivhen that one^ implores
favour, tvlu> ivill deem him ivorthy of favour.

Hefele.
The meaning of the canon is as follows :
" If the digamist, after contracting his second
marriage, comes to the priest to be told the
punishment he has to undergo, how stands
the priest himself who for the sake of the
feast has become his accomplice in the
offence ? "

Van Espen.

The present canon again shews that al-
though the Church never disapi^roved of, nor
reputed second or stiU later marriages illicit,
nevertheless the Fathers enjoined a penance


upon digamists and those repeating marriage,
because by this iteration they shewed their
incontinence. As he that contracted a sec-
ond marriage did not sin properly speaking,
and committed no fault worthy of jDunish-
meut, tlierefore whatever was amiss was be-
lieved to be paid off by a lighter jjenance,
and Zouaras supposes tliat the canons in-
flicted a mulct upon digamists, for saith he,
" Digamists are not allowed for one year to
receive the Hoh- Gifts."

Zonaras seems to indicate that the disci-
pline of the canon was not in force in his
time, for he says, " Although this is found in
our writings, yet we ourselves have seen the
Patriarch and many Metropolitans present
at the feast for the second nuptials of the
Emperor."


CANON VIII.

If the wife of a layman has committed adultery and been clearly convicted, such [a
husband 1 cannot enter the ministry ; and if she commit adultery after his ordination, he
must put her aAvay ; but if he retain her, he can have no part in the ministry committed
to him.


1 Bp. Beveridge for " that one " translates " the digamist." The meaning is very obscure at best.


NEOCiESAREA. A.D. 315


83


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.


A Jayman whose wife is an adulteress cannot
he a clergjiman, and a cleric tvho keeps an adul-
teress shall be expelled.

Van Espen.

Although the Eastern Church allows the
clergy to have wives, even priests, and per-
mits to them the use of marriage after ordi-


nation, nevertheless it requires of them the
highest conjugal continency, as is seen by the
present canon. For here it is evident that
the Fathers wished even the smallest possi-
ble kind of incontinence to be absent from
men dedicated to holiness.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cauouici, Gratian's Becretiim, Pars I., Dist.


CANON IX.

A PEESBYTER wbo has been promoted after having committed carnal sin, and who
shall confess that he had sinned before his ordination, shall not make the oblation,
though he may remain in his other functions on account of his zeal in other respects ;
for the majority have affirmed that ordination blots out other kinds of sins. But if he
do not confess and cannot be openly convicted, the decision shall depend upon himself.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.


If a presbyter confess that he has sinned,'^ Jet
him abstain from the oblation, and from it only.
For certain sins orders remit. If he neither con-
fess nor is convicted, let him have power over him-
self

Van Espen.

Therefore if he who before his ordination
had committed a sin of the flesh with a wom-
an, confess it after ordination, when he is
already a priest, he cannot perform the priest-
ly office, he can neither offer nor consecrate
the oblations, even though after his ordina-
tion he has presei-ved uprightness of living
and been careful to exercise virtue ; as the
words "zeal in other respects" ("studious of
good ") Zonaras rightly interprets.

And since here the consideration is of a sin
committed before ordination, and also con-
cerning a presbyter who after his ordination
was of spotless life, and careful to exercise
virtue, the Fathers rightly wished that he I


I should not, against his will, be deposed from
1 the priestly office.

It is certainly curious that this canon
speaks of ordination as in the oj^inion of most
persons taking away all sins except consum-
mated carnal offences. And it will be noted
that the d(/)teVat must mean more than that
they are forgiven by ordination, for they had
been forgiven long ago by God upon true
contrition, but that they were made to be
non-existent, as if they had never been, so
that they were no hinderance to the exercise
of the spiritual office. I offer no exj^lanation
of the difficulty and only venture to doubt
the satisfactory' character of any of the ex-
planations given by the commentators. More-
over it is hard to grasj) the logical connexion
of the clauses, and what this " blotting out "
of TO. XoiTza has to do with the matter I entirely
fail to see. The /cat after ttoAAoi may possibly
suggest that something has dropi^ed out.

This canon and the followina- are together
in the Corpus Juris Canon ici, Gratian's Uecre-
tum, Pars II., Causa xv., Qusest. viii., c. i.


CANON X.

Likewise, if a deacon have fallen into the same sin, let him have the rank of a
minister.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


A deacon found in the same crime shall remain
a minister {virr]p€Tr]<:).

1 Arletenus understands this of fornication.


Hefele.

By ministers (v-Tn^peTat) are meant inferior
officers of the Church — the so-called minor
orders, often including the subdeacons.


84


NEOC.ESAREA. A.D. 315


This canon is in the Corpus Juris Cawow- j following curious form: "Similiter et tlia-
ici, Gratiau's ItetrcfuDi, Pars II., Causa xv., conus, si in eodem culpie genere fuerit involu-
Qusest. viii., united with canon ix., and in the tus, sese a ministerio cohibebit."


CANON XI.

Let not a presbyter be ordained before he is thirty j'ears of age, even though he be
in all respects a worthy man, but let him be made to wait. For oiu- Lord Jesus Christ
was baptized and began to teach in his thirtieth year.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon" XI.


Unless he be xxx. i/curs of age mme shall he
presbyier, even should he he icorthy, foUoicbuj the
example of the baptism of our Saviour.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canon ici, Gratian's Dccretum, Pars I., Dist.
Ixxviii., c. iv.

Gratlvn.

{Ut SKpra, Nota.)

This is the law, and we do not read that
Christ, or John the Baptist, or Ezecliiel, or
some other of the Prophets prophesied or
preached before that age. But Jeremiah and
Daniel we read received the spirit of prophecy
before thev had ai'rived even at vouth, and
David and Solomon are found to have been
anointed in their youth, also John the Evan-
gelist, while still a youth, was chosen by the
Lord for an Apostle, and we find that with the
rest he was sent forth to preach : Paul also,
as we know, while still a young man was
called by the Lord, and was sent out to
preach. The Church iv. like manner, when


' necessity compels, is wont to ordain some un-
! der thirty years of age.

For this reason Pope Zacharias in his Let-
ter to Boniface the Bishop, number \\., which
begins " Benedictus Deus " says,

C. V. In ease <f neeessity presbyters may be
ordained at xxv. years of age.

If men thirtv vears old cannot be found,
and necessity so demand, Levites and jiriests
may be ordained from twenty-five years of age
upwai'ds.

Van Espen,

The power of dispensing was committed to
the bishop, and at length it was so frequently
exercised that in the space of one centuiy [i.e.
by the end of the xiith century] the law be-
came abrogated, which was brought about
by necessity, so that it passed into law that a
presbyter could be ordained at twenty-five.
And from this it may ajjjiear how true it is
that there is no surer way of destroying dis-
cipline and abrogating law than the allowing
of dispensations and relaxations. Vide Thom-
assiuus, Uc Disc. Ecdes., Pars. IV., Lib. I., cap.
46.


CANON XII.

If any one be baptized when he is ill, forasmuch as his [profession of] faith was not
voluntary, but of necessity [i.e. though fear of death] he cannot be promoted to the
presbyterate, unless on account of his subsequent [display of] zeal and faith, and
because of a lack of men.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII. i

One baptized on aceount of sicJcncss is not to be
made presbyter, unless in reward for a contest
tchich he afterwards sustains and on account of
scarcity of men. I

The word used in the Greek for "baptized,"
is "illuminated" {4>um(TSrj), a very common i
expression among the ancients.


AnisTENrs.

He that is bajDtised by reason of illness,
and, therefore come to his illumination not
freely but of necessity, shall not be admitted
to the priesthood unless both these conditions
concur, that there are few suitable men to be
found and that he has endured a hard conflict
after his baptism.


NEOC^SAREA. A.D. 315


85


With this interpretation agree also Zonaras
and Balsamon, the latter expressly saying,
" If one of these conditions is lacking, the
canon must be observed." Not only has Isi-
dore therefore missed the meaning by chang-
ing the copulative into the disjunctive con-
junction (as Van Espen points out) but Bp,
Beveridge has fallen into the same error, not
indeed in the canon itself, but in translating
the Ancient Epitome.

Zonaras explains that the reason for this


prohibition was the well-known fact that in
those ages baptism was put off so as the
longer to be free from the restraints which
baptism was considered to impose. From
this interpretation only Aubespine dissents,
and Hefele points out how entirely without
reason.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum., Pars. I., Dist.
Ivii., c. i.


CANON XIIL


CouNTEY presbyters may not make the oblation in the church of the city when the
bishop or presbyters of the city are present ; nor may they give the Bread or the Cup
with prayer. If, however, they be absent, and he [i.e., a country presbyter] alone be
called to prayer, lie may give them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canons XIII. and XIV.

A country pi^'csbiitcr shall not offer in the city
temple, unless the bishop and the ivhole bodi/ of the
2)resbi/ters are away. But if wanted lie can do so
while they are away. The chorepiscopi can
offer as felloiv ministers, as tliey hold tJie palace of
the Seventy.

Routh reads the last clause in the plural,
in this agreeing with Dionysius Exiguus and
Isidore. In many MSB. this canon is united
with the following and the whole number
given as 14.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Pars I., Dist. xcv., c. xii. And the


Roman correctors have added the following
notes.

Roman Correctors.

(Gratian ut supra.)
" Nor to give the sacrificed bread and to
hand the chalice ; " otherwise it is read " sanc-
tified " [sanctifcatKin for sacrifcatuni]. The
Greek of the council is aprov StSdvai iv evxfj ;
but Balsamon has aprov eu^^s, that is, "the
bread of the mystic prayer."

Instead of " let them only who are called
for giving the prayer, etc.," read Kai et? cv^V
KXrjSrj p.ovo'i StSojo-tv, that is : " and only he that
shall have been called to the mystic prayer,
shall distribute."


CANON XIV.


The chorepiscopi, however, are indeed after the pattern of the Seventy ; and as
fellow-servants, on account of their devotion to the poor, they have the honour of mak-
ing the oblation.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.

[Vide ante, as in many MSS. the two
canons are united in the Ancient Epitome.]

Van Espen.

The reference to the Seventy seems to inti-
mate that the Synod did not hold the chore-
piscopi to be true bishops, as such were
always reputed and called successors, not of


the Seventy disciples but successors of the
Twelve Apostles. It is also clear that their
chief ministry was thought to be the care of
the poor.

Zonaras and Balsamon would seem to
' agree in this with Van Espen. See on the
whole subject the Excursus on the Chore-
piscopi.


so


NEOaESAKEA. A.D. 315


CANON XV.

The deacons ought to be seven in number, according to the canon, even if the city
be great. Of this you will be persuaded from the Book of the Acts.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

Sercn Dcucons accordin;/ fo the Arts of the
Apostles should be appointed for each great city.

This oanon was observed in Rome and it
"was not until the xitli century that the num-
ber of the Seven Cardinal Deacons was
chanj^ed to fourteen. That Gratian received
it into the Decrctnni (Pars. I., Dist. XCIIL, c.
xij.) is good evidence that he considered it
part of the Roman discipline. Eusebius *
gives a letter of Pope Cornelius, written
about the middle of the third centur}^ which
sa^'S that at that time there were at Rome
fortv-four priests, seven deacons, and seven
subdeacons ; and that the number of those in
inferior oi'ders was very great. Thomassinus
says that, " no doubt in this the Roman
Church intended to imitate the Apostles who
only ordained seven deacons. But the other
Churches did not keep themselves so scrupu-
lously to that number." ^

> Eusebius, IT. E., Lib. VI., cap. xliij. I

' Thomaeein, Ancienneet A'ouvelle DUcipline de I'llglue, Lib.
II., Chap. xxix. I


In the acts of the Council of Chalcedon it
is noted that the Church of Edessa had fif-
teen priests and thirty-eif,dit deacons.' And
Justinian, we know, appointed one hundred
deacons for the Church of Constantinople.
Van Espen well points out that while this
canon refers to a previous law on the sub-
ject, neither the Council itself, nor the Greek
commentators Balsamon or Zonaras give the
least hint as to what that Canon was.

The Fathers of Neocsesarea base their
limiting of the number of deacons to seven
in one city upon the authority of Holy Script-
ure, but the sixteenth canon of the Quinisext
Council expressly says that in doin}:Cso they
showed they referred to ministers of alms,
not to ministers at the divine mysteries, and
that St. Stephen and the rest were not dea-
cons at all in this latter sense. The reader
is referred to this canon, where to defend the
practice of Constantinople the meaning of
the canon we are considering is entirely mis-
represented.

• Acta Cone. Chal., Actio x.


THE COUNCIL OF GANGRA.

AD. 325-381.

Emperor. — Const antine.

Elenchiis.
Historical Introduction. Synodal Letter.

Canons ivith the Ancient Epitome and Notes.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

With regard to the Synod of Gangra we know little beside what we learn from its own
synodal letter. Three great questions natui-ally arise with regard to it.

1. What was its date ?

2. Who was the Eustathius it condemned?

3. Who was its presiding officer ?

I shall briefly give the reader the salient points with regard to each of these matters.

1. With regard to the date, there can be no doubt that it was after Nice and before the
First Council of Constantinople, that is between 325 and 381. Socrates^ seems to place
it about 365 ; but Sozomen ^ some twenty years earlier. On the other hand, Remi Ceillier ^
inconsistently with his other statements, seems to argue from St. Basil's letters that the true
date is later than 376. Still another theory has been urged by the Ballerini, resting on the
supposition that the Eusebius who presided was Eusebius of Csesarea, and they therefore
fix the date between 362 and 370. With this Mr. Ffoulkes agrees, and fixes the date,^ with
Pagi, at 358, and is bold enough to add, " and this was unquestionably the year of the Coun-
cil." But in the old collections of canons almost without exception, the canons of Gangra
precede those of Antioch, and Blondel and Tillemont ^ have sustained this, which perhaps I
may call the traditional date.

2. There does not seem to be any reasonable ground to doubt that the person condemned,
Eustathius by name, was the famous bishop of Sebaste. This may be gathered from both
Sozomen'' and Socrates,' and is confirmed incidentally by one of St. Basil's ej^istles.*^ More-
over, Eustathius's See of Sebaste is in Armenia, and it is to the bishops of Armenia that the
Synod addresses its letter. It would seem in view of all this that Bp. Hefele's words are not
too sevei'e when he writes, "Under such circumstances the statement of Baronius, Du Pin,
and others (supported by no single ancient testimony) that another Eustathius, or possibly
the monk Eutactus, is here meant, deserves no serious consideration, though Tillemont did
not express himself as opposed to it "'

The story that after his condemnation by the Synod of Gangra Eustathius gave up wear-
ing his peculiar garb and other eccentricities, Sozomen only gives as a report.^**

3. As to who was the president, it seems tolerably certain that his name was Eusebius —
if Sozomen ^' indeed means it was " Eusebius of Constantinople," it is a blunder, yet he had
the name right. In the heading of the Synodal letter Eusebius is first named, and as Gangra
and Armenia were within the jurisdiction of Csesarea, it certainly would seem natural to sup-
pose that the Eusebius named was the Metropolitan of that province, but it must be remem-
bered that Eusebius of Cappadocia was not made bishop until 362, four years after Mr.
Ffoulkes makes him preside at Gangra. The names of thirteen bishops are given in the
Greek text.

The Latin translations add other names, such as that of Hosius of Cordova, and some
Latin writers have asserted that he presided as legate d latere from the pope, e.g., Baronius ^^
and Binius.^^ Hefele denies this and says : "At the time of the Synod of Gangra Hosius was

' Socrat. n. E., Lib. II , cap. xliij. I '" Soz. B E.. Lib III., cap. xiv. It is curious that Canon

2 Sozomen. H. E., Lib. IV.. cap. xxiv. Venables in h's article " Eustathius " in Smith and Wace, Diet.

^ Remi Ceillier. Hist. Ginerale des Auteurs Sacres, Tom. TV., I of Christ, lilori.. gives the story on Sozoraen's authority as

p. 735. quoted by Hefele. out without pivins Hefele's warning that it

< E. S. Ffoulkes, in Smith and Cheetham, Diet. Christ. Antiq., was a mere rumour. It would seem that Canon Venables could

s. V. Gangra not have consulted the Greek, where the word used is Adyoj ;

' I am indebted to Hefele for this reference, and he gives Me- Hefele gives no reference. I have supplied this in the beginning

moires, note xxvi]., sur St. Basile. of this note.


"Sozom. H. E., III., xiv.
'Socrat. H. E., II.. xliij.
'S. Basil. M., Ep. ccxxiij.
» Hefele. Hist. Councils, Vol. II., p. 337.


'■ Sozomen. H. E., Lib. TV., cap. xxiv.

'"' Baronius. Annal., Tom. iii , ad ann. 361, n. 44.

'^ Binius. Annotat. in Hynod. Gang.


90


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


without doubt dead."' But such has not been the opinion of the learned, and Cave- is of
opinion that Hosius's episcopate covered seventy years ending with 3G1, and (resting on the
same opinion) Pagi thinks Hosius may have attended the Synod in 358 on his way back to
Spain, an opinion with which, as I liave said, Mr. Ffoulkes agrees. It seems also clear that
by the beginning of the sixth century the Synod of Gangra was looked upon at Rome as
having been held under papal authority ; Pope Symmachus expressly saying so to the Roman
Synod of 504. {Vide Notes on Canons vij. and viij.)

It remains onl}* further to remark that the LihrUus Synrtdkus mentions a certain Dius as
president of the Synod. The Ballarini ^ suggest that it should be Bt'o?, an abbreviation of
Eusebius. Mr. Ffoulkes suggests that Dius is " probably Dianius, the pi-edeces.sor of Euse-
bius." Lightfoot^ fixes the episcopate of Eusebius Pamphili as between 313 and 337; and
states that that of Eusebius of Cjcsarea in Cappadocia did not begin until 362, so that the
enormous chronological difficulties will be evident to the reader.

As all the projoosed new dates involve more or less contradiction, I have given the canons
their usual position between Neocsesarea and Antioch, and have left the date undetermined.


' Hefele. Hist. Councils, Vol. II., p. 327.

'Cave. ITift. Lil., Lib. I., cap. v

' S. Leon., M., Opp., ed. Balleriul, Tom. III., p. xxiv.


* Smith and Wace. Diet. Chriit. Biog., t. v. Eusebius of
Csesarea.


SYNODICAL LETTER OF THE COUNCIL OF GANGRA.

EusEBius, ^lian, Eugenius, Olympius, Bithynicus, Gregory, Philetus, Pappus, Eula-
lius, Hypatius, Proaeresius, Basil and Bassus,' assembled iu the holy Synod at Gangra,
to our most honoured lords and fellow-ministers iu Armenia wish health in the Lord.

Forasmuch as the most Holy Synod of Bishops, assembled on account of certain
necessary matters of ecclesiastical business in the Church at Gangra, on inquiring also
into the matters which concern Eustathius, found that many things had been unlawfully
done by these very men who are partisans of Eustathius, it was compelled to make
definitions, Avhich it has hastened to make known to all, for the removal of whatever
has by him been done amiss. For, from their utter abhorrence of marriage, and from
their adoption of the proposition that no one living in a state of marriage has any hope
towards God, many misguided married women have forsaken their husbands, and hus-
bands their wives : then, afterwards, not being able to contain, they have fallen into
adultery ; and so, through such a principle as this, have come to shame. They were
found, moreover, fomenting separations from the houses of God and of the Church ;
treating the Church and its members with disdain, and establishing separate meetings
and assemblies, and different doctrines and other things in opposition to the Churches
and those things which are done in the Church ; wearing strange apparel, to the
destruction of the common custom of dress; making distributions, among themselves
and their adherents as saints, of the first-fruits of the Church, which have, from the
first, been given to the Church ; slaves also leaving their masters, and, on account of
their own strange apparel, acting insolently towards their masters ; women, too, disre-
garding decent custom, and, instead of womanly apparel, wearing men's clothes, think-
ing to be justified because of these ; while many of them, under a pretext of piety, cut
ofl:' the growth of hair, which is natural to woman ; [and these persons were found] fast-
ing on the Lord's Day, despising the sacredness of that free day, but disdaining and
eating on the fasts appointed in the Church ; and certain of them abhor the eating of
flesh ; neither do they tolerate prayers in the houses of married persons, but, on the
contrary, despise such prayers when they are made, and often refuse to partake when
Oblations are ofiered in the houses of married persons ; contemning married presbyters,
and refusing to touch their ministrations ; condemning the services in honour of the
Martyrs ^ and those who gather or minister therein, and the rich also who do not alien-
ate all their wealth, as having nothing to hope from God ; and many other things that
no one could recount. For every one of them, when he forsook the canon of the j
Church, adopted laws that tended as it were to isolation ; for neither was there any >
common judgment among all of them ; but whatever any one conceived, that he pro-
pounded, to the scandal of the Church, and to his own destruction.

Wherefore, the Holy Synod present in Gangra was compelled, on these accounts, to
condemn them, and to set forth definitions declaring them to be cast out of the Church ;
but that, if they should repent and anathematize every one of these false doctrines, then
they should be capable of restoration. And therefore the Holy Synod has particularly
set forth everything which they ought to anathematize before they are received. And
if any one will not submit to the said decrees, he shall be anathematized as a heretic,
and excommunicated, and cast out of the Church ; and it will behove the bishops to ob-
serve a like rule in respect of all who may be found with them.

' This list of names varies in the different M8S. and versions.

3 TblB pbraee in tlie Greek has dropped out in Labbe, and Mansi ; it is foond in Zonaras, etc.


THE CANONS OF THE HOLY FATHERS ASSEMBLED AT GAN-
GRA, WHICH WERE SET FORTH AFTER THE COUNCIL OF
NICE.^

CANON I.

If any one shall condemn marriage, or abominate and condemn a woman who is a
believer and devout, and sleeps with her own husband, as though she could not enter
the Kingdom [of heaveuj let him be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

Anathema to lit in icliu disrcyards legitimate
rtuirriagc.

When one considers how deeply tlie early
church was impressed with those passages of
Holy Scripture which she understood to set
forth the superiority of the virgin over the
married estate, it ceases to be any source of
astonishment that some should have run
into the error of condemning marriage as
sinful. The saying of our Blessed Lord with
refei*euce to those who had become "eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven's sake,"' and those
words of St. Paul " He that giveth his virgin
in marriage doeth well, but he that giveth her
not in marriage doeth better," -^ together with
the striking passage in the Revelation of
those that were " not defiled with women, for
they are virgins,"^ were considered as set-
tling the matter for the new dispensation.
The earliest writers are filled with the praises
of virginity. Its superiority underlies the
allegories of the Hermes Pastor ; ^ St. Justin


I Martyr speaks of " many men and women of
sixty and seventy years of age who from their
I childhood have been the disciples of Christ,
] and have kept themselves uncorrupted," '' and
from that time on there is an ever-swelling
tide of praise ; the reader must be referred
to SS. Cyprian, Athanasius, Cyril of Jenisa-
lem, Jerome, Augustine, etc., etc. In fact
the Council of Trent (it cannot be denied)
only gave expression to the view of all Chris-
tian antiquity both East and "West, when it
condemned those who denied that " it is
more blessed to remain virgin or celibate
than to be joined in marriage." ^

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Dccrcfam, Pars I., Dis-
tinc. XXX., c. xii. (Isidore's version), and
again Dist. xxxi., c. viii. (Dionysius's version).
Gratian, however, supposes that the canon is
directed against the Manichieans and refers
to the marriage of priests, but in both mat-
ters he is mistaken, as the Roman Correctors
1 and Van Esj^en point out.


CANON II.

If any one shall condemn him who eats flesh, which is without blood and has not
been offered to idols nor strangled, and is faithful and devout, as though tlie man were
without hope [of salvation] because of his eating, let him be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II. I

AiiafJirDifi also to him irha condemns the eat-
ing ofjlr.sh, cjcrj/f that of a suffoc(dcd animal or
ilmt o(fcrcd to idols.

Hefele.
This canon also, like the preceding one, is
not directed against the Gnostics and Maui-

' This is the title in the Paris Edition of Zoimraw. The Bod-
leian text simply reads •' The Canons of the Synod at GauCTa "
2 Matt. xis. 12.
' I Cor. vii 3S.

* Rev. xiv. 4

* Hermes Pastor. Sim. x., xj.


cheans, but against an unenlightened In-per-
asceticism, which certainly ap})roaches the
Gnostic-Manichean error as to matter behig
Satanic. AVe further see that, at the time of
the Synod of Gangra, the rule of the Apos-
tolic Synod with regard to blood and things
strangled was still in force. With the Greeks,


".Justin. M. Apol, i. 15.

' Cnnc. Trid , si'ssio xxiv. De Slatr., can. x It is curious to
note that while Kustathius and his followers held all marriage
to he sinful, I.utluT (at least at one tinier tauirht that it was a s]n
for anyone to remain unmarried who could " increase and multi-
ply ! " The Synod of (Jantrra in this canon sets forth the un-
changing position of the Catholic Church upon this point.


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


93


indeed, it continued always in force as their
Euchologies still show. Balsamon also, the
well-known commentator on the canons of
the Middle Ages, in his commentary on the
sixty- third Apostolic Canon, expressly blames
the Latins because they had ceased to observe
this command. What the Latin Church,
however, thought on this subject about the
year 400, is shown by St, Augustine in his
work Contra Faustnm, where he states that
the Apostles had given this command in order
to unite the heathens and Jews in the one
ark of Noah ; but that then, when the barrier
between Jewish and heathen converts had
fallen, this command concerning things
strangled and blood had lost its meaning,
and was only observed by few. But still, as
late as the eighth century, Pope Gregory the


Third (731) forbade the eating of blood or
things strangled under threat of a penance
of forty days.

No one will pretend that the disciplinary
enactments of any council, even though it be
one of the undisputed Ecumenical Synods,
can be of greater and more unchanging force
than the decree of that first council, held by
the Holy Apostles at Jerusalem, and the fact
that its decree has been obsolete for centuries
in the West is proof that even Ecumenical
canons may be of only temporary utilit}^ and
may be repealed by disuser, like other laws.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cnnonici, Gratian's Dccretum, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. xiii.


CANON III.

If any one shall teach a slave, under pretext of piety, to despise his master and to
run away from his service, and not to serve his own master with good- will and all
honour, let him be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

Anathema to him who persuades a slave to
leave his master under pretence of religion.

Van Espen.

This canon is framed in accordance with
the doctrine of the Apostle, in I. Timothy,
chapter six, verse 1. "Let as many servants
as are under the yoke count their own mas-
ters worthy of all honour, that the name of
God and his doctrine be not blasphemed."
And again the same Apostle teaches his dis-
ciple Titus that he should "exhort servants
to be obedient unto their own masters, and
to please them well in all things ; not answer-


ing again


not purloining, but shewing all
good fidelity ; that they may adorn the doc-
trine of God our Saviour in all things."
(Titus ii. 9 and 10.)

These texts are likewise cited by Balsamon
and Zouaras.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris
C((nonici, Gratian's Decrctum, Pars. II., Causa
XVII., Q. IV., c. xxxvij. in the version of Isi-
dore, and again in c. xxxviij. from the collec-
tions of Martin Bracarensis (so says Van
Espen) and assigned to a council of Pope
Martin, Canon xlvii.


CANON IV.

If any one shall maintain, concerning a married presbyter, that is not lawful to par-
take of the oblation when he offers it, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon TV.
Anathema to him who hesitates to receive com-
munion from p)resbyters joined in matrimony.

Hefele.


tinue to live in matrimony. Compare what
was said above in the history of the Council
of Niceea, in connection with Paj^hnutius, con-
cerning the celibacy and marriage of priests in
the ancient Church. Accordingly this canon


As is well known, the ancient Church, as speaks of those clergy who have wives and
now the Greek Church, allowed those clergy live in wedlock ; and Baronius, Biuius, and
who married before their ordination to con- Mitter-Miiller gave themselves useless trouble


94


GAXORA. A.I). 320-381


in trying to interpret it as only protecting lished by Quesnel, which, however, as was
those clergy who, though niarrit-d, have since shown by the Ballorini,' is of Gallicau and
their ordination ceased to cohabit with their not Roman origin, has not this canon, and


wives.

The so-called Codex Ecclesice liomance pub-


consequently it only mentions nineteen


canons of Gangra.


CANON V.


If any one shall teach that the house of God and the assemblies held therein are to
be despised, let him be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

Wlioso styles the house of God contenqjtible, let
him be anathema.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decrctum, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. X. The commentators find nothing
to say upon the canon, and in fact the despis-


ing of the worship of God's true church is
and always has been so common a sin, that it
hardly calls for comment ; no one will forget
tliat the Prophet Malachi complains how in
his days there were those Avho deemed " the
table of the Lord contemptible " and said of
his woi'ship " what a weariness is it." (Mai.
i., 7 and 13.)


CANON YI.

If any one shall hold private assemblies outside of the Church, and, despising the
canons, shall presume to perform ecclesiastical acts, the presbyter with the consent
of the bishop refusing his permission, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


^Mwso jirivdtdjj gathers a religious meeting
let him he anathema.

Hefele.

Both these canons, [Y. and VI.] forbid the
existence of conventicles, and conventicle
services. It already aj^pears from the second
article of the Synodal Letter of Gangra, that
the Eustathians, through spiritual joride,
separated themselves from the rest of the
congregation, as being the pure and holy,
avoided the public worshij), and held private
services of their own. The ninth, tenth, and
eleventh articles of the Synodal Letter give
us to understand that the Eustathians especi-
ally avoided the public services, when married
clergy officiated. We might possibly con-
clude, from the words of the sixth canon :

/XTj <Tvv6vTO<; Tov T pfrr/SvTipov Kara yvw/iATji' tov
iTTUTKOTTov, that no priest jierformed any part in
their private services ; but it is more proba-
ble that the Eustathians, who did not reject
the priesthood as such, but only abhorred the


married clergy, had their own unmarried
clergy, and that these officiated at their sepa-
rate sei'vices. And the above-mentioned
words of the canon do not the least contradict
this supposition, for the very addition of the
words Kara ■yroj/xT/i' tov eVicTKOTrov indicate that

the sectarian priests who performed the ser-
vices of the Eustathians had received no
permission to do so from the bishop of the
l)lace. Thus did the Greek commentators,
Balsamon, etc., and likewise Van Espen, inter-
pret this canon.

The meaning of this canon is very obscure.
Tlie Latin reads non convenienfe presbgtei'o.de
I'piscDpi seutentia ; and Lambert translates
" without the presence of a priest, with con-
sent of the bishop." Hammond diflfers from
this ami renders thus, "without the concur-
rence of the presbyter and the consent of the
bishop." I have translated literally and left
the obscuritv of the original.


' Vide their edition of 0pp. S. LeonU if., Tom. III., pp. 124,
685. 755.


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


•J5


CANON VII.

If any one shall presume to take the fruits offered to the Church, or to give them
out of the Church, without the consent of the bishop, or of the person charged with
such things, and shall refuse to act according to his judgment, let him be anathema.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.

Mlmo performs church acts contrary to the ivill of a hisliop or of a presbyter, let him he
anathema.


CANON VIII.

If anyone, except the bishop or the person appointed for the stewardship of bene-
factions, shall either give or receive the revenue, let both the giver and the receiver be
anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.


Wlioso gives or receives offered fruits, except
the bishop and the economist appointed to disburse
charities, both he that gives, and he that receives
shall be anathema.

Pope Symmachus.

(In his Address to the Synod of Borne a.d.
504. Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, torn, iv., col.
1373.)

In the canons framed by Apostolic author-
ity [i.e., by the authority of the Apostolic See
of Rome, cf. Ffoulkes, Smith and Cheetham,
Diet Christ. Antiq., art. Cangra] we find it
written as follows concerning the offerings of
fruits which are due to the clergy of the
church, and concerning those things which
are offered for the use of the poor; "If any-
one shall presume, etc." [Canon VIL] And
again at the same council, " If anyone except
the bishop, etc." [Canon VIII.] And truly


it is a crime and a great sacrilege for those
whose duty it is chiefly to guard it, that is
for Christians and God-fearing men and
above all for princes and rulers of this world,
to transfer and convert to other uses the
wealth which has been bestowed or left by
will to the venerable Church for the remedy
of their sins, or for the health and repose of
their souls.

Moreover, whosoever shall have no care for
these, and contrary to these canons, shall
seek for, accept, or hold, or shall unjustly
defend and retain the treasures given to the
Church unless he quickly repent himself shall
be stricken with that anathema with which
an angry God smites souls ; and to him that
accepts, or gives, or possesses let there be
anathema, and the constant accompaniment
of the appointed penalty. For he can have
no defence to offer before the tribunal of
Christ, who nefariously without any regard
to religion has scattered the substance left
by pious souls lor the poor.


CANON IX.

If any one shall remain virgin, or observe continence, abstaining from marriage
because he abhors it, and not on account of the beauty and holiness of virginity itself,
let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.


Wlioso preserves virginity not on account of its
beauty but because he abhors marriage, let him be
anathema.

The lesson taught by this canon and that
which follows is that the practice of even the


highest Christian virtues, such as the preser-
vation of virginity, if it does not spring from
a worthy motive is only deserving of execra-
tion.

Zonaras.

Virginity is most beautiful of all, and conti-
nence is likewise beautiful, but only if we fol-


96


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


low them for tlieir owu sake and because of the
sanctificatiou which comes from them. But
should auyoue embrace virginity, because he
detests marriage as impure, and keep himself
chaste, and abstains from commerce with wom-
en and marriage, because he thinks that the}-


are in themselves wicked, he is subjected by
this canon to the penalty of anathema.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
CiDionici, Gratiau's Ikcrrtum, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. v., and again Dist. xxxi., c. ix.


CANON X.

If any one of those who are living a virgin life for the Lord's sake shall treat arro-
gantly the married, let him be anathema.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon X. i us brought us into his world, having prepared
Whoso treats arrof/aiitli/ those joimd in matri- j^is benefits aforehaud ere ever we were born
mony, let him 1)0 anatheiitd. ^ "


Seeing therefore that we have all these things

in all things to give


from him, we


ought


On this point the fatliers had spoken long thanks to him, to whom be the glory for ever
before, I cite two as examples. and ever. Amen.


St. Clement.
(Epist. I., 38, Lightfoot's translation.)
So in our case let the whole body be saved
in Christ Jesus, and let each man be subject
unto his neighbour, according as also he was
appointed with his special grace. Let not
the strong neglect the weak ; and let the
weak respect the strong. Let the rich min-
ister aid to the poor and let the poor give
thanks to God, because he hath given him
one through whom his wants may be sup-
plied. Let the wise display his wisdom, not
in words, but in good works. He that is
lowl}' in mind, let him not bear testimony to
himself, but leave testimony to be borne to
him by his neighbour. He that is pure in the
flesh, let him be so,' and not boast, knowing
that it is Another who bestoweth his conti-
nence upon him. Let us consider, bi'ethren,
of what matter we were made ; who and what
manner of beings we were, when we came
into the world ; from what a sepulchre and
what darkness he that moulded and created


St. Ignatius.

(Epist. ad Polyc. 5, Lightfoot's translation.)

Flee evil arts, or rather hold thou discourse
about these, Tell my sisters to love the Lord
and to be content witli their husbands in
flesh and in spirit. In like manner also>
charge my brothers in the name of Jesus
Christ to love their wives, us the Lord loved the
(.'hurch. If anyone is able to abide in chas-
tity to the honour of the flesh of the Lord,
let him so abide without boasting. If he
boast, he is lost ; and if it be known beyond
the bishop, he is jJoUuted. It becometh men
and Avomen, too, when they marry to unite
themselves with the consent of the bishop,
that tlie marriage may be after the Lord and
not after concuiiiscence. Let all things be
done to the honour of God.

This canon is found in the Corj^is Juris
Canonic i, Gratian's Bccretum, Pars I., Dist^
XXX., c. iv.


CANON XI.

If anyone shall despise those who out of faith make love-feasts and invite the
brethren in honour of the Lord, and is not willing to accept these invitations because he
despises what is done, let him l)e anathema.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.xnon XI. | There are few subjects ujDon which there

Whoso sjitfnis those irho inrife to the af/a/)e, has been more diiTerence of opinion than

and who when invited icdl not communicate' ivith upo" the history and signiflcance of ^the


these, let him. he anathema.


Agapce or Love-feasts of the Early Church.


' Lightfoot adopts Laurents' emeBdation and reads ^no. StydTw nine reading. It all comes to the same thing, however, the mean-
has also been sUL'gested, and Ilort's thinks o-t^tw to bu the gen- ing being perfectly clear.


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


97


To cite here any writers would only mislead
the reader, I shall therefore merely state the
main outline of the discussion and leave
every man to study the matter for himself.

All agree that these feasts are referred to by
St. Jude in his Epistle, and, although Dean
Plumptre has denied it (Smith and Cheetham,
Did., Christ. At/fiq., s.v. Agapse), most writers
add St. Paul in the First Epistle to the Corin-
thians xi. Estius {ill he.) argues with great co-
gencA' that the expression "Lord's SujDper " in
Holy Scripture never means the Holy Euchar-
ist, but the love-feast, and in this view he has
been followed by many moderns, but the prev-
alent opinion has been the opposite.

There is also much discussion as to the
order in which the Agapse and the celebra-
tions of the Holy Sacrament were related,
some holding that the love-feast preceded
others that it followed the Divine Mysteries.
There seems no doubt that in early times the
two became separated, the Holy Sacrament
being celebrated in the morning and the
Agapae in the evening.

All agree that these feasts were at first


copies of the religious feasts common to the
Jews and to the heathen world, and that
soon abuses of one sort or another came in,
I so that they fell into ill rej^ute and were
finally prohibited at the Council in Trullo.
This canon of Gangra is found in the Corpus
Juris Cftnonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I.,
Dist. xlii., c, i.

Van Espen is of opinion that the agapse of
our canon have no real connexion with the
I rehgious feasts of earlier days, but were^
merely meals jDrovided by the rich for the
poor, and with this view Hefele agrees. But
the matter is by no means plain. In fact at
every point we are met with difficulties and
uncertainties.

There would seem to be little doubt that
the " pain beni " of the French Church, and
the "Antidoron" of the Eastern Church are
remains of the ancient Agapse.

The meaning, however, of this canon is plain
enough, to wit, people must not despise, out
of a false asceticism, feasts made for the poor
by those of the faithful who are rich and
liberal. ^


CANON XII.

If any one, under pretence of asceticism, should wear a jieribolcewn and, as if this
gave him righteousness, shall despise those who with piety wear the herns and use
other commou and customary dress, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Anciext Epitome of Canon XII.


TF7wso despises tJiose who wear beruses, let him
be anathema.

Hefele.

The /?7^poi (lacernce) were the common
upper garments worn by men over the tunic;
but the Trept^oAata were rough mantles worn
by philosophers to show their contempt for
all luxury. Socrates (H. E,, ii. 43) and the


Synodal Letter of Gangra in its third article
say that Eustathius of Sebaste wure the
philosopher's mantle. But this canon in no
way absolutely rejects a special dress for
monks, for it is not the distinctive dress but
the proud and superstitious over-estimation
of its worth which the Synod here blames.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.

XXX., C. XV.


CANON XIII.

If any woman, under pretence of asceticism, shall change her apparel and, instead
of a woman's accustomed clothing, shall put on that of a man, let her be anathema.

NOTES.

adoption by one sex of the dress of the other,
was forbidden in the Pentateuch (Dent, xxii.,
5), and Avas therefore most strictly inter-
dicted bv the whole ancient Church. Such


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

Whatever women ivear men's clothes, anath-
ema to them.

Hefele.

The synodal letter in its sixth article also
speaks of this. Exchange of dress, or the


' Most interesting literature on the who'e subject will be
found in connexion with the frescoes and cups, etc, found in
the catacombs


98


G A NOR A. A.D. 325-381


cliauge of attire was formerly adopted mainly
for theatrical purposes, or from eftemiiiaey,
■wautouuess, the furtlierance of uuchastity,
or the like. The Eustathians, from quite
opposite aud hyi)er-ascetieal reasous, had
recommended women to assume male, that is
probably monk's attire, in order to show that
for them, as the holy ones, there was no


longer any distinction of sex ; but the
Church, also from ascetical reasons, forbade
this change of attire, especially when joined
to superstition and puritanical pride.

This canon is found in the Corpus Jxris
Ouionici, Gratian's Utcrdutn, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. vi.


CANON XIV.

If any woman shall forsake her husband, and resolve to depart from him because
she abhors marriage, let her be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV


Women who Icecp away from their husbands
because they abominate tnarriage, anathema to
them.

Hefele.

This canon cannot in any way be emjiloyed
in opposition to the practice of the Catholic
Church. For though the Church allows one
of a married couple, with the consent of the
other, to give up matrimonial intercourse,
and to enter the clerical order or the cloister,
still this is not, as is the case with the Eusta-
thians, the result of a false dogmatic theory,
but takes place with a full recognition of the
sanctity of marriage.


Van Espen.

It would seem that the Eustathians chiefly
disapproved of the use of marriage, and
under pretext of jjreserving continence in-
i duced married women to abstain from its
use as from something unlawful, and to leave
their husbands, separating from them so far
as the bed was concerned ; aud so the Greek
interpreters understand this canon ; for the
Eustathians were never accused of persuad-
ing anyone to dissolve a marriage a vinculo.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Dccretum, Pars I., Dist.,
XXX., c. iii., but in Isidore's version, which
misses the sense by implying that a divorce a
vincido is intended. The Roman Correctors
do not note this error.


CANON XV.


If anyone shall forsake liis own children and sliall not nurture them, nor so far as
in him lies, rear them in becoming piety, but shall neglect them, under pretence of
asceticism, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV,


. Whosoever they be tluit desert their children
and do not instruct them in the fear of God let
them be anathema.

Van Espen.

The fathers of this Synod here teach that
it is the office aud duty of parents to provide
for the bodily cai'C of their children, and also,
as far as in them lies, to mould them to the
practice of piety. Aud this care for their


children is to be preferred by parents to any
l^rivate exercises of religion. In this connex-
ion should be read the letter of St. Francis
de Sales. [Ep' xxxii.. Lib. 4.)

It may perhaps be noted that this canon
has not infrequently been violated by those
who are accepted as Saints in the Church.

This canon is found, in Isidore's ver.sion,
in the dnpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decre-
tum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. xiv.


GANGEA. A.D. 325-381


99


CANON XVI.

If, under any pretence of piety, any cliiklren shall forsake their parents, particularly
[if the parents are] believers, and shall withhold becoming reverence from their par-
ents, on the plea that they honour piety more than them, let them be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


If children leave their parents who arc of the
faithful let them he anathema.


Zonaras notes that the use of the word
"particularly" shews that the obli<z:ation is
universal. The commentators all refer here
to St. Matthew xv., where our Lord speaks of
the subterfuge by which the Jews under pre-
text of piety defrauded their parents and
made the law^ of God of none effect.


Van Espen.

Of the last clause this is the meaning ;
that according to the Eustathians " piety
towards God" or "divine worship," or rather
its pretence, should be preferred to the
honour and reverence due to parents.

This canon, in Isidore's version, is found in
the Corpus Juris Canonic/, Gratian's Decrctum,
Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. i. The Roman correct-
ors advertize the reader that the version of
Dionysius Exiguus " is much nearer to the
original Greek, although not altogether so."


CANON XVII.

If any woman from pretended asceticism shall cut off her hair, which God gave her
as the reminder of her subjection, thus annulling as it were the ordinance of subjection,
let her be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

Whatever women shave their hair off, pretend-
ing to do so out of reverence for God, let them he
anathema.

Hefele.

The apostle Paul, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, xi. 10, represents the long hair
of women, which is given them as a natural
veil, as a token of their subjection to man.
We learn from the Synod of Gangra, that as
many Eustathian women renounced this sub-
jection, and left their husbands, so, as this
canon says, they also did away with their long
hair, which was the outward token of this sub-
jection. An old proverb says : duo si faciunt


idem, non est idem. In the Catholic Church
also, w^hen women and girls enter the cloister,
they have their hair cut off, but from quite
other reasons than those of the Eustathian
women. The former give up their hair, be-
cause it has gradually become the custom to
consider the long hair of women as a special
beauty, as their greatest ornament ; but the
Eustathians, like the ancient Church in
general, regarded long hair as the token of
subjection to the husband, and, because they
renounced marriage and forsook their hus-
bands, they cut it off.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Can-
onici,Gra.ti&nsjDecretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. ij.


CANON XVIII.

If any one, under pretence of asceticism, shall fast on Sunday, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.

Whoso fasts on the Lord's day or on tJie Sab-
bath let him he anathema.


Zonakas.


Eustathius appointed the Lord's day as a
fast, whereas, because Christ rose from the


100


GAXGRA. A.U. 325-381


grave and delivered human nature from sin
on that day, we shoukl sjjend it in oftering
joyous thanks to God. But fasting carries
with it the idea of grief and sorrow. For this
reason those who fast on Sunday are subject-
ed to the punishment of anathema.

Balsajion.

By many canons we are warned against
fasting or grieving on the festal and joyous
Lords day, in remembrance of the resurrec-
tion of the Lord ; but that we should cele-


brate it and oflfer thanks to God, that we be
raised from the fall of sin. But this canon
smites the Eustathians with anathema because
they taught that the Lord's days should be
fasted. Canon LXIV. of the Apostolic Canons
cuts oft' sucli of the laity as shall so fast, and
deposes such of the clergy. See also Canon
LY. of the Council in Trullo.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. vij.


CANON XIX.

If any of the ascetics, without bodily necessity, shall behave with insolence and
disregard the fasts commonly prescribed and observed by the Church, because of his
perfect understanding in the matter, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.


^Vlwso neglects the fasts of the Church, let him
be anathema.

I have followed Hefele's translation of the
last clause, with which Van Espeu seems to
agree, as well as Zonaras. But Hardouin and
Mansitake an entirely different view and trans-
late " if the Eustathian deliberately rejects the
Church fasts." Zonoras and Balsamon both
refer to the LXIXth of the Apostolical Canons
as being the law the Eustathians violated.
Balsamon suggests that the Eustathians
shared the error of the Bogomiles on the


subject of fasting, but I see no reason to
think that this was the case, Eustathius's
action seems rather to be attributable to
pride, and a desire to be different and origi-
nal, "I thank thee that I am not as other
men are," (as Van Espen points out). All
that Socrates says (//. K., II., xliii.,) is that
" he commanded that the prescribed fasts
should be neglected, and that the Lord's
days should be fasted."

This canon is found in the Corpus Jaris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
XXX., c. viii., in an imperfect translation but
not that of either Isidore or Dionvsius.


CANON XX.

If any one shall, from a presumptuous disposition, condemn and abhor the assem-
blies [in honour] of the martyrs, or the services performed there, and the commemora-
tion of them, let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.


Whoever thinks lightl/j of the meetings in
honour of the holy martyrs, let him be anathema.

Hefele.

Van Espen is of opinion that the Eusta-
thians had generally rejected the common
service as only fit for the less perfect, and
that the martyr chapels are only mentioned
here, because in old times service was usually
held there. According to tliis view, no


especial weight need be attached to the
expression. ]3ut this canon plainly speaks
of a disrespect shown hj the Eustathians to
the martyrs. Compare the twelfth article of
the Synodal Letter. Fuchs thought that, as
the Eustathians resembled the Aerians, who
rejected the service for the dead, the same
views might probably be ascribed to the
Eustathians. But, in the first place, the
Aerians are to be regarded rather' as opposed
than related in opinion to the Eustathians,
being lax in contrast to these ultra- rigorists.


GANGRA. A.D. 325-381


101


Besides which, Epiphanius only says that
they rejected prayer for the salvation of the
souls of the departed, but not that they did
not honour the martyrs ; and there is surely
a great difference between a feast in honour
of a saint, and a requiem for the good of a
departed soul. ^Vhy, however, the Eusta-
thians rejected the veneration of martyrs is
nowhere stated ; perhaps because thej' con-
sidered themselves as saints, /car i$oxy]i', exalted
above the martyrs, who were for the most
part oidy ordinary Christians, and many of


whom had lived in marriage, while according
to Eustathian views no married person could
be saved, or consequently could be an object
of veneration.

Lastly, it must be observed that the first
meaning of o-i'itt^^?, is an assembly for divine
service, or the service itself; but here it
seems to be taken to mean aviaywyij the place
of worship, so that the avvd^ei^ twv fxapTvfjuiv
seems to be identical with ))ir()ii/riti, and
different from the Aetrovpytat held in them, of
which the latter words of the canon sj)eak.


EPILOGUE.

These things we wTite, not to cut off those who wish to lead in the Church of God
an ascetic life, according to the Scriptures ; but those who carry the pretence of asceti-
cism to superciliousness ; both exalting themselves above those who live more simply,
and introducing novelties contrary to the Scriptures and the ecclesiastical Canons. We
do, assuredly, admire virginity accompanied by humility ; and we have regard for con-
tinence, accompanied b}' godliness and gravity ; and we praise the leaving of worldly
occupations, [when it is made] with lowliness of mind ; [but at the same time] we
honour the holy companionship of marriage, and we do not contemn wealth enjoyed with
uprightness and beneficence ; and we commend plainness and frugality in apparel, [which
is worn] onh' from attention, [and that] not over-fastidious, to the body ; but dissolute
and effeminate excess in di-ess we eschew ; and we reverence the houses of God and em-
brace the assemblies held therein as holy and helpful, not confining religion within the
houses, but reverencing every place built in the name of God ; and we approve of gath-
ering together in the Church itself for the common profit ; and we bless the exceeding
charities done by the brethren to the poor, according to the traditions of the Church ;
and, to sum up in a word, we wish that all things which have been delivered by the
Holy Scriptures and the Apostolical traditions, may be observed in the Chui'ch.


NOTES.


This is lacking in the ancient epitome ; 'and
while it occurs after Canon XX. in the ver-
sions of Dionysius Exiguus and of Isidore
Mercator, it is not numbered as a canon.
Moreover in John of Antioch's CoUccfion and
in Photius's Xomocanon, the number of canons
is said to be 20. Only the Greek Scholiasts
number it as Canon XXL, but its genuine-
ness is unquestioned.

It is curiously enough found in the Corpus
Juris Canonic t, divided into two canons ! Gra-
tian's JDecretum, Pars L, Dist. XXX., c. xvj.,
and Dist. xli., c. v.

Van Espen.
The Fathers of Gangra recognize not only
the Holy Scriptures, but also the Apostolical
traditions for the rule of morals.


From this [canon] it is by no means doubt-
ful that the fathers of this Sj^nod considered
that the Eustathians had violated some al-
ready existing ecclesiastical canons. Bever-
idge is of opinion that these are those com-
monly called the Canons of the Apostles
{SiJiiod. I. 5). Nor is this unlikely to be true,
for there can be no doubt that the doctrines
of the Eustathians condemned by this synod
are directly opposed to those very " Canons
of the Apostles " ; and no small argument is
drawn for the authority and antiquity of the
Canons of the Apostles from the large num-
ber of Eustathian teachings found to be
therein condemned, as Beveridge has pointed
out and as can easily be seen by comparing
the two.


THE SYNOD OF ANTIOCH IN ENC^NIIS.

A.D. 341.

Elenclius.
Historical Introduction. TJie Synodal Letter.

The Canons, ivith the Ancient Epitome and Notes.


HISTOEICAL INTEODUCTION

Of the Synod of Autiocli which adopted the canons subsequently received into the code
of the universal church we know the exact date. This is iixed by the fact that the synod
was helil at the time of the dedication of the great church in Antioch, known as the
" Golden," which had been bep^uu by his father, Constantine the Great, and was finished in
the days of Constautius. The synod has for this reason always been known as the Synod
of Antioch iit Encwiuis, i.e., at the dedication {in DedirafioHc), and was holden in the summer
of the year 34:1. Ninety-seven bishops assembled together and a large number of them were
hostile to St. Athanasius, being professed Eusebians, all of them were Orientals and most
of them belonged to the patriarchate of Antioch. Not a single Western or Latin bishop was
present and the pope, Julius, was in no way represented. This fact gave Socrates the histo-
rian the opi^ortunity of making the statement (around which such ijolemics have raged),
that " an ecclesiastical canon commands that the churches should not make decrees against
the opinion of the bishop of Rome." ^

But while this much is all clear, there is no council that presents a greater amount of
difficulty to the historian as well as to the theologian. No one can deny that St. Hilary of
Poictiers, who was a contemporary, styled it a Synod of Saints (Syuodus Sanctorum) ^ ; that
two of its canons were read at Chalcedon as the " canons of the Holy Fathers " ; and that
Popes John II., Zacharias, and Leo. IV. all approved these canons, and attributed them to
"Holy Fathers." And yet this synod set forth creeds to rival that of Nice, and, it is said,
that some of the canons were adopted to condemn Athanasius.

Various attempts have been made to escape from these difficulties.

It has been suggested that there really were two Synods at Antioch, the one orthodox,
which adopted the canons, the other heretical.

Father Emanuel Schelstraten, S. J. ^ improved on this theory. He supposed that the
Eusebians stojDjjed behind in Antioch after the orthodox bishojjs left and then passed the
decrees against Athanasius, giving out that the synod was still in session. This has been
adopted by Pagi, Remi Ceillier, Walch, and to a certain extent by SchrOckh and others. But
Tillemont demurs to this view, urging that according to Socrates ^ the deposition of Atha-
nasius came first and the adoption of the canons afterwards. But Tillemont would seem to
have :nisunderstood Socrates on this point and this objection falls to the ground. But an-
other objection remains, viz., that both Socrates and Sozomen say that the creeds were drawn
up after the deposition of Athanasius, " and yet " (as Hefele remarks, Vol. II., -p. 63), " St.
Hilary says that these creeds proceeded from a ' Synod of Saints.' "

Schelstraten's hypothesis not being satisfactory, the learned Ballerini, in their appendix
to the Ojjera S. Leonis M., have set forth another theoiy with which Mansi agrees in his
" Notes on Alexander Natalis's Clmrch Hisfon/." These maintain that the canons did not
come from the Council iu Encceniis at all, but from another synod held before, in 332 ; but
Hefele rejects this hypothesis altogether, on the following grounds. First and chief est be-
cause it has no external evidence to support it ; and secondly because the internal evidence is
most unsatisfactory. But even if the 25 canons were adopted by a s^mod at Antioch in 332,
the real difficulty would not be obviated, for Socrates says ^ of that synod that there too the

' Socrates. H. E., Lib. IT., cap viij. Hefele thinks the state- | = Hilar. Pict. De Synodis, seu de Fide Orient., C. sxxii. Ed.
ment may rest upon nothing more than the letter of .Julius I. that | Ben., 117C

the matter should first have been referred to Rome (Hefele. ^ Schelstraten, S. J. s'acrwii Antiochenum Condi, auctoritati
Hist. Coi'tiriis. Vol. H., p. 59, n. 2.) But the word used by Soc- suns restitutuvi. (Ant. 1680.1
lates is Kacu;<! . < Socrates. H. E., Lib. H.. Cap. viij.

I * Socrates, i?. J?., Lib. I., Cap. xxiv.


lOG ANTIOCII IX ENC'EXIIS. A.D. 341

" opposers of the Niceue faith " were able to elect their candidate to fill the place of the
banished bishop Eustathius !

Hefele seems to g'ive the true solution of the whole difficulty when he says : " Certainly
Athanasius identified the Euseliians with the Arians and we regard them as at least Semi-
arians ; but at that time, after they had made the orthodox confession of faith, and repeatedly
declared their disapproval of the heresies condemned at Nice, they were considered, by the
greater number, as lawful bishops, and thoroughly orthodox and saintly men might with-
out hesitation unite with them at a synod." '

Pope Julius styles the verj- Eusebian synod that deposed Athanasius "dear brethren"
while blaming their action, and invited them to a common synod to enquire into the charges
made against the Saint. In view of all this we may well believe that both orthodox and
Eusebians met together at the consecration of the Emperor's new church, and that the whole
church afterwards awarded the canons then adopted a rank in accordance with their intrin-
sic worth, and without any regard to the motives or shades of theological opinion that
swayed those who drafted and voted for them.

> Hefele. History of the Councils. Vol., II., p. C6. I have in this introduction done little more than condense Hefele.


THE SYNODAL LETTER.

{Found in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. II., col. 559. It really is no part of
the canons, but I have placed it here, because, as Labbe notes, " it is usually prefixed to the
canons in the Greek/')

The holy and most peaceful Synod which has been gathered together in Antioch from
the provinces of Ccele-Syria, Phoenicia, Palestine, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, and
Isauria ; ^ to our like-minded and holy fellow Ministers in every Province, health in the
Lord.

The grace and truth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ hath regarded the holy
Church of the Antiochians, and, by joining it together with unity of mind and concord
and the Spirit of Peace, hath likewise bettered many other things; and in them all
this betterment is wrought by the assistance of the holy and peace-giving Spirit.
Wherefore, that which after much examination and investigation, was unanimously
agreed upon by us bishops, who coming out of various Provinces have met together in
Antioch, we have now brought to your knowledge ; trusting in the grace of Christ and
in the Holy Spirit of Peace, that ye also will agree with us and stand by us as far as
in you lies, striving with us in prayers, and being even more united with us, following
the Holy Spirit, uniting in our definitions, and decreeing the same things as we ; ye, in
the concord which proceedeth of the Holy Spirit, sealing and confirming what has
been determined.

Now the Canons of the Church which have been settled are hereto appended.

1 Hefele thinks this list of provinces is probably an interpolation. In the Latin version this letter is followed by the names of
the bishops.


THE CANONS OF THE BLESSED AND HOLY FATHERS AS-
SEMBLED AT ANTIOCH IN SYRIA/


CANON I.

AVhosoever shall presume to set aside the decree of the holy and great Sjmod
whieh was asstMiibh-d at Nice in the presence of th(> ])i()ns Eni])or()r Constantine, beloved
of CumI, concerning the holy and salutary feast of lilaster ; if they shall obstinately i)er-
sist in opposing what was [then] rightl} ordained, let them be excommunicated and
cast out of the Church ; this is said concerning the laity. But if any one of those who
]n-osido in the Church, whether he be bisho]i, ]>resbytoi-, or (l(\acon, shall ])resl^nle, after
this decree, to exercise his own private judgment to the subversion of tlu- j)eo])le and to
the disturbance of the churches, by observing Easter [at the same time] with the Jews,
the holy Synod decrees that he shall thenceforth be an alien from the Church, as one
who not only heaps sins u])on himself, but who is also the cause of destruction and sub-
version to man}'; and it deposes not only such pt^rsons themselves from their ministry,
but those also who after their deposition shall presume to communicate with them.
And the deposed shall be deprived even of that external honour, of which the holy
Canon and God's priesthood partake.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon I. iug the decrees sanctioned and received by

Whoso endeavours io change the laivfid tradi- ^^^ ^^^^^"^^^ ' ^^^ ^^ *^^"' ^^.^^^^^ 1° «^e^^: ^^^y


tion of Easter, if he be a layman let him he ex
commxnicated, but if a cleric let him be cast out of
the Charch.


are attempting to overturn." And this being
the case, why should such not be rejjelled or
cast forth from the Church as rebels ?

Finally this Canon proves that not only
The connexion between these canons of ' ^^^^W^^ "^"^^ P^^^by^^^'^, but also deacons were
Antioeh and the Apostolical Canons is so ^'T^'^"^^,} ^™""" them who, "preside m the
evident and so intimate that I shall note it, in Church. An argument m tavour of the
each case, for the convenience of the student, opi'^ioii ^hat the deacons of that time were

Zonaras and Balsamon both point out that entrusted with hierarchical functions,
from this tirst canon it is evident that the It is curious that as a matter of fact the
Council of Nice did take action upon the entire clergy and people of the AVest fell
Paschal question, and in a form well known under the anathema of this canon in 1825,


to the Church.

Van Espen.

From this canon it appears that the fathers
did not deem laymen deserving of excom-
munication who merely broke the decrees, but
only those who " obstinately persist in opj^os-


when they observed Easter on the same day
as the Jews. This was owing to the adoption
of the Gregorian calendar, and this misfort-
une while that calendar is followed it is al-
most impossible to prevent.'

Compare Apostolic Canons ; Canon VII.


CANON IT.

All who enter the church of CJod and hear the Holy Scriptures, but do not com-
municate Avith the people in ]n-ayers, or who turn away, by reason of some disorder, from
the holy partaking of the Eucharist, are to be cast out of the Church, until, after they
shall have made confession, and having brought forth the fruits of penance, and made


' This is the title in the codices of Zornras ; the Parisian edition
of Balsamon simply reads " The S}Tiod at Amioch " The Bod-
leian MS. reads " Canons of the Synod at .\ntioch in Syria."


''There seems but little doubt that the < .r. :.
be introduced before many years into Russia.


<r:aii Calendar will


ANTIOCH IN ENCENIIS. A.D. 341


109


earnest entreaty, they shall have obtained forgiveness ; and it is unlawful to communi-
cate with excommunicated persons, or to assemble in j^rivate houses and pray with those
who do not i)ray in the Church ; or to receive in one Church those who do not assemble
wdtli another Church. And, if any one of the bishops, ])resbyters, or deacons, or any
one in the Canon shall be found communicating with excommunicated persons, let him
also be excommunicated, as one who brings confusion on the order of the Church.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II.


WJioso conies to chinrJi, and aitenticely hears
the holy Scriptures, and then despises, goes forth
from, and turns his hacJc upon the Comiuunion, let
hiin be cast out, until after having brought forth
fruits of penance, he shall be indulged. A)ul who-
so coiuiHunicates a-ith one excotninunicated, shall
he excommunicated, and wlioso prays with him wJio
prays not with the Church is guilty, and even
wltoso receives him who does not attend tlte ser-
vices of the Church is not without guilt.

Balsamon.

In the Eighth and Ninth canons of the
Apostles it is set forth how those are to be
punished who will not wait for the prayers,
and the holy Communion : So, too, in the
Tenth canon provision is made with respect
to those who communicate with the excom-
municated. In pursuance of this the present
canon provides that they are to be cut off
who come to church and do not wait for the
prayer, and through disorder [? dra^iai/] ^ will
not receive the holy Communion ; for such
are to be cast out until with confession they
shew forth worthy penance.

Zonakas.

In this canon the Fathers refer to such as
go to church l^ut will not tarry to the prayer
nor receive holy Communion, held back by
some perversity or license, that is to say with-
out any just cause, but petulantly, and by
reason of some disorder [dra^Yai'] ; these are


forbidden to be expelled from the Church,
that is to say cut off from the congregation of
the faithful. But the Fathers call it a turn-
ing awa}^ from, not a hatred of the divine
Communion, which holds them l)ack from
communion ; a certain kind of Hight from it,
brought about perchance by reverence and
lowliness of mind. Those who object to com-
municate by reason of hatred or disgust, such
must be punished not with mere se2)aration,
but by an altogether absolute excommunica-
tion, and be cursed with anathema.

It need hardly be remarked that this canon
has no reference to such of the faithful as
tarry to the end of the service and yet do not
partake of the holy sacrament, being held
back by some good reason, recognized by the
Church as such. It will be remembered that
the highest grade of Penitents did this hal)it-
ually, and that it was looked upon as a great
privilege to be allowed to be present when
the Divine Mysteries were performed, even
though those assisting as spectators might
not be partakers of them. What this canon
condemns is leaving the Church before the
service of the Holy Eucharist is done ; tliis
much is clear, the difficulty is to understand
just why these particular people, against
whom the canon is directed, did so.

This canon should be compared with the
Apostolic canons viij., ix., x., xj., xij. and
xiij.


CANON III.

If any presbyter or deacon, or any one whatever belonging to the priesthood, shall for-
sake his own parish, and shall depart, ami, having wholly changed his residence, shall
set himself to remain for a long time in another parish, let him no longer officiate ; espe-
cially if his own bishop shall summon and urge him to return to his own parish and he
shall disobey. And if he persist in his disorder, let him be wholly deposed from his
ministry, so that no further room be left for his restoration. And if another bishop
shall receive a man deposed for this cause, let him be punished by the Common Synod
as one who nullifies the ecclesiastical laws.


• I confops I do not know what the phrase Kara ma dra^Cav
means, nor do the Greek Commentators give much help. I have
translated " by reason of some disorder" in the canon itself, and
in the notes, but Beveridge renders it propter aliquam insolen- \


Ham, which to me appears very unsatisfactory. The pro qua-
darn, intent per antia of the ordinary Latin seems no better. The
same word is used in the next canon.


110


AXTIOCII IX EXC.EXIIS. A.D. 341


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

If unil cleric leaves his own jmrisJi and goes off
to anotlicr, tranUinfi here (uid fJinr, and sfai/s for
a long time in that oilier, let hint not offer the sacri-
fice (XiLTovpyiLTw), especiallg if he do not ret am
ichen called by his own bishop. But if he per-
se reres in his insolence let him be deposed, neither
afterwards let him hare anij power to refarn. And
if any bishop shall receive him thus deposed, he


shall be punished by the Common Synod for breach
of the ecclesiastical laws.

Compare with Cauons of the Apostles xv.
and xvi.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
('(uionici, Gratian's Jkrrrtum, Pars II., Causa
YIL, Quiest. I., Can. xxiv.'


CANON IV.

If any bishop ^vho has Ijecn dcpost.'d by u synod, or any preslnter or deacou who
has been deposed by his bisliop shall presume to execute an}' part of the ministry,
whether it be a bishop according to his former custom, or a presbyter, or a deacon, he
shall no longer have any jn-ospect of restoration in another Synod ; nor any opportunity
of making his dt^fence ; but they who connnunicate with him shall all l)e cast out of the
Church, and particularly if they have presumetl to communicate with the persons afore-
mentioned, knowing the sentence pronounced against them,

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.
If a bishop deposed by a synod shall dare to
celebrate the liturgy, let him have no chance of re-
turn.

Tliis canon derives its chief interest from
the fact that it is usually considered to have
been ad()i)tod at tlie instigation of the party
opposed to St. Athanasius and that afterwards
it was used against St. Chrysostoni. But while
such may have been tlie secret reason why
some voted for it and others prized it, it
must be remembered that its provision is
identical with that of the Apostolic Canons,
and that it was read at tlie Council of Chal-
cedou as Canon eight^^-three. Remi Ceillier
(Hisfoire Ceneral des Autheurs, p. (559) tries to
prove that this is not the canon whicli St.


Chrysostom and his fi'iends rejected, but He-
fele thinks his position "altogether unten-
aljle " (Hist of the Councils, Vol. II., p. (52, u.
1), and refers to Tillemont {Jlemoires, p. 32'.),
Sur les Arians, and Fuchs' Bib. der Kirchen-
versammlungen, P. II., p. 59.-')

Compare Af)Ostolic Canon xxviij.

This canon is found tv^dce in the Juris Cor-
2)us Canonici, Gratiau's iJecrefum, Pars II.,
Causa XI., Qusest. III., Can. vj., and Can. vij.
in the version of Martin Bracarensis. This
version is very iutei'esting as expanding the
phrase " to execute any })art of the ministry "
into " to make the oblation, or to i)erform the
morning or evening sacrifice as though he
were in office just as before, etc."


CANON V.

If any presbyter or deacon, despising his own bislio]), has so]iarat(Ml himself from the
Church, and gathered a private assembly, and set up an altar; and if, when summoned
by his bishop, he shall refuse to be ])eisuaded and will not obey, even though he sum-
mon him a first and a second time, let such an (Hu; Ix' w holly dejiosed and have no fur-
ther remedy, neither be capal)]e of regaining his rank. An<l if he ])ersist in troul)ling
and disturbing the Church, let him be corrected, as a seditious person, by the civil
power.

' Hefele pcems to have overlooked this. The note referring to witli wlint I hnve cited above, and with the followinsr ip. G.t): "In

the Apostohc Canons i» nil wTon<; ( \>. r.8. n l.l the alta r of St Cliryfostoni the canon employed airainst him wa,s

' Uefe'e on the precedinir paL'e (p. 61, n. Ii sayn "Of course represented as i)r,>c(edinLr from the .Xriaiis. and all ;ittenipts to

the sentence or canon to which the adversaries of Chrysostom re- deny its identity with our fourth and twelfth Autiochiau cauous

ferred must be distinfiuished from the fourth and twelfth t ucAn- are fruitless."
tioch.an canons. It seems somewhat dillicult to reconcile this


AXTIOCH IX ENC^XIIS. A.D. 341


111


NOTES.


AxciEXT Epitome of Canon V.


Anil preshiikr or deacon icJio spurns his bishop,
and irithdraics from hint, and sets up another
altar, if after being thrice called bij the bishojj, he
sh(dl jJCi'sist in his arrofjancy, let him be deposed
and be deprived of all hope of restoration .

It will be noted that the AncieBt Epitome
mentions three warnings, and the canon only
two. The e2:)itome in this evidently follows
the Apostolical Canon, numljer thirty-one. It
is somewhat curious that Aristenus in com-
menting on this canon does not note the dis-
crepancy.

Van Espen. !

This canon, together with the preceding
was read from the Code of Canons at the Coun-
cil of Chalcedon, at the Fourth Session in
connexion with the case of Carosus and Dor-
othoeus, and of other monks who adhered to
them. And a sentence in accordance with
them was conceived in these words against
those who would not obey the Council in the
condemnation of Eutyches, "Let them know


that they together with the monks who are
with them, are deprived of grade, and of all dig-
nity, and of communion, as well as he, so that
they cease to j^reside over their monasteries :
and if they attempt to escape, this holy and uni-
versal great council decrees the same punish-
ment shall attach to them, that is to say the ex-
ternal authority, according to the divine and
holv laws of the Fathers, shall carry out the
sentence passed against the contumacious."

This canon shews that monks and clerics
Avho were rebellious were sometimes coerced
by the Secular Power, when the ecclesiastical
power was not sufficient to coerce them, and
hence it was that the secular arm was called
in.

Compare with this Apostolic Canon XXXI.

The last clause of this canon is found in the
Corpus Juris Canonici,(jvatiiinH JM'cretum, Pars
II. Causa XI., Qusest YIII. Can. vij. (The
Latin however for " by the civil power " is, as
is pointed out by the Roman Correctors, j^^f
forinsecam potestatem or pier forasticam potes-
: tatem.


CAXOX \1.

If any one has been excommunicated by bis own bishop, let him not be received by
others until he has either been restored by his own bishop, or until, when a synod is
held, he shall have appeared and made his defence, and, having convinced the synod,
shall have received a different sentence. And let this decree apply to the laity, and to
presbyters and deacons, and all who are enrolled in the clergj-'list.


XOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon YI.


The sentence of the greater synod Kpon a clerJc
excommunicated by his bishop, ichether cf acquitted
or condemnation, shall stand.


Comi:)are Apostolic Canons numbers XII.
and XXXII.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canon ici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
XI., Qusest. III., Can. ij.


CANON YII.

No stranger shall be received without letters pacifical.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon YII.


A traveller having no letter pacific ivith Mm is
not to be received.


Compare
XXXIII.


the Apostolic Canon number


For a discussion of the Letters styled paci-
fici, see notes on next canon.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Can-
onici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. Ixxi.,
c. ix. in Isidore's version. The Roman Cor-
rectors note that Diouysius must have had a
different reading from the Greek we know.


112 ANTIOCII IX EXC.-EXIIS. A.D. 341


CANON VIII.

Let not country presbyters give letters canonical, or let them send such letters only
to the neighbouring bishops. But the chorepiscopi of good rejjort may give letters paci-
fical.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII. is continued, but in this cauon and in the

A coil tifn/ prcshi/frr is not to gi re canonical let- -ilst of Lautlicoa the expression " Canonical

tcrs, or[af inosf] onhi to a ncighbouying bishop. Letters" is used. In the West, at least, these

letters received the episcoiDal seal of the dio-

These "letters canonical" were called in cese to avoid all possibility of imposture,
the "West letters "f(inuat(v" and no greater Dean Pluiuptre (whom I am following very
proof of the great influence they had in the closely in this note) believes the earliest evi-
early days of the Churcli in binding tlie faith- dence of tliis use of the diocesan seal is in 8t.
ful together can be found than the fact that Augustine {K})ist. lix. al. ccxvij.) He also re-
Julian the Apostate made an attempt to in- fers to Ducange, s. v. Forinatjc.
troduce something similar among the pagans As these letters admitted their bearers
of his empire. to communion they were sometimes called

"Commendatory letters" (eVto-ToAru o-uo-ra- "Comnuinion letters" («otrojitKtit), and are so

TLKm) are spoken of by St. Paul in 2 Cor. iii. 1, described by St. Cyril of Alexandria ; and by

and the reader will find some interesting re- the Council of Elvira (canon xxv.), and by St.

marks on this and cognate subjects in J. J. Augustine [Epiist. xliii. <d. clxii).

Blunt's, 'The Christian Church during the first The "Letters Pacitical" apj)ear to have
three Centuries (Chapter II). ' been of an eleemosynary character, so that

By means of tliese letters even the lay peo- the bearers of them obtained bodily helj).

pie found hospitality and care in every part Chalcedon in its eleventh canon ordains that

of tlie world, and it was thrown up against the these " Letters pacifical " shall be given to the

Donatists as a mark of their being schis- poor, whether they be clerics or laics. The

matics that their canonical letters were good same expression is used in the preceding

only among themselves. canon of the synod.

Pseudo-Isidore informs us that it was A later form of ecclesiastical letter is that

stated at the Council of Chalcedon by Atti- with wliich we are so familiar, the "letter

cus, bishop of Constanfinople, that it was dimissorv." This expression first occurs in

agreed at the Council of Xice that all such Canon XVII. of the Council in Trullo. On

letters should be marked II. Y. A. IT. (i. e. this expression Snicer (ThcsaurKs, s. r. uttoXv-

Father, Son, Holy Spirit), and it is asserted tlk^j) draws from the context the conclusion

(Herzog, Jical-Enci/k:, s. r. Literal Formatai) that " letters dimissory " were given only for

that this f(n'm is found in German documents permanent change of ecclesiastical residence,

of the sixtli centuiy. wliile "letters commendatory" were given to

As will be seen among the Canons of Chal- those whose absence from their diocese was

cedon, the old name. Letters Commendatory, only temporary.

CANON IX.

It behoves the l)isli()])s in ev(>rv province to acknowh^'dgo the bishop wlio ]>resides in
the metropolis, and who has to take tliought for the wliole ])rovince ; because all men of
business come together from every quarter to the nietro])olis. Wherefore it is decreed
that he have precedence in rank, and tliat the other bishops do nothing extracn-dinary
without hira, (according to the ancient canon whicli ]>r(Mailed from [the times of | our
Fathers) or such things only as jx-rtain to their own particular parishes and tlie districts
subject to them. For each bisho|) has authority over his own |)arish, both to manage it
with the piety Avhich is incundjent on every one, and to make pnn'ision for the whole
district which is de])endent on liis city ; to ordain ]iresbvters and d(\acons ; and to settle
everything with jmlgnient. Ibit let him undertake nothing further without the l)ishop
of the metropolis ; neither the latter without the consent of the others.


ANTIOCH IN ENC^NllS. A.D. 341


113


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.
Hisliops sJio/tld })(' hi»itt<l fn flic ophuoil of fhr
metropolitan, oiid uothiiuj sltoald than do ivdhout
his knoiiiedge except only such things as have re-
ference to the diocese of each, and let tJiem ordain
men free from blame.

Van Espen.

From tliis canon we see that causes of
more imiiortance and greater moment are to
be considered in the Provincial Synod which
consisted of the metropolitan and the other
Lishi^ps of the province.

By the "ancient canon " of which mention
is liere made, there can scarcely be a donbt
is intended the xxxiv. of the Canons of the
Apostles, since in it are read the same pro-
visions (and almost in the same words) as
here are set forth somewhat more at length :
nor is there any other canon in which these i


provisions are found earlier in date than this
synod, wherefore from this is deduced a
strong argument for the integrity of the
Canons of the Apostles.

The Avording of this canon should be coni^
pared Avith the famous sentence so often
quoted of St. Irena'us. "Ad hanc enim eccle-
siam [i. e. of Rome] propter potentiorem
principalitatem uecesse est omnem convenire
ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique fi-
deles, in qua semper ab his, qiii sunt undi-
que, consei-vata est eaque est ab Apostolis
traditio."

Is it not likely that in the lost Greek origi-
nal the words translated convenire ad were
avvTpexeiv it' ? Vide on the meaning of con-
venire ad, F. W. Puller, The Primitive Saints
and the See of Home, pp. 32 ct seqq.

Compare Apostolic Canon XXXIV.


CANON X.

The Holy Synod decrees that persons in villages and districts, or those Avho are
called cliorepiscopi, even though they may have received ordination to the Episcopate,
shall regard their own limits and manage the cbnrclies subject to them, and be content
with the cave and administration of these ; but they may ordain readers, sub-deacons
and exorcists, and shall be content with promoting these, but shall not presume to or-
dain either a presbyter or a deacon, without the consent of bishop of the city to which
he and his district are subject. And if he shall dare to transgress [these] decrees, he
shall be deposed from the rank which he enjoys. And a chorepiscojDUS is to be ap-
pointed by the bishop of the city to which he is subject.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


A chorepiscopus maTces Exorcists, Lectors, Sub-
deacons and Singers, but not a presbyter or a dea-
con n-ithout the bishop of the city. Who dares to
transgress this law Jet him be deposed. The
bishop of the city makes the chorepiscopus.

For the Minor Orders in the Earl}- Church
see the Excursus on the subject appended to
Canon XXIY. of Laodicea.

" Ordination to the episcoimte." In trans-
lating thus I have followed both Dionysius
and Isidore, the former of whom translates
"although they had received the iiuposition
of the hand of the bishop and had been con-
secrated bishops ;" and the latter "although
they had received from bishops the imj^osition
of the hand, and had been consecrated
bishops."


Van Espen.


There can be no doubt that the Cliorepis-
copi, the authority of Avhom is limited by this
canon, are supposed to be endowed with the
episcopal character. Among the learned
there is a controversy as to whether Chore-
piscopi were true bishops by virtue of the
ordination to that office, and endowed with
the episcopal character or were only bishojjs
when accidentally so. But whatever may be
the merits of this controversy, there can be no
doubt from the context of this canon that the
Fathersof Antiochtookit for granted that the
cliorepiscopi were true bishops by virtue of
their ordination, but it is also evident that
they were subject to the bishop of the greater
city. It must also be noted that these cliore-
piscopi were not instituted by the canons of
the Councils of Ancyra. Xeoctesarea, or even
of Nice, for these speak of them and make


114


AxNTlOClI IN EXC.KNIIS. A.D. 341


their decrees as concerning something already Antioch supposed these chorepiscopi to be
existing. I real bishops, for otherwise even with the

And from the very liiiiitfitioiis of this canon liceuse of the bishop of the city they could
it is by no means obscure that the fathers of not ordain presbyters or deacons.


CANON XI.


If finv bishop, or ]irosl>yter, or any ono whatever of the canon shall presume to
betake himself to the Emperor witiiout the consent and letters of the bishop of the
province, and particularly of the bishop of the metro])olis, such a one shall be jmblidj
<leposed and cast out, not only from communion, i)ut also from the rank wliich he
hap])ens to have; inasmucii as he dares to trouble the ears of our Emju-ror beloved of
God, contrary to the law of the Church. But, if necessary business shall rcHjuire any
one to go to the Emperor, let him do it with the advice and consent of the metropolitan
and other bishops in the province, and let him undertake his journey with letters from
them.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XL


A bishop .or jjn'sh//f(r irlio of his oirn motion
and not at the biddinfi of the Metropolitan of the
province f/oes to the Ewjirror sh<dl he depri red both
of connnKnion and difjuifij.

This canon is one of those magnificent
efforts which the early church made to clieck
the already growing inclination to what we
have in later tim(>s learned to call Erastian-
ism. Not only did tlie State, as soon as it
became Christian, interfere in spiritual mat-
ters at its own motion, but there were found
bishops and others of the clergy wlio not
being able to attain their ends otherwise,


appealed to the civil power, usually to the
Emperor himself, and thus the whole disci-
pline of the Church was threatened, and the
authority of spiritual synods set aside. How
unsuccessful the Church often was in this
struggle is only too evident from the remarks
of the Greek commentator Balsamon on this
very canon.

Hefele.
Kellner (Das li/iss. and Htrafversahren, p.
(51) remarks with reference to this, that de-
position is here treated as a heavier imnish-
ment than exclusion from communion, and
therefore the latter cannot mean actual
excommunication but only suspension.


CANON XII.

If any presbyter or deacon deposed by his own bishop, or any bisliop deposed by a
synod, shall dare to troul)le the ears of the Emperor, when it is his duty to submit his
case to a greater synod of l)ishops, and to refer to more bishops the things wliich lie
thinks right, and to abide by the examination and decision made by them ; if, despising
these, he shall trouble the Emperor, he shall bo entitl(Ml to no ]>ardon, neither shall he
have an opportunity of defence, nor any hope of future restoration.

NOTES. .


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.
One deposed, if lie sluill harr troiiljfed the
Emperor, sh(dl seek the f/rrafrr sz/ikkI, and sut>-
mit to its dnnr. lint if lieaijain misf)ehare him-
self, he shall m,! have ani/ ehanee of restoration.


and it was used against St. Chrysostom by his
enemies. Vide Socrates, Ecelesiastienl His-
forif. Book II., Clia})ter viij., and Sozomen's
h't-cli'siasfical Jlistor/f, Book III., cha2)ter v. ;
also ibid. Book VII., chapter xx.


It is usually suiiposcd that this canon, as This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
well as the fourth, and the fourteenth and \ Canoniei, Gratian's Deeretum, Pars II., Causa
fifteentli, was directed against St. Athanasius, XXL, Quest. V., Can. ij., in Isidore's Version.


ANTIOCll IX ENC^NILS. A.D. 341 lio

CANON XIII.

No bishop shall presume to pass from one province to another, and ordain persons
to the digiiit}' of the ministry iu the Church, not even should he have others with him,
unless he should go at the written invitation of the metropolitan and l)ishops into whose
country he goes. But if he should, without invitation, proceed irregularly to the ordina-
tion of any, or to the regulation of ecclesiastical affairs which do not concern him, the
things done by him are null, and he himself shall suffer the due punishment of his irregu-
larity and his unreasonable undertaking, by being forthwith deposed by the holy Synod.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII. j This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

Ificithnd itu-itafion a hishnp shall rjn into an-] Canonici, Gratian's Derrcfum, Pars II., Causa

othrr province, and shall ordain, and\idministcr '^^; Qusest. II., Can. vj. in the Versio Prisca.

affairs, what he does shall be void and lie himself The Roman Correctors are not satisfied with


shall be deposed.

Compare with this Apostolic Canon xxxv. :
also canon xxii. of this same synod.


it, however, nor with any version and give the
Greek text, to which they add an accurate
translation.


CANON XIV.

If a bishop shall be tried on any accusations, and it should then happen that the
bishops of the province disagree concerning him, some pronouncing the accused inno-
cent, and others guilty ; for the settlement of all disputes, the holy Synod decrees that
the metropolitan call on some others belonging to the neighbouring province, who shall
add their judgment and resolve the dispute, and thus, with those of the province, confirm
what is determined.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV. This also is the law of the Synod of Sardica,

^ ^ . -,. canons iii. and v.

If the bisltojjs of the province disagree among |

themselves as to an accused bishop, that the eon- \ Aristenus,

troversy may be certainly settled, let other neigh- Every bishop accused of crimes should be
bouring bishops be called in. judged by his own synod, but if the bishops

of the province differ, some sajang that he is
ZoNARAS innocent and some that he is guilty, the metro-

politan can call other bishops from a neigh-
When any bishop shall have been con- i^o^.i-ij^g province that they may solve the
demned with unanimous consent by all the controversy agitated bv the' bishops,
bishops of the province, the condemnation can-
not be called into doubt, as this synod has set This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
forth in its fourth canon. But if all the bish- Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
ops are not of the same mind, but some con- vi., Qusest. iv., can. j. The Eoman Correctors
tend that he should be condemned and others note that the Latin translation implies that
the contrary, then other bishops may b called the neighbouring- metropolitan is to be in-
iu by the nietropolitan from the neighbouring vited and say, " But. in truth, it hardly seems
provinces, and when their votes are added to fitting that one metropolitan should come at
one or other of the parties among the bishops, the call of another, and that there should be
then controversy should be brought to a close, two metropolitans in one synod."

CANON XV.

If any bishop, lying under any accusation, shall be judged by all the bishops in the
province, and all shall unanimously deliver the same verdict concerning him, he shall
not be again judged by others, but the unanimous sentence of the bishops of the prov-
ince shall stand firm.


116


ANTIOCII IX EXaEXIIS. A.D. 341


NOTES.


Akciext Epitome of Canon XV.

If all the bishops of a province agree icith regard
to a bishop aJremlif sentenced, a new tried shidl not
he granted him.

Van Espen.

Bv tlie phrase "by others " must be under-
stood bishops called from a neighbouring
province, of which mention is made in the
previous canon, where in the case of an agree-
ment among the bishops, the synod did not
wish to be called in, even if it were demanded
by the condemned bishop. This canon, there-
fore, is a supplement as it were to the preced-
ing. And for this reason in the Breviarium
and in Cresconius's CotJcrtioi} of Canons they
are phiced under a common title, cap. 144,


"Concerning the difference of opinion which
hapjtens in the judgnKnt of Inshops, or when
a bishop is cut oil" by all the l)ishops of his
province."

From these canons it is manifest that at
first the causes of bishops were agitated and
decided in pi'ovincial synods, and this disci-
Inline continued for man}' centuries, and was
little l\v little departed from in the Vlllth
and IXth centui'ies.

Tliis canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratiau's iJcvreium, Pars II., Causa
VI., Qusest. IV., Can. v. Gratian adds a note
which Van Espen remarks smacks of his own
date rather than of that of the Synod of An-
tioch.


CANON XVI.

If any bishop without a see sliall throAv himself upon a vacant church and seize its
throne, without a full synod, he shall be cast out, even if all the people over whom he
has usurped jurisdiction should choose him. And that shall be [accounted] a full synod,
in which the metropolitan is present.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


cil of Chalcedon, from the book of the canons,
in which this is called the 95th and the fol-
WJioerer without the fall spiod and tvitJwut the i^^^.- the 96th, according to the order ob-
Mctropohtan Councd, shall go over to a vacant g^^.^g^^ ^^ ^hat book of the canons.
church, even ij he has no position, he shall be


ejected.


Beveridge.


This, together with the following canon,
was recited by Bishop Leontius in the Coun-


This canon is found in the Obrpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decrrtum, Pars I., Dist.
XCIL, Can. viij. in Isidore's version, and the
Roman Correctors note its departure from the


original.


CANON XVII.

If any one having received the ordination of a bishop, and having been appointed
to preside over a people, shall not accept his ministry, and will not be persuaded to i)ro-
ceed to the Church entrusted to him, he shall be excommunicated until he, being con-
strained, accept it, or until h full synod of the bishops of the province shall have deter-
mined concerning him.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

WJioso has received orders and abandoned
them let him be excommunicated, until he shall
have repented and been received.

ZONARAS.

If any one called to the rule of the people
rsfuse to undertake that office and ministry,


let him be removed from communion, that is
separated, until he accejit tlie position. But
shoulil he i^ersist in his refusal, he can by no
means be absolved from his separation, unless
perchance the full synod shall take some ac-
tion in his case. For it is possible that he
may assign reasonable causes why he should
be excused from accepting the prelature of-


AXTIOCII IX ENC.'EXIIS. A.D. 341


117


fered him, reasons which "would meet with Com|)are
the apijrobatiou of the synod. XXXVl.


with this Apostolic Canon


Biilsamon explains the canon in the same This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
sense and adds that by " ordination " here is Canonici, Gratian's Decrcfum, Pars I., Dist.
intended ordination proper, not merely elec- XCII., C. vij. The Roman Correctors note
tion, as some have held. i that Dionvoius's version is nearer the Greek.


CANON XYIII.

If any bishop ordained to a parish i^liall not proceed to the parish to which he has
been ordained, not through any fault of his own, but either because of the rejection
of the people, or for any other reason not arising from himself, let him enjoy his rank
and ministry ; only he shall not disturb the affairs of the Church which he joins ;
and lie shall abide by whatever the full synod of the province shall determine, after
judging the case.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.

Let a hishoj) ordained but not received hij his
city have his part of the honour, and offer the
liturgii Old//, tndting for the synod of the prov-
ince to give judgment.

Balsamon.

In canon xvij. the fathers punished him
who when ordained could not be persuaded
to go to the church to which he was assigned.
In the present canon they grant pardon to
him who is willing to take the charge of the
diocese, for which he was consecrated, but is
prevented from doing so by the impudence
of the peojole or else by the incursions of the
infidel ; and therefore they allow him to
enjoy, in whatever province he may happen
to be, the honour due his rank, viz., his


throne, his title, and the exercise of the
episcopal office, witli the knowledge and con-
sent of the bishop of the diocese. He must
not, however, meddle with the affairs of the
church of which he is a guest, that is to say
he must not teach, nor ordain, nor perform
any episcoj^al act without the consent of the
bishop of the diocese ; but he must observe
quiet, until he learns what he ought to do
by the determination of the full Synod.

Aristenus explains that by keeping quiet is
intended that he should not " use any military
helj^ or other power. "

This canon is found twice in the Corpus
Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I.,
Dist. xcii., c. iv. and v. ; in the versions of
Martin Bracarensis and of Dionysius.


.CANON XIX.

A BISHOP shall not be ordained without a synod and the presence of the metropoli-
tan of the province. And when he is present, it is by all means better that all his
brethren in the ministry of the Province should assemble together with him ; and these
the metropolitan ought to invite by letter. And it were better that all should meet ;
but if this be difficult, it is indispensable that a majority should either be present or
take part by letter in the election, and that thus the appointment should be made in
the presence, or with the consent, of the majority ; but if it should be done contrary to
these decrees, the ordination shall be of no force. And if the appointment shall be
made according to the prescribed canon, and any should object through natural love of
contradiction, the decision of the majority shall prevail.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX. j do not meet together, at least let the greater number,

I or let them give their assent by letter. But if
If there be no synod and metropolitan, let there after the affair is all settled a few are contentious,
be no bishop. If on account of some difficulty all let the vote of the majority stand firm.


118


AXTIOCII IX EXC.EXIIS. A.D. 341


ZONARAS.

lu the first place it must be noted that l)_v
" ordination " in this place is meant election,
and the laying on of the bishops hand.

Balsamon.

The method of choosing a bishop is laid
down in the canons of Nice, number iv., but
the present canon adds the provision that an
election which takes place in violation of the
provisions of this decree is null and invalid :
and that when those who are electing are
divided in opinion as to whom to choose, the
votes of the majority shall prevail. But


w'hen you bear this canon saying that there
should be no election without the presence of
the [Metropolitan, you must not say that he
ought to be present at an election (for this
was j)roliil)ited, as is fouml written in other
canons) but rather say that his presence here
is a permission or persuasion, without which
no election could take place.

Compare Apostolic Canon number j.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cfiiionici, Gratiau's iJccrctuni, Pars I., Dist.
LXY., can. iij. Gratian has chosen Isidore's
version, and the Roman Correctors point out
that Dionysius' is preferable.


CANON XX.

With a view to the good of the Church and tlie settlement of disputes, it is decreed
to be well that s^^nods of the bishops, (of which the metropolitan shall give notice to
the provincials), should be held in every province twice a year, one after the third week
of the feast of Easter, so that the synod may be ended in the fourth week of the Pen-
tecost ; and the second on the ides of October wdiich is the tenth [ or fifteenth] day of
the month Hyperberetajus ; so that presbyters and deacons, and all wlio think them-
selves unjustly dealt with, may resort to these synods and obtain the judgment of the
synod. But it shall be unlawful for any to hold synods by themselves without those
who are entrusted with the Metropolitan Sees.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

On account of ecclesiastical necessities the synod
in every province shall meet twice a year, in the
fourth week of Pentecost and on the tenth day of
Hyperberetceus.

ScHELESTRATius {cit. Van Espen).

Tlie time fixed by the Council of Nice be-
fore Lent for the meeting of the synod was
not received in the East, and the bishops kept
on in the old custom of celebrating the coun-
cil in the fourth week after Easter, for the
time before Lent often j^resented the great-
est difficulties for those in the far separated
cities to come to the provincial metropolis.

Van Espen.

In this canon the decree of Nice in canon
V. is renewed, but with this difference that
the Nicene synod orders one synod to be held


before Lent, Tint this synod that it should be
held the fourth week after Easter.

It will be remembered that the whole pe-
riod of the great fifty days from Easter to
Whitsunday was known as " Pentecost."

Com2:)are with this Apostolic Canon number
XXXVII.

This canon is found in tlie Corpus Juris
C(()i(»iici, Gratian's DccrcfiiiH, Pars I., Dist.
XVIII. , c. XV., attributed to a council held by
Pope Martin. The lioman Correctors point
out that this "Pope Martin " was a bishop of
Braga {Bracarcnsis) from whose collection of
the decrees of the Greek synods Gratian
often quotes ; the Correctors also note, " For
bishops in old times were usually called
Popes" (Antiquitu.s cnim episcopi Pnpce dice-
bant ur).


CANON XXI.

A BISHOP may not be translated from one jiarish to another, either inti-uding himself
of his own suggesticm, or under compulsion bv tlie ]ieo]ile, or by constraint of the
bishops ; but he shall remain in the Church to which he was allotted by God from the


ANTIOCII IN ENCiENIIS. A.D. 341


119


begimiing, and shall not be translated from it, according to the decree formerly passed
on the subject.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.
A bishop ercn if coi»peUcd ht/ the people, and
compelled bij tlie bishops, must not be translated to
anotJier diocese.

See the treatment of the translation of
bishojjs in the Excursus to canon xv. of Nice.


Compare this canon with Apostolical Can-
on number xiv.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's iJecretum, Pars II., Causa
VII., Quaist. I., can. xxv., from Isidore's ver-
sion.


CANON XXII.

Let not a bishop go to a strange city, which is not subject to himself, nor into a dis-
trict which does not belong to him, either to ordain any one, or to appoint presbyters or
deacons to places within the jurisdiction of another bishop, unless with the consent of
the proper bishop of the place. And if any one shall presume to do any such thing, the
ordination shall be void, and he himself shall be punished by the synod.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.


A bishop shall not go from city to citi/ ordain-
ing people, except by the will of the bishop of the
city : otherwise the ordination shall be without
force, and he himself exposed to censure.

If we do not draw a rash conclusion, we
sliould say that the interference of bishops in
dioceses not their own, must have been very
frequent in early days. This one s^nod en-
acted two canons (number XIII. and this
present canon) on the subject. The same
prohibition is found in canons XIV. and
XXXV. of the Apostolic canons, in canon XV.
of Nice, canon ij. of I. Constantinople and in
many others. On account of the similarity
of this canon to canon xiii. some have sup-
posed it to be spurious, the enactment of
some other synod, and this was the opinion
of Godefrides Hermautius {Vita S. Athana-
sii, Lib. IV., cap. xij.) as well as of Alexander
Natalis [Hist. Scec, IV., Dissert, xxv.). Van
Espen, however, is of opinion that the two
canons do not cover exactly the same ground,


for he says Canon XIII. requires letters both
from the Metropolitan and from the other
bishops of the province, while this canon
XXII. requires only the consent of the dioce-
san. He concludes that Canon XIII. refers
to a diocese sede vacante, when the Metropoli-
tan with the other bishops took care of the
widowed church, but that Canon XXII. refers
to a diocese with its own bishop, whose will
is all that is needed for the performance of
episcopal acts by another bishop. And this
distinction Schelestratius makes still more
evident by his discussion of the matter in his
scholion on Canon XIII.

Compare with this canon of the Apostolic
Canons number XXXV. also number XIV.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's JJevretum, Pars II., Causa
IX., Qusest. II., can. vij., but in a form differ-
ing far from the Greek original, as the Roman
Correctors joint out ; and even Gratian's
present text is not as he wrote it, but amended.


CANON XXIII.

It shall not be lawful for a bisho]), even at the close of life, to appoint another as
successor to himself ; and if any such thing should be done, the appointment shall be
void. But the ecclesiastical law must be observed, that a bishop must not be appointed
otherwise than by a synod and wdtli the judgment of the bishops, who have the authority
to promote the man who is worthy, after the falling asleep of him who has ceased from
his labours.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.

A dying bishop shall not apjpoint another bishop.
But ivhen he is dead a ivorthy successor shcdl be
provided by a synod of those who have this power.


Nothing could be more important than the
provision of this canon. It is evidently in-
tended to prevent nepotism in every form,
and to leave the appointment to the vacant


120


AXTiorir i\ i:\c.K\iis. a.d. 341


see absolutely to the free choice of the Metro-
politan and his synod. The history of the
Church, and its present jiractice, is a curious
commentary upon the ancient le<irislation, and
the appointment of coadjutcn- l)isho])s ctoii jure
succcssionis, so common in later days, seems to
be a somewhat ingenious way of escapino; the
force of the canon. Van Espen, however, re-
minds his readers of the most interesting case
of St. Augustine of Hippo (wliicli he liiinself
narrates in his Epistle CCXIII.) of how he
was chosen by his predecessor as bishoj? of
Hipjio, both he and the then bishop being ig-
norant of the fact that it was prohiljited by
the canons. And how when in his old age
the people wished him to have one chosen
bishop to help him till his death and to suc-
ceed him afterwards, he declined saying:
"What was worthy of blame in my own case,
shall not be a blot likewise upon my son."
He did not hesitate to say who he thought


most worthy to succeed him, but he added,
"he shall be a presbyter, as he is, and when
God so wills he shall l)e a bishop." Van Es-
pen ailds ; "All this should be read carefully
that thence may be learned how St. Au<'ustine
set an example to bishops and pastors of tak-
ing all the i)ains possible that after their
deaths true pastors, and not thieves and
wolves, should enter into their flocks, who in a
sliort time would destroy all they had accom-

*■' ''

plished by so much labour in so long a time."
(Cf. Eusebius. 11. E., Lib. VI., cap. xj. and
cap. xxxij.)

Compare Apostolic Canon number LXXVI.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cdnonici, Gratian's JJrrrcfuin, Pars II., Causa
VIII., Qusest. I., can. III., in Dionysius's ver-
sion, and again Canon IV. in that of Martin
Bracarensis.


CANON XXIY.

It is right that what belongs to the Clmrch be preserved with all care to the Church,
with a good conscience and faith in God, the inspector and judge of all. And these
things ought to be administered under the judgment and authority of the bislio]), who
is entrusted with the wliole people and with the souls of the congregation. But it
should be manifest what is church property, with the knowledge of the presbyters and
deacons about him ; so that these may know^ assuredly what things belong to the
Clmrch, and that nothing bo concealed from them, in order that, when the bishop may
hap})en to depart this life, the ])roperty belonging to the Church being well known, may
not be embezzled nor lost, and in ortler that the private property of the bishop may
not be disturbed on a pretence that it is part of the ecclesiastical goods. For it is just
and W(;ll-pleasing to God and man that the private ])r()))erty of tlit; bisliop be be-
queathed to whomsoever he will, Ijut that for the Church be kept whatever belongs to
the Church ; so that neither the Church may suffer loss, nor the bishop be injured un-
der pretext of the Church's interest, nor those who belong to him fall into lawsuits, and
himself, after his death, be brought under rej)i<)ach.


NOTES.

had the charge of it. All this Martin of Braga
sets forth more clearly in his version, and
All the cler;j!j shonhJ hr ro;/>uzanf of eccksms- , j jj^^.-e treated of the niatter at large in my
so ihnt ,rhm the Inshop dies the I ^^^.^i on Evrlemi.-<tical Law, Pars I., Tit. viii".,

cap. i., where I have shewn that the Cathe-
dral rha])ter succeeded to this senate of j^res-
bvters and deacons.


Ancient Epito^ie of Canon XXIV.


tieul matters

Church iiKiji prrsrrrr lur ouii (foods ; hut what
lieloiHjs to the bishop shall be disposed of accordiiuj
to his directions.


Van Espen.

This canon shews the early discipline ac-
cording to which the presbyters and deacons


Compare with this canon Ajjostolical Can-
on XL.

This canon in a somewhat changed form is


of the episcojml city, Avho were said to be found in the Corjius Juris Canoniei, Gratian's

"about him '■ or to pertain to his chair, ic])- Dnrrtuiu, Pars II., Causa XII., Quast. !..

resented the senate of the church, who to- can. xx., and attributed to " Po])e Martin's

gether with the bisln^p a<lniinistered the Council " ; also compare with this the ensu-

clmrch aft'airs, and, wlun the see was vacant, ing canon, nundiei- XXT.


ANTIOCH IN ENC^NIIS. A.D. 341


121


CANON XXV.

Let the bishop have power over the funds of the Church, so as to dispense them
with all piety and in the fear of God to all who need. And if there be occasicm, let him
take what he requires for his own necessary uses and those of his brethren sojourning
with him, so that they may in no way lack, according to the divine A})ostle, Avho says,
"Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content." And if he shall not Ix' con-
tent with these, but shall apply the funds to his own private uses, and not manage the
revenues of the Church, or the rent of the farms, M'ith the consent of the presbyters and
deacons, but shall give the authority to his own domestics and kinsmen, or brothers, or
sons, so that the accounts of the Church are secretly injured, he himself shall submit
to an investigation by the synod of the province. But if, on the other hand, the bishop
or his presbyters shall be defamed as appropriating to themselves what belongs to the
Chui'ch, (whether from lands or any other ecclesiastical resources), so that the poor are
oppressed, and accusation and infamy are brought upon the account and on those who
so administer it, let them also be subject to correction, the holy synod determining what
is right.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.


The hislwp shall have power over eccJesiasfieal
goods. But should he not he content with those
things which are sufficient for him but shad
alienate the goods and revenues of the church,
without the advice of the clergy, penalties shall he
exacted from him in the 2>resence of the synod.
But if he has converted to his oicn uses what was
given for the poor, of this also let Mm give an ex-
planation to the synod.

Compare with this canon Apostolic Canon
number XLI.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canoniei, Gratian's JDecretum, Pars II., Causa
XII., Qusest I., can. XXIII. and with this


should be compared canon XXII. immediately
preceding.

At the end of this canon in Labbe's ver-
sion of Diouysius we find these words added.
"And thirty bishops signed who were gath-
ered together at this Synod." Isidore Mer-
cator has a still fuller text, viz. : "I, Eusebius,
being present subscribe to all things consti-
tuted by this holy Synod. Theodore, Nicetas,
Macedonius, Auatolius, Tarcodimantus, .Ethe-
reus, Narcissus, Eustachius, Hes^-chius, Mau-
ricius, Paulus, and the rest, thirty bishops
agreed and signed." Van Espen after noting
that this addition is not found in the Greek,
nor in Martin Bracarensis, adds " there is
little j)robability that this clause is of the
same antiquity as the canons."


f


SYNOD OF LAODICEA.


A.D. 343-381.


Elenclius.


Historical Introduction.

TJie Canons tvith the Ancient Epitome and,
Notes.

Excursus to Canon XVIII., On the Choir
Offices of the Early Church.


Excursus to Canon XIX., On the Worship
of the Early Church.

Excursus to Canon XX II., On the Vest-
ments of the Early Church.

Excursus to Canon XXIV., On the Minor
Orders in the Early Church.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

The Laodicea at which the Synod met is Laixlicea in Thiygia Pacatiaiia, also called Lao-
dicea ad Lycum, aud to he carefully distinguished from the Laodicea in Syria. This much
is certain, but as to the exact date of the Synod there is much discussion. Peter de Marca
fixed it at the year 365, but Pagi in his Critica on liaronius's Amuils ' seems to have over-
thrown the arguments upon which de Marca rested, and agrees with Gothofred in jjlacing it
circa 3G3. At tirst sight it would seem that the Seventh Canon gave a clue w^hich would set-
tle the date, inasmuch as the Photinians are mentioned, and Bishoj) Photinus began to be
prominent in the middle of the fourth century and was anathematized b}* the Eusebians in a
synod at Antioch in 344, and by the orthodox at Milan in 3-45 ; and finally, after several
other condemnations, he died in banishment in 3GG. Jiut it is not quite certain whether the
word " Photinians " is not an interpolation. Something with regard to the date may perhaps
be di-awn from the word IIa/<artai/f;s as descriptive of Phrygia, for it is probable that this
division was not yet made at the time of the Sardican Council in 343. Hefele concludes
that " Under such circumstances, it is best, with Romi Ceillier, Tillemont, and others, to
place the meeting of the sjniod of Laodicea generally somewhere between the j'ears 343 and
381, i.e., between the Sardican and the Second Ecumenical Council — aud to give up the at-
tempt to discover a more exact date." ~

But since the traditional position of the canons of this Council is after those of Antioch
and immediately before those of First Constantinople, I have followed this order. Such is
their position in " very many old collections of the Councils which have had their origin
since the sixth or even in the fifth centur}'," says Hefele. It is true that Matthew Blastares
places these canons after those of Sardica, but the Quinisext Synod in its Second Canon and
Pope Leo IV., according to the Corpus Juris Canouici,^ give them the position which they
hold in this volume.


' Pa^ri : f'rit. in Anna}. Baron., a.d 314. n. xxv. Baronius's
view that this pynort was held before that of Nice because the
book of Judith "is not mentioned among the l)ooks of the O. T.,
and because its canons arc sometimes identical with those oi
Nice, is universally rejected.


2 Hefele : J/ist. nf the foineih. Vol. II., p. 29S.
= tJratian : Dcrre'tum. Pars I., Diet, xx., c. 1. It is from Leo's
letter to the British Bishops.


THE CANONS OF THE SYNOD HELD IN THE CITY OF
LAODICEA, IN PHRYGIA PACATIANA, IN WHICH MANY
BLESSED FATHERS FROM DIVERS PROVINCES OF ASIA
WERE GATHERED TOGETHER.^


The holy synod which assembled at Laodicea in Phrygia Pacatiaua, from divers
regions of Asia ; set forth the ecclesiastical definitions which are hereunder annexed.


NOTE.


This brief preface, by some ancient col-


lector, is found in the printed editions of Amerbachian manuscript.


Zonaras and of Balsamon and also in the


CANON I.

It is right, according to the ecclesiastical Canon, that the Communion should by
indulgence be given to those who have freely and lawfully joined in second marriages^
not having previously made a secret marriage ; after a short space, which is to be spent
by them in prayer and fasting.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome or Canon I.

A digamist not secretly married, after devot-
ing himself for a short time to praying shall he
held blameless afterwards.

Van Espen.

Many synods imposed a penance upon
digamists, although the Church never con-
demned second marriages.

On this whole subject of second marriages
see notes on Canon "VIII. of Nice, on Canons
III. and VII. of Neoceesarea, and on Canon
XIX. of Aneyra. In treating of this cauon
Hefele does little but follow Van Espen, who
accepts Bishop Beveridge's conclusions in
opposition to Justellus and refers to him, as
follows, " See this observation of Justellus'
refuted more at length by William Beveridge


I in his notes on this canon," and Bjx Beve-

j ridge adopted and defended the exjiosition of
the Greek commentators, viz. : there is some
fault and some punishment, they are to be

1 held back from communion for "a short
space," but after that, it is according to the

I law of the Church that they should Ije admitted
to communion. The phrase " not having

^previous!}' made a secret marriage" means
that there must not have been intercoui'se
with the woman before the second marriage
was '' lawfully " contracted, for if so the pun-
ishment would have been for fornication, and
neither light nor for " a short space," The
person referred to in the canon is a real diga-
mist and not a Ingamist, this is proved by the
word " lawfully " which could not be used of
the second marriage of a man who already
had a living wife.


CANON II.

They who have sinned in divers particulars, if they have persevered in the prayer
of confession and penance, and are wholly converted from their faults, shall be received
again to communion, through the mercy and goodness of God, after a time of penance
appointed to them, in proportion to the nature of their offence.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome or Canon II.
Those who have fallen into various faidts and
have confessed them with eompunction, and done


the penance suitable to them, shall he favourablrf
received.


' Such is the caption in the Parisian edition of Zonaras ; so | number of canons is 60, and substituting for "Pacatiana"
too reads the Amerbachian codex; adding, however, that the | "Capatiana," a not unusual form of the same word.


126


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.U. 343-381


Hefele.

Van Espeu and utliers were of opiuion
that this canon treated only of those who had
themselves been <^uilty of various criminal
acts, and it has been asked whether any one
guilty not only of one gross sin, l)ut of
several of various kinds, niij^lit also be again
received into communion. It seems to me,
however, that this canon with the words,
" those who have sinned in divers particu-
lars," sim])ly means that " sinners of various
kinds slijill l)e treated exactly in proportion
to the extent of their fall." That the ques-
tion is not necessarily of diflt'erent sins com-
mitted by the same person ap])ears from the
words, " in proportion to the nature of their


I offence," as the singular, not the plural, is
here used.

1 But Van Espen, with Aubespine, is clearly
right in not referring the words, "if they
persevere in confession and repentance," to
sacramental confession, to which the expres-
sion "per,severe " would not be well suited.
Here is evidently meant the oft-repeated con-
trite confession before God and the congre-
gation in prayer of sins committed, which
l)receded .sacramental confession and absolu-
tion.


This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canoitici, Gratian's Jkcrdum, Pars II., Causa
XXYL, Quest, vii., can. iv.


CANON III.

He who has been recently baptized ought not to be promoted to the sacerdotal order.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon III.
A neophitc is not ordninahJe.

This rule is laid down in the Second Nicene


light, Nectarius, just separated from the flock
of the catechumens, when he had washed away
the sins of his life in the divine font, now
])ure himself, he put on the most pure dig-


oanon. ^ Balsamon also compares Apostolic „ity of the episcopate, and at the same time

became bishoj) of the Imperial City, and
president of the Second Holy Ecumenical


Canon Ixxx


Balsamon.


Notwithstanding this provision, that great \ Synod.


CANON IV.

Thf.y who are of the sacerdotal order ought not to lend and receive usury, nor what
is called hemioliie.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon IY. i Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore have num-

A priest is not to receive usun/ rmr hrmiolice. ^^''^"^ ^^'^ ^anon v., and our fifth they have as

IV.

The same rule is laid down in the seven-
teenth Canon of Nice. For a treatment of This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
the whole subject of usury see excursus to ('(luouiri, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
that canon. i XLYL, can. ix.


CANON V.

Ordinations are not to be held in the presence of hearers.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.


Balsamon.


Ordinations are nut to be performed in the This canon calls elections " laying on of
presence of hearers. [ hands," and says that since in elections un-


SY.NUD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


127


worthy things are often said with regard to the reference to ordinations properly so-

those who are elected, therefore they should called, as follows :

not take place in the presence of any that Aristentjs

might happen to come to hear.


Zonaras also agrees that election is here
intended, but Aristenus dissents and makes


The prayers of ordination are not to be said
out loud so that they may be heard by the
fteople.


CANON VI.

It is not permitted to heretics to enter the house of God while they continue in

heresy.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.
The holy place is forbidden to heretics.

Aristenus.

Heretics are not to be permitted to enter
the house of God, and yet Basil the Great,
before this canon was set forth, admitted
Valens to the perfecting of the faithful [i.e.,
to the witnessing the celebration of the Divine
Mysteries].

Van Espen.

A heretic who pertinaciously rejects the
doctrine of the Church is rightly not allowed


to enter the house of God, in wliich his doc-
trine is set forth, so long as he continues in
his heresy. For this reason when Timothy,
Archbishop of Alexandria, was consulted con-
cerning the admission of heretics to church,
answered in the IXtli Canon of his Canonical
Epistle, that unless they were ready to promise
to do penance and to abandon their heresy,
they could in no way be admitted to the
prayers of the faithful.

Contrast with this Canon Ixxxiv., of the so-
called IVth Council of Carthage, a.d. 898.


CANON VII.

Persons converted from heresies, that is, of the Novatians, Pliotinians, and Quarto-
decimans, whether they were catechumens or communicants among them, shall not be
received until they shall have anathematized every heresy, and particularly tliatin wliich
they were held ; and afterwards those who among them were called communicants, hav-
ing thoroughly learned the symbols of the faith, and having been anointed with the
holy chrism, shall so communicate in the holy Mjsteries.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.


Novatians and Photinians, and Qiiartodeci-
mans, iinless the// an/dheinafhize their own and
other heresies, are not lo be received. When
thcf/ hare been anointed, after their abjuration,
let them coinmiinicatc.

I have allowed the word "Photinians" to
stand in the text although whether it is not an
interiDolatiou is by no means certain. They
certainly were heretical on the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, and therefore differed from the
other dissidents mentioned in the canon, all
of whom were orthodox on this matter. It is
also worthy of note that the Avord is not found
in Ferrandus's Condensation [Breriatio Cano-
nuin, n. 177) nor in Isidore's version. More-
over there is a Latin codex in Lucca, and also


I one in Paris (as is noted by Mansi, v. 585 ; ij.
591) in which it is lacking. It was rejected
by Baronius, Binius, and Remi Ceillier.

The word " Catechumens " is wanting in
many Greek MSS. but found in Balsamon,
moreover, Dionysius and Isidore had it in their
texts.


I

This canon possesses a great interest and
value to the student from a different point of
view. Its provisions, both doctrinal and dis-
I cij^linary, are in contrariety with the provis-
! ions of the council held at Carthage in the
j time of St. Cyprian, and yet both these canons,
contradictory as they are, are accepted by the
Council in Trullo and are given such ecumeni-
cal authority as canons on discipline ever can
possess, by the Seventh Ecumenical. This is not


us


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


the only matter in which the various conciliar
actions adopted and ratitied do not agree inter
se, and from this consideration it would seem
evident that it was not intended that to each
IJarticular of each canon of eacli local synod
adopted, the express sanction of the Universal
Church was given, but that they were received
in block as legislation well calculated for the
good of the Church. And that this must have


been the understanding at the time is evinced
by the fact that while the Trullan canons con-

I demned a number of "Western customs and
usages, as I shall have occasion to point out
m its proj)fr place, no objection was made by

I the Roman legates to the canon of the Seventh
Ecumenical which received them as authori-

1 tative.


CANON VIII.

Persons converted from the heresy of those who are called Phrygians, even
should they be among those reputed by them us clergymen, and even should they l)e
called the very chiefest, are with all care to be both instructed and baptized by the
bishops and presbyters of the Church.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon YIII.


When Dtri/gitins return thetj arc to be bap-
tized anew, even if among them they ivere reckoned
clergymen.

Hefele.

This synod here declares the baptism of the
Montanists invalid, while in the preceding
canon it recognised a> valid the baptism of
the Novatians and Quartodecimans. From
this, it would appear that the Montanists
were suspected of heresy with regard to the
doctrine of the Trinity. Some other authori-
ties of the ancient Cliui-cli, however, judged
differently, and for a long time it was a ques-
tion in the Church whether to consider the
baptism of the Montanists valid or not.
Dionj'sius the Great of Alexandria was in
favour of its validity : but this Synod and the
Second General Council rejected it as invalid,
not to mention the Synod of Iconium (235),
which declared all heretical baptism invalid.
This uncertainty of the ancient Church is ac-
counted for thus : {a) On one side the Monta-
nists, and especially TertuUian, asserted that
they held the same faith and sacraments,
esj^ecially the same baptism {eadeiit lavaeri
sacrnmenta) as the Catholics. St. Epiphaiiius
concurred in this, and testified that the ]\b)ii-
tanists taught the same regarding the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as did the
Catholic Church. (?;) "Other Fathers, how-
ever, thought less favourably of them, and
for this reason, that the Montanists often ex-
pressed themselves so ambiguously, that they
might, nay, must be said completely to iden-


tify the Holy Ghost with ]\Iontanus. Thus
Tertullian in quoting expressions of Monta-
nus, actually says : " the Paraclete speaks " ;
and thereftu'e Firmilian, Cyril of Jerusalem,
Basil the Great, and other Fathers, did in
fact, reproach the Montanists with this identi-
fication, and consequently held their l)aptism
to be invalid, (r) Basil the Great goes to the
greatest length in this direction in maintain-
ing that the Montanists had baptized in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of Mon-
tanus and Priscilla. But it is very probable,
as Tillemont conjectured, that Basil only
founded these strange stories of their manner
of ba])tizing upon his assunqjtion that they
identitied Montanus with tlie Holy Ghost ;
and, as Baronius maintains, it is equally
probable that the Montanists did not alter the
form of ba])tism. But, even admitting all
this, their and)iguous expressions concerning
Montanus and the Holy Ghost would alone
have rendered it advisable to declare tlieir
baptism invalid, (r/) Besides this, a consid-
\ erable number of Montanists, namely, the
' school of -35scliines, fell into Sabellianism, and
thus their baptism was decidedly invalid.
{Vide Article in Wetzer and "Welte Kirchen-
le.rieon s. v. Montanus ; bv myself [i. e.
Hefele] ).

In conclusion, it mvist l)e observed that
Balsamon and Zonaras rightly understood
the words in our text, "even though they be
called the very chiefest," "though they be
held in the highest esteem," to refer to the
most distinguished clergy and teachers of the
Montanists.


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


129


CANON IX.

The members of the Churcli are not allowed to meet in the cemeteries, nor attend the
so-called martyries of any of the heretics, for prayer or service ; bnt snch as so do, if
they be communicants, shall be excommunicated for a time; but if they repent and
confess that they have sinned thej shall be received.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

WIiO!<o pni//cfJt in the cemeteries and marti/ries
of heretics is to be excommunicated.

ZOXARAS.

By the word " service " (^epuTretas) in this
canon is to be understood the lieaHng- of sick-
ness. The canon wishes that the faithful
should under no pretence betake themselves
to the prayers of heretical pseudo-martyrs
nor pay them honour in the hope of obtaining
the healing of sickness or the cure of their
various temptations. And if any do so, the}-
are to be cut off, that is for a time forbidden
communion (and this refers to the faithful
who are only laymen), but when they have
done j^enance and made confession of their
fault, the canon orders that they are to be re-
ceived back again.

Balsamon.

As canon vi. forbids heretics to enter the
house of God, so this canon forbids the faithful
to go to the cemeteries of heretics, which are


called by them "Martyries." . . . For in the
days of the persecution, certain of the heretics,
calling themselves Christians, suffered even
to death, and hence those who shared their
opinions called them "martyrs."

Van Espen.

As Catholics had their martjTS, so too had
the heretics, and especially the Montanists or
Phrygians, who greatly boasted of them.
Apollinaris writes of these as may be seen in
Eusebius {H. E., Lib. v., cap. xvj.)

The places or cemeteries in which rested
the bodies of those they boasted of as martyi's,
they styled "Martyries" {mart//ria) as similar
places among Catholics w^ere wont to be called
by the same name, from the bones of the mar-
tyrs that rested there.

From the Greek text, as also from Isidore's
version it is clear that this canon refers to all
the faithful generally, and that " the members
of the Church " (Lat. Ecclesiastici, the word
Dionysius uses) must be taken in this wide
signification.


CANON X.

The members of the Church shall not indiscriminately marry their children to here-
tics.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.
Thou shalt not marry a heretic.


FUCHS.

{Bih. der Kirchenvers., pt. ii., p. 324.)
" Indiscriminately " means not that they
might be given in marriage to some heretics
and not to others ; but that it should not be
considered a matter of indifference whether
they were married to heretics or orthodox.

Zonaras and Balsamon, led astray by the
similar canon enacted at Chalcedon (number


xiv.), suppose this restriction only to apply to
the children of the clergy, but Van Espen has
shewn that the rule is of general application.
He adds, however, the following :

Van Espen.

Since by the custom of the Greeks, ecclesi-
astics are allowed to have wives, there is no
doubt that the marriage of their children with
heretics would be indecent in a very special
degree, although there are manj- things which
go to shew that marriage with heretics was
universally deemed a thing to be avoided by
Catholics, and was rightly forbidden.


CANON XL

Presbytides, as they are called, or female presidents, are not to be appointed in the
Church.


130


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.

Widoivs called j^rcsklents xli'ill not be appoint-
ed in churches.

IjALSAMON. I

In old (lays certain venerable women (Trpco--
/SvTtSes) sat' in Catholic fhurelies, and took
care that the other women kept good and
modest order. But from their habit of usinor
improperly that w hicli was pr()pcr, either
through their arrogancy or through their base j
self-seeking, scandal arose. Therefore the
Fathers prohibited the existence in the
Church thereafter of any more such women \
as are called presbytides or presidents. And
that no one niav obiect that in the monaster-
ies of women one woman must preside over
the rest, it should be remembered that the
renunciation which they make of themselves
to God and the tonsure brings it to pass that
they are thought of as one body though '
many ; and all things which are theirs, relate
only to the salvation of the soul. But for a
wojuan to teach in a Catholic Church, where
a multitude of men is gathered together, and \
women of different opinions, is, in the highest '
degree, indecorous and pernicious.

Hefele.

It is doubtful what was here intended, and
this canon has received very different inter-
pretations. In the first place, what is the
meaning of the words Trpeir^uVtSes and irpoKa-
Sijfxeiai (" presbytides " and female presi-
dents) ? I think the first light is thrown on
the subject by Epiphanius, w^ho in his treatise
against the Collyridians (Ilrrr., Ixxix. 4) says
that " women had never been allowed to offer
sacrifice, as tlie Collyridians presumed to do,
but were only allowed to minister. There-
fore there were only deaconesses in the
Church, and even if the oldest among them
were called 'presbytides,' this term must be
clearly distinguished from presbyteresses.
The latter woidd mean priestesses (leptVro-a?),
but 'presbytides' only designated their age,
as seniors." According to this, the canon ap-
pears to treat of the superior deaconesses
who were the overseers {-fyoKd.^ii'njxi ul) of the
other deaconesses ; and the further words of
the text may then ])robab]y mean that in
future no more such suj^erior deaconesses or
eldresses were to be api^ointed, probably be-
cause they had often outstepped their author-
ity.

Neander, Fuchs, and others, however, think
it more probable that the terms in question


are in this canon to be taken as simply mean-
ing deaconesses, for even in the church they
had been wont to jjreside over the female por-
tion of the congregation (whence their name
of " presidents ") ; and, according to St.
Paul's rule, only widows over sixty years of
age were to be chosen for this office (hence
called " presbytides "). "We may add, that
this direction of the apostle was not very
strictly adhered to subsequently, but still it
was repeatedly enjoined that only elder per-
sons should be chosen as deaconesses. Thus,
for instance, the Council of Clialcedon, in its
fifteenth canon, required that deaconesses
should be at least forty years of age, while
the Emperor Theodosius even prescribed the
age of sixty.

Supposing now that this canon simply
treats of deaconesses, a fresh doubt arises as
to how the last words — " they are not to be
appointed in the Church " are to be under-
stood. For it may mean that " from hence-
forth no more deaconesses shall be apjjoint-
ed ; " or, that "in future they shall no more
be solemnly ordained in the church." The
first interpretation would, however, contra-
dict the fact that the Greek Church had dea-
conesses long after the Synod of Laodicea.
For instance, in G92 the Synod in Tndlo (Can.
xiv.) ordered tliat " no one under forty years
of age should be ordained deaconess." Con-
sequently the second interpretation, " they
shall not be solemnly ordained in the church,"
seems a better one, and Neander decidedly
prefers it. It is certainly true that several
later synods distinctly forbade the old prac-
tice of conferring a sort of ordination upon
deaconesses, as, for instance, the first Synod
of Orange {Arausicaniitn I. of 441, Can. xxvj.)
in the words — diaconce omnimodis nun ordi-
nanda^ ; also the Synod at Epaon in 517
(Can. xxj.), and the second Synod at Orleans
in 533 (Can. xviij.) ; but in the Greek Church
at least, an ordination, a x*'/'"'''"''^^"'''^"') took
place as late as the Council in Tndlo (Can.
xiv.U But this Canon of Laodicea does not
speak of solemn dedication, and certainly not
of ordination, l)ut only of KaSLcrraaSai. These
reasons induce us to return to the first inter-
pretation of this canon, and to understand it
as forbidding from that time forward the ap-
pointment of any more chief deaconesses or
"presbytides."

Zonaras and Balsamon give yet another ex-
planation. In their ojiinion, these " presby-
tides " were not chief deaconesses, but aged
women in general {ex populo), to Avhom was


SYJS^OD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


131


given the supervision of the females, in
church. The Synod of Laodicea, howevei',
did away with this arrangement, probably be-
cause they had misvised their office for pur-
poses of pride, or money-making, bribery, etc.

Compare with the foregoing the Excursus
on Deaconesses, appended to Canon XIX. of
Nice.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris


Cnnonici, Gratian's JDecretum, Pars I., Dist.
XXXII., c. xix., in Isidore's version ; but Van
Espen remarks that the Roman Correctors
have pointed out tliat it departs widely from
the Greek original. The Roman Correctors
further say " The note of Balsamon on this
point should be seen ; " and with tliis inter-
pretation ^lorinus also agrees in his work on
Holy Orders [De Ordinationihus, Pars III.,
Exercit. x., cap. iij., n. 3j.


CANON XII.

Bishops are to be appointed to the ecclesiastical government by the judgment of
the metropolitans and neighbouring bishops, after having been long proved both in the
foundation of their faith and in the conversation of an honest life.


NOTE.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.
Wlioever is most ajyproved in faitli and life
and most learned, lie is fit to he chosen hislioj).


The first part of this canon is in con-
formity with the provision in the IV. canon of
Nice.


CANON XIII.

The election of those who are to be appointed to the priesthood is not to be com-
mitted to the multitude.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

Whoso is cliosen hy seculars is ineligible.

Balsamon.

From this canon it is evident that in an-
cient times not only bishops but also priests
were voted for by the multitude of the peo-
ple. This is here forbidden.

Aristenus.

Bishops are elected by metropolitans and
other bishops. If anyone in this manner
shall not have been promoted to the Episco-
pate, but shall have been chosen by the multi-
tude, he is not to be admitted nor elected.

[It is clear from this that by " the Priest-
hood " Aristenus understands the episcopate,
and I think rightly.]

Van Espen.

The word in the Greek to which "multi-
tude " corresponds (ox'^os) jDroperly signifies
a tumult.^

What the fathers intend to forbid are
tumultuous elections, that is, that no atten-
tion is to be paid to riotous demonstrations


on the part of the people, when with acclama-
tions they are demanding the oi'dination of
anyone, with an appearance of sedition. Such
a state of affairs St. Augustine admirably
describes in his Epistola ad Albinani [Epist.
cxxvi., Tom. II., col. 548, Ed. Gaume).

And it is manifest that by this canon the
peoj^le were not excluded from all share in
the election of bishops aud priests from what
St. Gregory Nazianzen says, in Epistola ad
Ccesarienses, with regard to the election of St.
Basil. From this what could be more evi-
dent than that after this canon was put out
the people in the East still had their part in
the election of a bishop? This also is clear
"Novels" [Xocelke, cxxiij.,
c. ij.)

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
Ixiii., can. vj., but in proof of the proposition
that laymen were hereby forbidden to have
any share in elections. Van Espen notes that
Isidore's version favours Gratian's misunder-
' standing, and says that " no doubt that this
version did much to exclude the people from
the election of bishops."


from Justinian's
c.j., and cxxxvij.,


1 More accurately " a tumultuous and riotous mob " vide Liddell and Scott.


132


SYNOD OF Lx\ODICEA. A.D. 343-381


CANON XIV.

The holy things are not to be sent into other dioceses at the feast of Easter by way
of eulogiie.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.

It is not right to send the hAy gifts to anotJier
parish.

Hefele.

It was a custom in the ancient Church, not
indeed to consecrate, l)ut to bless such of
the several breads of the same form laid on
the altar as wore not needed for the com-
munion, and to employ them, partly for the
maintenance of the clergy, and partly for dis-
tributing to those of the faithful who did not
communicate at the INlass. The breads thus
blessed were culled rulogio'. Another very
ancient custom was, that bishops as a sign of
Church fellowshij), should send the conse-
crated bread to one another. That the Roman
Popes of the first and second centuries did so,
Irenffius testifies in his letter to Pope Victor
in Eusebius. In course of time, however,
instead of the consecrated bread, only bread
which had been blessed, or culugiw, were sent
abroad. For instance, Paulinus and Augus-
tine sent one another these cidogice. But at
Easter the older custom still prevailed ; and
to invest the matter Avith more solemnity,
instead of the eidogice, the consecrated bread,
i.e., the Eucharist, was sent out. The Synod
of Laodicea forbids this, probably out of
reverence to the holy Sacrament.

Binterim {iJoduvardegkcitcn, vol. IV., P. iij.,
p. 53.5.) gives another exi)lanation. He starts
from the fact that, with the Greeks as well as
the Latins, tlie wafer intended for commun-
ion is generally called saneta or ayta even
before the consecration. Xliis is not only
perfectly true, but a well-known fact ; only it
must not be forgotten that these wafers or


ol)lations were only called saneta by anticipa-
tion, and because of the siuntijieatio to which
they were destined. Binterim then states
that by dyui in the canon is to be understood
not the breads already consecrated, but those
still unconsecrated. He further conjectures
that these unconsecrated breads were often

I sent about instead of the e/ilogiee, and that
the Synod of Laodicea had forbidden this, not
during the whole year, but only at Easter.
He cannot, however, give any reason, and his
statement is the more doubtful, as he cannot
prove that these unconsecrated communion
breads really used before to be sent about as
eulogice.

In connection with this, however, he adds
another hyjiothesis. It is known that the
Greeks oidy consecrate a square piece of the

1 little loaf intended for communion, which is
first cut out with the so-called holy spear.
The remainder of the small loaf is divided
into little pieces, which remain on or near the
altar during Mass, after which they are dis-
tributed to the non-communicants. These
remains of the small loaf intended for conse-
cration are called dirlSwpa and Binterim's
second conjecture is, that these dvTt^wpa
might perha^DS have been sent as cidogice and
may be the uyia of this canon. But he is
unable to prove that these aiTLOoipa were sent
about, and is, moreover, obliged to confess
that they are nowhere called cidogice, while
this canon certainly speaks of cidogice. To
this must be added that, as with regard to
the unconsecrated wafer, so we see no suffi-
cient cause why the Synod should have for-
bidden these ui/rtSwpa being sent.


CANON XV.


No others shall sing in the Church, save only the canonical singers, who go up into


the ambo and sing from a book


NOTES
Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

No one should ascend the ambon unless he is
tonsured.

Hefele.


or whether it only intended to forbid those
who were not cantors taking the lead. Van
Espen and Neauder in particular were in
favour of the latter meaning, i)ointing to the
fact that certainly in the Greek Church after
The only question [presented by this canon] the Synod of Laodicea the people were accus-
is whether this sj'nod forbade the laity to take tomed to join in the singing, as Chrysostom
any part in the Church music, as Binius and and Basil the Great sufficiently testify. Biug-
others have understood the words of the text, | ham propounded a peculiar ojiinion, namely.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


133


that this Synod did iudeed forbid the laity i-easons. I have no doubt, however, that Van


to sing in the church, or even to join in the
singing, but this only temporarily, for certain


Espen and Neander take the truer view.


CANON XVI.

The Gospels are to be read on the Sabbath [i.e. Saturday], with the other Scriptures.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


TJie Gospel, the Epistle [aTroaroXo^] and the
other Scriptures are to he read on the Sabbath.

Balsamon.

Before the arrangement of the Ecclesiastical
Psalmody was settled, neither the Gospel nor
the other Scriptures were accustomed to be
read on the Sabbath. But out of regard to
the canons which forbade fasting or kneeling
on the Sabbath, there were no services, so that
there might be as much feasting as possible.
This the fathers prohibit, and decree that on
the Sabbath the whole ecclesiastical office
shall be said.

Neander (Kirchengesch., 2d ed., vol. iij., p.
565 et seq.) suggests in addition to the inter-
pretation just given another', viz.: that it was
the custom in many parts of the ancient
Church to keep every Saturday as a feast in
commemoration of the Creation. Neander
also suggests that possibly some Judaizers


read on the Sabbath only the Old Testament ;
he, however, himself remarks that in this case
cL'ayye'Ata and hepuiv ypai^uiv Avould require the
article.

Van Espen.

Among the Greeks the Sabbath was kept
exactly as the Lord's day except so far as the
cessation of work was concerned, wherefore
the Council wishes that, as on Sundays, after
the other lessons there should follow the
Gospel.

For it is evident that by the intention of
the Church the whole Divine Office was de-
signed for the edification and instruction of
the people, and especially was this the case
on feast days, when the people were apt to
be present in lai'ge numbers.

Here we may note the origin of our present
[Western] discipline, by which on Sundays
and feast days the Gospel is wont to be read
with the other Scriptures in the canonical
hours, while such is not the case on ferial
days, or in the order for ferias and " simples." ^


CANON XVII.

The Psalms are not to be joined together in the congregations, but a lesson shall
intervene after every psalm.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.


In time of service lessons shall be interspersed
with the Psalms.

Aristenus.

It was well to separate the Psalms by les-
sons when the congregation was gathered in
church, and not to keep them continuously
singing unbroken psalmody, lest those who
had assembled might become careless through
weariness.


Zonaeas.


This was an ancient custom which has been
laid aside since the new order of ecclesiastical
matters has been instituted.'^

Van Espen.

Here it may be remarked we find the real
reason why in our jjresent rite., the lections,
verses, etc., of the nocturns are placed be-
tween the Psalms, so as to repel weariness.


• "Simples" (simplici) are distinguished from "doubles" (du-
plici) in not having their antiphons said double but only once.

^ I do not understand this note, as to-day in the Divine Office
of the Greek Church the Psalms are still divided by Lessons.


Vide T?ie Horologion {iopoKoyiov to ne'ya) and an English transla-
tion by G. V. Shann, entitled Euchology, A Manual of Prayers
of the Holy Orthodmc Church,


134 SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


CANON XVIII.
The same service of prayers is to be said always both at nones and at vespers.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XYIII. tator understands tlio Synod to ordor that

m. 7 ;; 7 ,• 7 ,/ >,^..„^ .,.,.7 tlio sauie pvavcrs should be used in all placcs,

The sanir prdiirrs fthdU or saul at nonrs and ^. .f- ^.- ,, ■ t • i i • •"■ *

^ ^ thus excludmc? all individual caprice. Ac-

^ ' cordin*,' to this, the rule of conformity would

Hefele. refer to phices ; while, according to Van

Some feasts ended at the ninth hour, others Espen, the nones and vespers were to be the

only in the evening, and both alike with same. If, however, this interpretation were

prayer. The Synod here wills that in l)oth correct, the Synod would not have only

cases the same i^rayers should be used. Thus spoken of the prayers at nones and vespers,

does Van Espen exjdain the words of the text, but would have said in general, " all dioceses

and I think rightly. But the Greek commeu- , shall use the same form of prayer."

EXCUESUS ON THE CHOIR OFFICES OF THE EARLY CHUKCH.

Nothing is more marked in the lives of the early followers of Christ than the abiding
sense which they had of the Divine Presence. Prayer was not to them an occasional exercise
but an unceasing practice. If then the Psalmist sang in the old dispensation "Seven times a
day do I praise thee" (Ps. cxix. 1G4), we may be quite certain that the Christians would
never fall behind the Jewish example. We know that among the Jews thei'ewere the " Hours
of Pi-ayer," and nothing would be, d priori, more likely than that with new and deeper sig-
nificance these should pass over into the Christian Church. I need not pause here to re-
mind the reader of the observance of "the hour of prayer'" which is mentioned in the New
Testament, and shall pass on to my more immediate subject.

Most liturgiologists have been agreed that the " Choir Offices " of the Christian Church,
that is to say the recitation of the Psalms of David, with lessons fi'om other parts of Holy
Scripture and collects,' was an actual continuation of the Jewish worshi}). the melodies even
of the Psalms being carried over and modified through the ages into the plain song of to-
day. For this view of the Jewish origin of the Canonical Hours there is so much to be said
that one hesitates to accept a rival theory, recently set forth with much skill and learning,
by a French jjriest, who had the inestimable happiness of sitting at the feet of De Rossi.
M. Pierre Battifol ' is of opinion that the Canonical Hours in no way come from the Jewish
Hours of Prayer but are the outgrowth of the Saturtlay Vigil service, which was wholly of
Christian origin, and which he tells us was divided into three parts, j., the evening service, or
lucernariain, which was the service of Vespers ; ij., the midnight service, the origin of the Noc-
turns or Mattins ; iij., the service at daybreak, the origin of Lauds. Soon vigils were kept
for all the martyr commemorations ; and by the time of Tertullian, if not before, Wednes-
days and Fridays had their vigils. With the growth of monasticism they became daily.
This Mr. Battifol thinks Avas introduced into Antioch about a.d. 350, and soon spread all
over the East. The " little hours," that is Terce, Sext, and None, he thinks were monastic in
origin and that Prime and Compline were transferred from the dormitoi'y to the church,
just as the martyrology was transferred from the refectory.

Such is the new theory, which, even if rejected, at least is valuable in drawing attention
to the great importance of the vigil-service in the Early Church, an importance still attach-
ing to it in Russia on the night of Easter Even.


' Vide Tertullian.

' Histoire du lireviaire Rnmnin. Paris. 1893. An Rnclieh trans-
lation has since (189S) appeared by tlie Kev. A. M. Y. Buyley,


which IS not iu principle changed so far as this discussion is con-
cerned.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 135

Of the twilight service we have a most exquisite remains in the hymn to be sung at the light-
ing of the lamps. This is oUe of the few Psalmi idiotici which has sui*vived the condemna-
tion of such compositions by the early councils, in fact the only two others are the Gloria
in Excelsis and the Tc Deum. The hymn at the lighting of the lamps is as follows:

" O gladsome light

Of the Father Immortal,
And of the celestial
Sacred and blessed
Jesus, our Saviour!

^' Now to the sunset
Again hast thou brought us;
And seeing the evening
Twilight, we bless thee,
Praise thee, adore thee !

" Father omnipotent!
Son, the Life-giver!
Spirit, the Comforter!
Worth}- at all times
Of worship and wonder ! " '

Dr. Battifol's new theory was promptly attacked by P. Suibbert Btiumer, a learned Ger-
man Benedictine who had already written several magazine articles on the subject before
Battifol's book had appeared.

The title of Biiumer's book is Geschichte cles Breviers, Versucli einer queUenmilssigcn DarsM-
lung der Entwicklung des altkirchen und des rdmesclien Officiumsbis aufunsere Tage. (Freiburg in
Briesgau, 1895.) The following ~ may be taken as a fair resume of the positi')n taken in this
w^ork and most ably defended, a position which (if I may be allowed to express an opinion) is
more likely to prevail as being most in accordance with the j)revious researches of the
learned.

" The early Christians separated from the Synagogues about a.d. 65 ; that is, about the
same time as the first Epistle to Timothy was written, and at this moment of separation from
the Synagogue the Apostles had already established, besides the liturgy, at least one, proba-
bly two, canonical hours of prayer, Mattins and Evensong, Besides what we should call
sermons, the service of these hours was made up of psalms, readings from Holy Scripture,
and extempore prayers. A few pages on (p. 42) Btiumer allows that even if this service had
been daily in Jerusalem in the Apostles' times, j-et it had become limited to Sundays in the
sub- Apostolic times, when persecution would not allow the Apostolic custom of daily morn-
ing and evening public prayer. Yet the practice of private prayer at the third, sixth, and
ninth hours continued, based upon an Apostolic tradition ; and thus, when the tyi'anny of
persecution was overpast, the idea of public jjrayer at these hours was saved and the prac-
tice carried on."

The stu lent should by no means omit to read Dom Prosper Gueranger's Institutions Litur-
giqiies, which while written in a bitter and most partisan spirit, is yet a work of the most pro-
found learning. Above all anyone professing any familiarity with the literature on the
subject must have mastered Cardinal Bona's invaluable Be Divina Psalmodia, a mine of wis-
dom and a wonder of research.

' Lonsjfellow. The Oohien T.cqend II. Liddon's remarks upon this hymn are well worth the reader's attention, Bampton Lectures,
Lect. VII., where Keble's translation will be tound.
' Taken from the Church. Quarterly Review, 1898.


136 SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381

CANON XIX.

After the sermons of the Bishops, the prayer for the catechuinens is to be made
first by itself; and after the catechumens have j^one out, the ])rayer for those who are
under penance; and, after these have passetl under the hand [of the BishopJ and de-
parted, there shoukl then be oflered the three prayers of the faithful, the first to be said
entirely in silence, the second and third aloud, and then the |kiss of] peace is to be
given. And, after the jiresbvters have given the [kiss of] jicace t(j the liislioj), then the
laity are to give it [to one another], and so the Holy Ohlaticni is to be completed. And
it is lawful to the priesthood alone to go to the Altar and [there] communicate.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX. latiou " they also pi*ay who are doinpf pen-

ance," thinks the prayer of the penitents, said
by themselves, is intended, and not the prayer
said by the Bishop. But Hefele, following


After the jyrayers of the catechumens shall be
said those of the Penitents, and afteru-ards those

of the faithful. And after the peace, or em- Dionysius's version — "the praj-ers over the
bi'ace, has been gicen, the offering shall be made. \ ceitechumens," "over those who are doing
Onlij priests shall enter the suncluunj and penance " — thinks that the liturgical prayers
make there their communion. ^ are intended, which after the sermon were

i wont to be said " over " the diftei'eut classes.

The Greek commentators throw l)ut little Dioiiysius does not say "over" the faithful,
if any liyht upon this canon. A (juestion has l)iit describes them as "the prayers of the
been raised as to who said tlie prayers men- faithful," which Hefele thinks means that the
tioned. Van EsiDen, following Isidore's trans- ^ faithful joined in reciting them.

EXCURSUS ON THE WORSHIP OF THE EARLY CHURCH.

(Percival, H. R. : Johnsons Universal Gyclopcedia, Vol. V., s. v. Liturgies.)

St. Paul is by some learned writers supposed to have quoted in several places the already
existing liturgy, especially in I. Cor. ij. 9.,^ and there can be no doubt that the Lord's
prayer was used and cei'tain other formulas which are referred to ])y St. Luke in the Acts of
the Apostles- as "the Apostles' prayers." How early these forms were committed to writing
has been much disputed among the learned, and it Avould be rash to attempt to rule this
question. Pierre Le Brun ^ presents most strongly the denial of their having been written
during the first three centuries, and Probst * argues against this oiDiniou. While it does not
seem possible to prove that before the fourth century the liturgical books were written out
in full, owing no doubt to the influence of the discipUna arcani, it seems to be true that much
earlier than this there was a deiinite and fixed order in the celebration of divine worship and
in the administration of the sacraments. The famous passage in St Justin Martyr ' seems
to point to the existence of such a form in his day, shewing how even then the service for the
Holy Eucharist began witli the Epistle and Gospeh St. Augustine and St. Chrysostom
bear witness to the same thing.''

Within, comparatively speaking, a few years, a good deal of information with regard to
the worship of the early Church has been given us by the discovery of the AtSa;(T;, and of the
fragments the Germans describe as the K. O., and by the publication of M. Gamurrini's
transcript of the Peregrinatio Silvice.'^

' J. M. Neale. Essays on Liturgiology. i ' The MS. from which this was printed was found in a library

'Arts i). 42. ' in .\re7.zo. Silvia was a lady of rank, living in the times of Theo-

' Pierre Le Rrun. Ezplir. Tom. II , hiss. j. p. II., c? seqq. flosius, who made a piltrriiiiasre to .I(■rll^;alenl and the llolv Places

* Probst. Litiir;iie rlerdrei ersten Christichen Jahrhvnderten. from Meridian (iaiil To us the chief interest of her book lies in

'' A polar]. Cap. LXVII. I the account she gives of the services. The following is the title,

' I venture to draw the reader's attention to the rest of this arti- N. silrite .^quittance jiercfirinatio ad loca Saitcta. It wiil be

cle as containing information not readily found elsewhere. found in the Biblioteca dell' Accademia storica giuridica. Tom.


SYNOD OP LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 137

From all these it is thought that liturgical information of the greatest value can be
obtainetl. Moreover the first two are thought to throw much light upon the age and con-
struction of the Apostolical Constitutions. Without in any way committing mvself to the
views I now proceed to quote, I lay then before the reader as the results of the most ad-
vanced criticism in the matter.

(Duchesne. Origines du Culte Chretien, p. 54 et seqq.)
All known liturgies may be reduced to four principal types — the Syrian, the Alexandrian,
the Roman, and the Galilean. In the fourth century there certainly existed these four types at
the least, for the Syrian had already given rise to several sub-types which were clearly marked.
The most ancient documents of the Syrian Liturgy ai'e :

1. The Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, delivered about the year 347.

2. The Apostolic Constitutions (Bk. II., 57, and Bk. VIIL, 5-15).

3. The homilies of St. John Chrysostom.

St. John Chrysostom often quotes lines of thought and even prayers taken from the lit-
urgy. Bingham ' was the first to have the idea of gathering together and putting in order
these scattered references. This work has been recently taken in hand afresh by Mr. Ham-
mond.- From this one can find much interesting corroborative evidence, but the orator does
not give anywhere a systematic description of the liturgy, in the order of its rites and prayers.

The Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril are really a commentary ujjon the ceremonies of the
mass, made to the neophytes after their initiation. The preacher does not treat of the missa
catechu me norum because his hearers had so long been familiar with it ; he presupj^oses the bread
and wine to have been brought to and placed upon the altar, and begins at the moment when
the bishop prepares himself to celebrate the Holy Mysteries by washing his hands.

In the Apostolic Constitutions a distinction must be drawn between Book 11. and Book
YIII. The first is very sketchy ; it only contains a descrijotion of the rites without the
words used, the other gives at length all the formulas of the prayers, but only from the end
of the Gospel.

"We know now that the Apostolical Constitutions in the present state of the Greek text
represent a melting down and fusing together of two analogous books — the Bidaskale of the
Apostles, of which only a Syriac version is extant ; and the Didake of the Apostles, recently
discovered by the metropolitan, Philotheus Bryennius. The first of these two books has
served as a basis for the first six books of the Apostolical Constitutions. The second, much
spread out, has become the seventh book of the same collection. The eighth book is more
homogeneous. It must have been added to the seven others by the author of the recension
of the Didaskale and of the iJklake. This author is the same as he who made the intei'pola-
tions in the seven authentic letters of St. Ignatius, and added to them six others of his own
manufacture. He lived at Antioch in Syria, or else in the ecclesiastical region of which that
city was the centre. He wrote about the middle of the fourth century, at the very high tide
of the Subordination theology, which finds expression more than once in his different com-
positions. He is the author of the description of the liturgy, which is found in Book II. ;
in fact, that whole passage is lacking in the Syriac Didaskale. Was it also he who composed
the liturgy of the Vlllth book ? This is open to doubt, for there are certain differences
between this liturgy and that of the lid book. ^

I shall now describe the religious service such as these documents suppose, noting, where
necessarv, their divergences.

IV. Rome, 18S7, and again in the Studi e Documenti di sto- ' 2 Hammond The Ancient LUurgy nf Antinck (Oxford, IS'9).
ria e dir itto, April-September, 1SS8. and the liturgical parts in ' The reader will, of course, recognize the foregoing as a piece
an appendix to Duchesne . Of the other books the best edition of " Higher Criticism,'" and need not be told that it rests upon no

is Adolf Harnack's. foundation more secure than probable guess-work.

' Bin£rhara, Antiquities, Xlli. 6.


138 SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381

The congregation is gathered together, the men on one side the women on the other, the
clergy in the apsidal chancel. The readings immediately begin ; they are interrupted by
chants. A reader ascends the ambo, which stood in the middle of the church, between the
clergy and the people, and read two lessons ; then another goes up in his place to sing a
psalm. This he executes as a s;)lo, but the congregation join in the last modulations of the
chant and continue them. This is what is called the " Response " (ps«/y««s rcsjxfnsurixs),
which must be distinguished carefully from the " Antiphon," which was a psalm executed
alternately by two choirs. At this early date the antipliou did not exist, only the response
was known. Tliere must have been a considerable nundjcr of readings, but we are not told
how many. The series ended witli a lection from the Gospel, whicli is made not by a reader
but by a priest or deacon. The congregation stands during this lesson.

When the lessons and psalmodies are done, the priests take the word, each in his turn,
and after them the bishop. The homily is always preceded by a salutation to the people, to
which they answer, "And with thy spirit."

After the sermon the sending out of the different categories of persons who should not
assist at the holy Mysteries takes place. First of all the catechumens. Upon the invitation
of the deacon the}^ make a prayer in silence while the congregation prays for them. The
deacon gives the outline of this i:)rayer by detailing the intentions and the things to be
prayed for. The faithful answer, and especially the children, by the supplication Ki/ric eld-
son. Then the catechumens rise up, and the deacon asks them to join with him in the
prayer which he pronounces ; next he makes them bow before the bishop to receive his bene-
diction, after whicli he sends them home.

The same form is used for the energumens, for the competentes, i.e., for the catechumens
who are preparing to receive bajitism, and last of all for the penitents.

When there remain in the church only the faithful communicants, these fall to prayer ;
and prostrate toward the East they listen while the deacon says the litany — " For the peace
and good estate of the world ; for the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church ; for bishojDS,
priests ; for the Church's benefactors ; for the neophytes ; for the sick ; for travellers ; for
little children ; for those wlio are erring," etc. And to all these petitions is added Kf/rie
eleison. The litany ends with this special form " Save us, and raise us up, O God, for thy
mercy's sake." Then the voice of the bishop rises in the silence — he pronounces a solemn
prayer of a grave and majestic style.

Here ends the first part of the liturgy ; that part which the Church had taken from the
old use of the synagogues. The second part, the Christian liturgy, properly so-called, be-
gins by the salutation of the bishop, followed by the response of the people. Then, at a sign
given by a deacon, the clergy receive the kiss of peace from the bishop, and the faithful give
it to each other, men to men, women to women.

Then the deacons and the other lower ministers divide themselves between watching and
serving at the altar. The one division go througli the congregation, keei)ing all in their
proper place, and the little childi'en on the outskirts of the sacred enclosure, and watching
the door that no profane person may enter the church. The others bring and set upon the
altar the breads and tlie chalices prepared for the Sacred Banquet ; two of them wave fans
backwards and forwards to ])rotect tlie holy offerings from insects. The bishop washes liis
hands and vests himself in festal habit : the priests range themselves around him, and all to-
gether they approach tlie altar. This is a solemn moment. After private pi'ayer the liishop
makes the sign of the cross upon his brow and begins,

"The grace of God Almighty, and the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion
of tlie Holy Ghfist be with you always !

"And with tliy spirit.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 139

" Lift up your hearts.

" We lift them up unto the Lord.

" Let us give thanks unto our Lord.

" It is meet and right so to do.

" It is very meet," etc.

And the eucharistic prayer goes on . . . concluding at last with a return to the mys-
terious Sanctuary where God abides in the midst of spirits, where the Cherubims and the
Seraphims eternally make heaven ring with the trisagion.

Here the whole multitude of the people lift up their voices and joining their song with
that of the choir of Angels, sing, "Holy, Holy, Holy," etc.

When the hymn is done and silence returns, the bishop continues the intex-rupted
eucharistic prayer.

" Thou truly art holy," etc., and goes on to commemorate the work of Redemption, the
Incarnation of the Word, his mortal life, his j^assion ; now the officiant keeps close to ' the
Gospel account of the last supper ; the mysterious words pronounced at first by Jesus on the
night before his death are heard over the holy table. Then, taking his inspiration from the
last words, " Do this in remembrance of me," the bishop develops the idea, recalling the
Passion of the Son of God, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, the hope of his glori-
ous return, and declaring that it is in order to observe this precej)t and make this memorial
that the congregation offers to God this eucharistic bread and wine. Finally he praj's the
Lord to turn upon the Oblation a favourable regard, and to send down upon it the power of
his Holy Spirit, to make it the Body and Blood of Christ, the spiritual food of his faithful,
and the j^ledge of their immortality.

Thus ends the eucharistic prayer, properly so-called. The mystery is consummated.
. . . The bishop then directs the prayers . . , and when this long prayer is fin-
ished by a doxology, all the congregation answer "Amen," and thus ratify his acts of thanks
and intercession.

After this is said " Our Father," accompanied by a short litany. . . . The bishoj) then
pronounces his benediction on the people.

The deacon awakes the attention of the faithful and the bishoj) cries aloud, " Holy things
for holy persons." And the people answer, "There is one only holy, one only Lord Jesus
Christ, to the glory of God the Father," etc.

No doubt at this moment took place the fraction of the bread, a ceremony which the
documents of the fourth century do not mention in express terms.

The communion then follows. The bishop receives first, then the priests, the deacons,
the sub-deacons, the readers, the singers, the ascetics, the deaconesses, the virgins, the
widows, the little children, and last of all the people.

The bishop places the consecrated bread in the right hand, which is open, and supported
by the left ; the deacon holds the chalice — they drink out of it directly. To each communi-
cant the bishop says, " The Body of Christ " ; and the deacon says, " The Blood of Christ,
the Cup of life," to which the answer is made, " Amen."

During the communion the singers execute Psalm XXXIII. [XXXIV. Heb. numbering]
Benedicam Doininum, in which the words " O, taste and see how gracious the Lord is," have a
special suitability.

When the communion is done, the deacon gives the sign for prayer, which the bishop
offers in the name of all ; then all bow to receive his blessing. Finally the deacon dismisses
the congregation, saying, " Go in peace." ^

' An iuteresting and instructive book has recently been pnb- I theories from Vitringa to Bickell are carefully considered. The
lished on this subject by F E. Warren, P S A., entitled T/w book is one of the S. P.O. K. series, "Side-lights of Church
Liturgy and llitual of the Ante-Sicene Church, in which all the | History."


140


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


CANON XX.

It is not right for h deueon to sit in the presence of ti presbyter, unless he be bidden
by the presbyter to sit down. Likewise the deacons shall have worship of the sub-
deacons and all the [inferior] clergy.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.
A deacon shall not sit down unless bidden.


This is another canon tt) curl) the ambition
of Levites who wish to take upon themselves
the honours of the priesthood also. Spiritual
Cores seem to have been connnon in early
times among the deacons and this is but one
of many canons on the subject. Compare
Canon XVIII of the Council of Nice. Van
Espen points out that in tlie Apostolic Consti-
tutions (Lib. II., cap. Ivij), occurs the follow-
ing passage, " Let the seat for the bishop be xciii., c. xv., in Dionysius's version.


set in the midst, and on each side of him let
the presbyters sit, and let the deacons stand,
having their loins girded."

Van Espen.

Here it should be noted, b^- the way, that
in this canon there is presented a hierarchy
consisting of bishops, presbyters, and deacons
and other inferior ministers, each with their
mutual subordination one to the other.

This canon is found in the Gorjms Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.


CANON XXI.

The subdeacons have no right to a place in the Diaconicum, nor to touch the Lord's
vessels.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.
A suhdeacon shall twt touch the vessels.

The "Lord's vessels "are the chalice and
what we call the sacred vessels.

Aristenus.

The ecclesiastical ministers shall not take
into their hands the Lord's vessels, but they
shall be carried to the Table by the priests or
deacons.

Both Balsamon and Zonaras agree that by
•L'Tre'pcTai is here meant subdeacons.

Hefkle.

It is doubtful whether by diaconicum is hei'e
meant the place where the deacons stood dur-
ing service, or the diaconicum generally so
called, which answers to our sacristy of the
present day. In this diacu)iicum the sacred


vessels and vestments were kept ; and as the
last part of the canon especially mentions
these, I have no doubt that the diaconicum
must mean the sacristy. For the rest, this
canon is only the concrete expression of the
rule, that the subdeacons shall not assume
the functions of the deacons.

With regard to the last words of this
canon, Morinus and Van Espen are of opin-
ion that the subdeacons were not altogether
forbidden to touch the sacred vessels, for this
had never been the case, but that it was
intended that at the solemn entrance to the
altar, peculiar to the Greek service, the sacred
vessels which were then carried should not be
borne l)v the subdeacons.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
xxiii., c. XX vj.


CANON XXII.

The subdeacon has no right to wear an orarium [i.e., stole], nor to leave the
doors.

NOTES.
Ancient Ei'Itome of Canon XXII. I The " orarium " is what we call now the

A suhdeacon must not wear an orarium nor \ ^''°^^-
leave the doors. I In old times, so we are told by Zonaras


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 141

and Balsamon, it was the place of the sub- the subdeacon should remain and consume
deacons to stand at the church doors and to ' them with the other ministers." The Roman

bring in and take out the catechumens and Correctors indeed note the error but have not

the penitents at the proper points in the felt themselves at liberty to correct it on

service. Zonaras remarks that no one need account of the authority of the gloss. Van

be surprised if this, like many other ancient Espen remarks "To-day if any Hosts remain

customs, has been entirely changed and which are not to be reserved, the celebrant


abandoned.

This canon is found in the Curjms Juris
Canonki, Gratian's Ikcretum, Pars I., Dist.
xxxii., canon xxvij., but reads hostias instead
of ostia, thus making the canon forbid the
svibdeacons to leave the Hosts ; and to make


consumes them himself, but perchance in the
time the gloss was written, it was the custom
that the subdeacon s and other ministers of
the altar were accustomed to do this, but
whenever the ministers present gradually
fell into the habit of not receiving the sacra-
ment, this consumption of what remained


this worse the ancient Glossator adds, " but ' devolved uj)on the celebrant." ^


EXCURSUS ON THE VESTMENTS OP THE EARLY CHURCH.

It would be out of place to enter into any sj)ecific treatment of the different vestments
worn by the clergy in the performance of their various duties. For a full discussion of this
whole matter I must refer my readers to the great writers on liturgical and kindred matters,
especially to Cardinal Bona, Be Rebus Liturgkis ; Pugin, Ecclesiastkal Glossary ; Rock, Church
of our Fathers ; Hefele, Beitrdge zu Kircheschkhte, Archilologk und Liturgik (essay in Die Lit-
urgischen Gerviinder, vol. ij., p. 184 sqq.). And I would take this opjjortunity of warning the
student against the entirely unwarranted conclusions of Durandus's Batknale JJivinoruin
Officiormn and of Marriott's Vestkirinm Christ I a num.

The manner in which the use of the stole is spoken of in this canon shews not only the
great antiquity of that vestment but of other ecclesiastical vestments as well. Before, how-
ever, giving the details of our knowledge with regard to this particular vestment I shall need
no apology for quoting a passage, very germane to the whole subject, from the jDen of that
most delightful writer Curzon, to whose care and erudition all scholars and students of
manuscripts are so deeply indebted.

(Robert Curzon, Armenia, p. 202.)

Here I will remark that the sacred vestures of the Christian Church are the same, with very
insignificant modifications, among every denomination of Christians in the world ; that they
have always been the same, and never were otherwise in any country, from the remotest
times when we have any written accounts of them, or any mosaics, sculj^tures, or pictures to
explain their forms. They are no more a Popish invention, or have anything more to do
with the Roman Church, than any other usage which is common to all denominations of
Christians. They are and always have been, of general and universal — that is, of Catholic —
use ; they have never been used for many centuries for ornament or dress by the laity, having
been considered as set apart to be used only by priests in the church during the celebration
of the worship of Almighty God.

Thus far the very learned Curzon. As is natural the distinctive dress of the bishops is
the first that we hear of, and that in connexion with St. John, who is said to have worn a
golden mitre or fillet.^

> It is interesting to note that the ancient custom is in full use in the Anglican Church to-day, ordered expressly by the rubrics
of the Prayer Book.

a Eusebius. Hist. Eccl., v. 24.


142 SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381

(Duchesne, Origines clii Culfc Chretien, p. 37G et sqq.)

It was not tlie bishojjs alone who were distinguished by insignia from the other ecclesi-
astics. Priests and deacons had theii" distinctive insignia as well. There was, however, a
difference between Rome and the rest of the world in tliis matter. At Rome it Avould seem
that but little favour was extended at first to these marks of rank ; the letter of Pope Celes-
tine to the bishops shews tliis already. But what makes it evident still more clearly, is that
the oriiriiiin of the priest and of the deacon, looked upon as a visible and distinctive mark of
these orders, was unknown at Rome, at least down to the tenth century, while it liad been
adoj)ted everywhere else.

To be sure, the orarkun is spoken of in the ordines of the ninth century ; but from these
it is also evident that this vestment was worn by acolytes and siibdeacons, as well as by the
sujjerior clergy, and that its jDlace was under the top vestment, whether dalmatic or chasuble,
and not over it. But that orarhim is nothing more than the ancient sweat-cloth {sudariuiu),
the handkerchief, or cravat which has ended up by taking a special form and even by becom-
ing an accessory of a ceremonial vestment : but it is not an insignia. I know no Roman
representation of this earlier than the twelfth century. The priests and deacons who figure
in the mosaics never disi)lay this detail of costume.

But such is not the case elsewhere. Towards the end of the fourth centuiy, the Council
of Laodicea in Phiygia forbade inferior classes, subdeacons, readers, etc., to usurp the orarium.
St. Isidore of Pelusium knew it as somewhat analogous to the episcojDal pidJiwn, except tliat it
was of linen, while the pallium was of wool. The sermon on the Prodigal Son, sometimes
attributed to St. John Chrysostom [Migne's Ed., vol. viij., 520], uses the same term, o.^drr;;
it adds that this piece of dress was w'oru over the left shoulder, and that as it swung back
and forth it called to mind the wings of the angels.

The deacons among the Greeks wear the stole in this fashion dow'n to to-day, perfectly
visible, over the top of the upper vestment, and fastened uj)on the left shoulder. Its ancient
name (wpapiov) still clings to it. As for the orarhaii of the j^riests it is worn, like the stole
of Latin j^riests, round the neck, the two ends falling in front, almost to the feet. This is
called the ejjitrachilion (iTriTpaxrjXtov).

These distinctions were also found in Spain and Gaul. The Couricil of Braga, in 561,
ordered that deacons should wear these oraria, not under the tunicle, which caused them to
be confounded wdth the subdeacon, but over it, over the shoulder. The Council of Toledo,
in G33, describes the orarium as the common mark of the three superior orders, bishops,
priests, and deacons ; and specifics that the deacon should wear his over his left shoulder,
and that it should be white, without any mixture of colours or any gold embroidery. An-
other Council of Braga forbade priests to say mass without having a stole around their
necks and crossed upon the breast, exactly as Latin priests wear it to-day. St. Germanus
of Paris speaks of the insignia of a bishop and of a deacon ; to the first he assigns the
name oi pall i urn, and says that it is worn around the neck, and falls dowm upon the breast
where it ends with a fringe. As for the insignia of a deacon he calls it a stole {sfo](() ; and
says that deacons wear it over the alb. Tliis fashion of wearing the stole of the deacon
spread during the middle ages over nearly the whole of Italy and to the very gates of Rome.
And even at Rome the ancient visage seems to have been maintained with a compromise.
They ended up by adopting the stole for deacons and by jilacing it over the left shoulder, but
they covered it uji with the dalmatic or the chasuble.

The priest's stole was also accepted : and in the mosaics of Sta. Maria in Trastcrere is seen
a priest ornajnented with this insignia It is worthy of notice that the four popes who are
represented in the same mosaic wear the pallium but no stole. The one seems to exclude


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 143


the other. And as a matter of fact the onlines of the ninth century in describing the costume
of the pope omit always the stole. One can readily understand that who bore one of these
insignia should not wear the other.

However, they ended by combining them, and at Ravenna, where they always bad a taste
for decorations, bishoj) Ecclesius in the mosaics of San Vitale wears both the priest's stole
and the Roman pallium. This, however, seems to be unique, and his successors have the pal-
lium only. The two are found together again in the Sacramentary of Autun ( Vide M. Lelisle's
reproduction in the Gazette Archeologique, 1884, pi. 20), and on the paliotto of St. Ambrose
of Milan ; such seems to have been the usage of the Franks.

In view of these facts one is led to the conclusion that all these insignia, called pallium,
omophnrion, ovarium, stole, epitrachilion, have the same origin. They are the marks of dig-
nity, introduced into church usage during the fourth century, analogous to those which the
Theodosian code orders for certain kinds of civil functionaries. For one reason or another
the Roman Church refused to receive these marks, or rather confined itself to the papal pal-
lium, which then took a wholly technical signification. But everywhere else, this mark of
the then superior orders of the hierarchy was adopted, only varying slightly to mark the
degree, the deacon wearing it over the left shoulder, the bishop and priest around the neck,
the deacon over the tunicle which is his uppermost vestment, the priest under the chasuble;
the bishop over his chasuble. *However, for this distinction between a bishop and priest
we have very little evidence. The Canon of III Braga, already cited, which prescribes
that priests shall wear the stole crossed over the breast, i:)resuj)poses that it is worn under
the chasuble, but the council understands that this method of wearing it pertains distinctively
to priests, and that bishops have another method which they should observe ; for the word
sacerdotes, used by the council, includes bishops as well as i^riests. The rest of the Sjoanish
ecclesiastical literature gives us no information upon the point. In Gaul, St. Germanus of
Paris (as we have seen) speaks of the episcopal pa//i?(m after having described the chasuble,
which makes one believe that it was worn on top. I have already said that Bishop Ecclesius
of Ravenna is represented with the stole pendant before, under the chasuble and at the same
time with the pallium on top of it ; and that this usage was adopted in France in the Carlo-
vingian times. Greek bishops also wear at the same time the epitrachilion and the omophor-
lon. This accumulation of insignia was forbidden in Spain in the seventh century ( Fide IV
Toledo, Canon XXXIX), and (as we have stated) the Pope abstained from it until about
the twelfth century, contenting himself with the pallium without adding to it the stole.*

The pallium, with the exception of the crosses which adorn its ends, was always white ;
so too was the deacon's stole and also that of the priest and bishoj). The pallium was
always and everywhere made of wool ; in the East the deacon's stole was of linen ; I cannot
say of what material the priest's and deacon's stole was in the West.


CANON XXIII.

The readers and singers have no right to wear an orarium, and to read or sing thus
[habited].


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.
Cantors and lectors shall not wear the orarium.


* What follows down to the next asterisk is a foot-note to p.
379 of Duchesne's book.


Van Espen.


Rightly Zonoras here remarks, "for the
same reason (that they should not seem to
wish to usurp a ministry not their own) it


144


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


is not permitted to these to wear the stole,
for reatlers are for the work of reading, and
singers for singing," so each one should per-
form his own office.


This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cdnonici, Gratian's JJccrctum, Pars I., Dist.
xxiii,, can. xxviij.


CANON XXIV.

No one of the priosthood, from presbyters to deacons, and so on in the ecclesiastical
order to subdoacons, readers, singers, exorcists, door-keepers, or any of the class of the
Ascetics, ought to enter a tavern.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.
No clergyman should enter a tavern.

Compare this with Aj^ostolic Canon LIV.,


which contains exceptions not here speci-
fied.

This canon is contained in the Corpus Juris
Crnionici, Gratian's JJccretunt, Pars I., Dist.
xliv., c. ij.


EXCURSUS ON THE MINOR ORDERS OF THE EARLY CHUT^CH.

(Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, Ignatius, Vol. I., -p. 258.)

Some of these lower orders, the subdeacons, readers, door-keepers, and exorcists, are
mentioned in the celebrated letter of Cornelius bishop of Rome (a.d. 251) presei-ved by
Eusebius {H.E., vi., 43), and the readers existed at least half a century earlier (Tertull., dc
Praescr., 41). In the Eastern Church, however, if we except the Apostolic Constitutions, of
which the date and country are uncertain, the first reference to such offices is found in a
canon of the Council of Autioch, a.d. 341, where readers, subdeacons, and exorcists, are
mentioned, this being apparently intended as an exhaustive enumeration of the ecclesiastical
orders below the diacouate ; and for the first mention of door-keej^ers in the East, we must
go to the still later Council of Laodicea, about a.d. 303, (see III., p. 240, for the references,
where also fuller information is given). But while most of these lower orders certainly
existed in the West, and probably in the East, as early as the middle of the third centuiy
the case is di£ferent with the " singers " {xpaXTai) and the "labourers" (KOTriarai). Setting
aside the Apostolic Constitutions, the first notice of the " singers " occurs in the canons of
the above-mentioned Council of Laodicea. This, however, may be accidental. Tlie history
of the word coptatai aft'ords a more precise and conclusive indication of date. The term first
occurs in a rescript of Constantius (a.d. 357), "clerici (jui copiatai appellantur," and a little
later (a.d. 3G1), the same emperor speaks of them as "lii cjuos copiatas rccens usus instituit
nuncupari."

(Adolf Harnack, in his little book ridiculously intituled in the English version Sources
of the Apostolic Canons, page 85.)

Exorcists and readers there had been in the Church from old times, subdeacons are not
essentially strange, as they participate in a name (deacon) which dates from the earliest days
of Christianity. But acol}i;es and door-keepers {irvXaipoi) are quite strange, are really novel-
ties. And these acolytes even at the time of Cornelius stand at the head of the ordines
minores : for that the subdeacons follow on the deacons is self-evident. Whence do they
come ? Now if they do not spring out of the Christian tradition, their origin must be
explained from the Roman. It can in fact be shown there with desirable plainness.

With regard to subdeacons the reader may also like to see some of Harnack's specula-
tions. In the volume just quoted he writes as follows (p. 85 note) :

According to Cornelius and Cyprian subdeacons were mentioned in the thirtieth canon


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381 145

of the Synod of Elvira (about 305), so that the sub diaconate must then have been acknowl-
edged as a fixed general institution in the whole west (see Dale, The Synod of Elvira, Lond.,
1882). The same is seen in the " gesta apud Zenojjhilum." As the ajDpointment of the
lower orders took place at Rome between about the years 222-249, the announcement in
the L'ther Pontificalis (see Duchesne's edition, fase. 2, 1885, p. 148) is not to be despised, as
according to it Bishop Fabian appointed seven subdeacons : " Hie regiones dividit dia-
conibus et fecit vii. subdiaconos." The Codex Liberianus indeed (see Duchesne, fasc. 1, pp.
4 and 5 ; Lipsius, Chronohgie d. rOm Bischi'ifc, p. 267), only contains the first half of the sen-
tence, and what the Liher Potdif. has added of the account of the appointment of subdea-
cons (. . . qui vii notariis imminerent, ut gestas martyrum in integro fideliter colliger-
ent) is, in spite of the explanation of Duchesne, not convincing. According to Probst and
other Catholic scholars the subdiaconate existed in Rome a long time before Fabian [KircJd.
Disciplin, p. 109), but Hippolytus is against them. Besides, it should be observed that the
officials first, even in Carthage, are called hypo-deacons, though the word subdiaconus was
by degrees used in the West. This also points to a Roman origin of the office, for in the
Koman church in the first joart of the third century the Greek language was the prevailing
one, but not at Carthage.

But to return to the Acolythes, and door-keepers, whom Harnack thinks to be copies of
the old Roman temple officers. He refers to Marquardt's explanation of the sacrificial sys-
tem of the Romans, and gives the following resume (page 85 et seqq.) :

1. The temples have only partially their own priests, but they all have a superintendent
(oedituus-curidor tcnqM). These ceditui, who lived in the temple, fall again into two classes.
At least " in the most imjjortant brotherhoods the chosen cedituus was not in a position to
undertake in person the watching and cleaning of the saceUnm. He charged therefore with
this service a freedman or slave." "In this case the saceUum had two ceditui, the temple-
keeper, originally called magister cedituus, and the temple-servant, who appears to be called
the cedituus minister." "To both it is common that they live in the temple, although in small
chapels the presence of the servant is sufficient. The temple-servant opens, shuts, and cleans
the sacred place, and sJwws to strangers its curiosities, and allows, according to the rules of tlie tem-
ple, those persons to offer up prayers and sacrifices to whom this is permitted, while he sends aivay
the others."

2. " Besides the endowment, the colleges of priests were also supplied with a body of
servants " — the under officials — ; " they were appointed to the priests, ... by all of
whom they were used partly as letter-carriers (tabellarii), partly as scribes, partly as assistants
at the sacrifices." Marquardt reckons, (page 218 and fol.) the various categories of them
among the sacerdotes publici, lictores, pullarii, victimarii, tibicines, viatores, sixthly the
calatores, in the priests' colleges free men or freedmen, not slaves, and in fact one for the per-
sonal service of each member.

Here we have the forerunners of the Church door-keepers and acolytes. Thus says the
fourth Council of Carthage, as far as refers to the former : " Ostiarius cum ordinatur, post-
quam ab archidiacono instructus fuerit, qualiter in domo dei debeat conversari, ad suggest-
ionem archidiaconi, tradat ei episcopus claves ecclesise de altari, dicens. Sic age, quasi reddi-
turus deo rationem pro his rebus, quse hisce clavibus recluduntur." The ostiarius (TrvXwpo's)
is thus the sedituus minister. He had to look after the opening and shutting of the doors,
to watch over the coming in and going out of the faithful, to refuse entrance to suspicious
persons, and, from the date of the more strict separation between the missa catechumenorum
and the missa fidelium, to close the doors, after the dismissal of the catechumens, against
those doing penance and unbelievers. He first became necessary when there were special


140 SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381

church buildings (there wei-e such even in the second century), and they Hke the temples,
together with the ceremonial of divine sen-ice, had come to be considered as holy, that is,
since about 225. The church acolytes are ^^'ithout difficulty to be recognised in the under
officials of the priests, especially in the " calatores," the personal servants of the priests.
According to Cyprian the acolytes and others are used by preference as tabellarii. Accord-
ing to Cornelius there were in Rome forty-two acolytes. As he gives the number of priests
as forty-six, it may be concluded with something like cei'tainty that the nile was that the
number of the priests and of the acolytes should be equal, and that the little difference may
have been caused by temporary vacancies. If this view is correct, the identity of the calator
with the acolyte is strikingly proved. But the name "acolyte" plainly shows the acolyte
was not, like the door-keeper, attached to a sacred thing, but to a sacred j^erson.

(Lightfoot. Apostolic Fathers. Ignatius, ad Antioch, xj., note. Vol. II., Sec. II., p. 240.)

The acolytes were confined to the Western Church and so are not mentioned here. On
the other hand the " deaconesses " seem to have been confined to the Eastern Church at this
time. See also Apost. Const., iii., 11. ; viii., 12 ; comp. viii., 19-28, 31 ; Apost. Can., 48 ;
Cone. Loodic, Can. 24; Cone. Antioch, Can. 10. Of these lower orders the "subdeacons"
ai*e fir.st mentioned in the middle of the third century, in the passage of Cornelius already
quoted and in the contemporary letters of Cyprian. The " readers " occur as early as Ter-
tullian dc Prcescr. 41 "hodie diaconus, qui eras lector," where the language shows that this
was already a fii-mly established order in the Church. Of the "singers" the notices iii the
Apostolical Constitutions are probably the most ancient. The " door-keejiers," like the sub-
deacons, seem to be first mentioned in the letter of Cornelius. The kottiwi/tcs first appear a
full century later ; see the next note. The " exorcists," as we have seen, are mentioned as a
distinct order by Cornelius, Avhile in Apost. Const., viii., 26, it is ordered that they shall not
be ordained, because it is a spiritual function which comes direct from God and manifests
itself by its results. The name and the function, however, apj^ear much earlier in the Chris-
tian Church; e.g., Justin Mart., Apol. ii., 6 (p. 45). The forms f.iTopKL(ni]<i and iiopKLo-rrjs are
convertible; e.g., Justin Mart., Dial., S5 (p. 311). The "confessors" hardly desei-ve to be
reckoned a distinct order, though accidentally they are mentioned in proximity with the
different grades of clergy in Apost. Const., viii., 12, already quoted. Perhaps the accidental
connexion in this work has led to their confusion with the offices of the Christian ministry
in our false Ignatius. In Apost. Const., viii., 23, they are treated in much the same way as
the exorcists, being regarded as in some sense an order and yet not subject to ordination.
Possibly, however, the word oixoXoy-qToi has here a different sense, "chanters," as the cori'e-
sponding Latin " confessores " seems sometimes to have, e.g., in the Sacramentarj' of Gregory
" Oremus et pro omnibus episcopis, presbyteris, diaconibus, acolythis, exorcistis, lectoribus,
ostiariis, confessoribus, virginibus, viduis, et pro omni populo sancto Dei ; " see Ducange,
Gloss. Lat., s. V. (11. p. 530, Heuschel).

In a law of the year 357 {Cod. Tlicod., xiii., 1) mention is made of " clerici qui copiatae
appellantur," and anotlier law of the year 361 {Cod. Theod., xvi., 2, 15) runs " clerici vero vel
his quos copiatas recens usus instituit nuncupari," etc. From these passages it is clear
that the name Ko-n-iCvTes was not in use much before the middle of the fourth centuiy, though
the office under its Latin name " fossores " or " fossarii "' appears somewhat earlier. Even
later Epiphanius {Expos. Fid., 21) writes as if the word still needed some explanation. In
accoi'dance with these facts, Zahn (I. v., A. ji. 129), correctly argues with regard to our
Ignatian writer, urging that on the one hand he would not have ascribed such language to
Ignatius if the Avord had been quite recent, while on the other hand his using the participle
(tovs KOTTtuivTas) rather than the substantive indicates that it had not yet firmly established


SYNOD OF LAODICExY. A.D. 343-381


14^


itself. For these "copiatfc" see especially de Kossi, Roma Sntternnea, III., p. 533 sq.,
Gothofred on Cod. Theod., II., cc, and for the Latin "fossores" Martigny, Diet, des Antiq.
Chr-t. s.v. See also the inscriptions, C. I. G., 9227, Bull, de Corr. Bellen., vii., p. 238,
Journ. of Ilellen. Stud., vi., p. 362.


CANON XXY.

A SUBDEACON must Dot give the Bread, nor bless the Cup,


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.


A subdeacon may not give the bread and the
cup.

Aristenus.

Subdeacons are not allowed to perform the
work of pi-esbyters and deacons. Wherefore
they neither deliver the bread nor the cup to
the people.

Hefele.

According to the Apostolic Constitutions,
the communion was administered in the fol-
lowing manner : the bishop gave to each the
holy bread with the words : " the Body of the
Lord," and the recipient said, "Amen." The


deacon then gave the chalice with the words :
"the Blood of Christ, the chalice of life," and
the recipient again answered, " Amen." This
giving of the chalice with the words :" the
Blood of Christ," etc., is called in the canon of
Laodicea a " blessing " {evXoyeh). The Greek
commentator Aristenus in accordance with
this, and quite rightly, gives the meaning of
this canon.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars L, Dist.
XCIIL, c. xix. ; but reads "Deacons" instead
of "Subdeacons." The Roman Correctors
point out the error.


CANON XXVI.

They who have not been promoted [to that office] by the bishop, ought not to adjure,
either in churches or in private houses.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.


No one shall adjure without the bishop's pro-
motion to that office.

Balsamon.

Some were in the habit of " adjuring," that
is catechising the unbelievers, who had never
received the imposition of the bishop's hands
for that purpose ; and when they were accused
of doing; so, contended that as they did not do
it in church but only at home, they could not
be considered as deseiwing of any punishment.
For this I'eason the Fathers rule that even to
" adjure " (ec^opKi'^etr) is an ecclesiastical minis-
try, and must not be executed by anyone who
shall not have been promoted thereto by a
bishoj). But the " Exorcist " must be excepted
who has been promoted by a Chorepiscopus,
for he can indeed properly catechize although
not promoted by a bishop ; for from Canon
X. of Antioch we learn that even a Chorepis-
copus can make an Exorcist.


Zonaras notes that from this canon it ap-
pears that " Chorepiscopi are considered to be
in the number of bishops."

Van Espen.

"Promoted" (Trpoax-^eWas) by the bishops,
by which is signified a mere designation or
appointment, in conformity with the Greek
discipline which never counted exorcism
among the orders, but among the simple
ministries which were committed to certain
persons by the bishops, as Morinus proves at
length in his work on Orders {Dc Ordinationi-
bus. Pars IIL, Ex. XIV., cap. ij.).

Double is the power of devils over men, the
one part internal the other external. The
former is when they hold the soul captive by
vice and sin. The latter when they disturb
the exterior and interior senses and lead any-
one on to fury. Those who are subject to
the interior evils are the Catechumens and
Penitents, and those who are subject to the
exterior are the Energumens. Whoever are


148


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


occupied with the freeincj from tlie power of
the devil of either of these kinds, by prayers,
exhortations, and exorcisms, are said " to
exoi'cize " them ; which seems to be what
Balsamon means when he says — " ' exorcize '
that is ' to catechize the unbelievers.'" Vide


this matter moi'e at leuo^th in Ducange's
(Unssarij [Gloss., s. v. Exorcizare).

This canon is found in the Coj'puft Jtms
Canonici, Gratiau's Dccretum, Pars I., Dist.
LXIX. c. ij., Isidore's version.


CANON XXYII.

Neither they of the priesthood, nor clergymen, nor laymen, who are invited to a love
feast, may take away their portions, for this is to cast reproach on the ecclesiastical
order.

NOTES.


An'ciext Epitome of Cvxon XXVII.

A clergyman invited to a love feast shall carry
nothing away loith him ; for this ivould bring
his order into shame.


Hefele.


the higher ranks of the clergy, priests and
deacons, as in the preceding twenty-fourth
canon the presbyters and deacons alone are
expressly numbered among the UpaxKcoi? and
distinguished from the other (minor) clerics.
And afterwards, in canon XXX., there is a
similar mention of three different grades,

upuTLKOi, K-AryptKot, and aaK-qrau

" „ , 1 i. ii f„„+ +!.„+ „i,.^n^i,r ,-,, I The taking away of the remains of the wflwe

man, and appeals to the tact that already in I . , t ^^^^ \ 4.i i i

, ' . A^ ,1 n^r,r^-c ^o«,r \. rA A ishcrc lorbidden, because, on the one hand,

earlv times among the (jreeks many held ., , , , ' i ii ii

a> ' • ii /-,! 1 xi i. 1 •„ , ^,..i„,-,,„;i it showed covetousness, and, on the other, was
offices in the Church without being ordained, . i i e .■

, ■ . ^ ^r i.^r. T 1^ perhaps considered a profanation,

as do now our sacristans and acolvtes. 1 do ^ ^ ^


Van Espen translates : "no one holding
any office in the Church, be he cleric or lay


not think, however, with Van Espen, that by
" they of the priesthood " is meant in general
any one holding office in the Church, but only


This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
XLII., c. iij.


CANON XXMII.

It is not permitted to hold love feasts, as they are called, in the Lord's Houses, or
Chui-ches, nor to eat and to spread couches in the house of God.

NOTES.


A>'ciE>'T Epitome of Canon XXVIII.

Beds shall not he set up in churches, nor
shall love feasts he held there.

Hefele.

Eusebius {H. R, Lib. IX., Cap. X.) employs
the expression KvpcaKa in the same sense as
does this canon as identical with churches.
The prohibition itself, however, here given, as ,
well as the preceding canon, proves that as ;


early as the time of the Synod of Laodicea,
many irregulai'ities had crept into the agape.
For the rest, this Synod was not in a position
permanently to banish the usage from the
Church ; for which reason the Trullan Synod
in its seventy-fourth canon repeated this rule
word for word.

This canon is found in the Corjtus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
XLII., c. iv.


CANON XXIX.

Christians must not judaize by resting on the Sal)])ath, but must work on that day,
rather honouring the Lord's Day ; and, if they can, resting then as Christians. But if
any shall be found to be judaizers, let them be anathema from Christ.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.
A Christian shall not stop work on the Sab-
bath, but on the Lord's Bay.


Balsamon.

Here the Fathers order that no one of the
faithful shall stop work on the Sabbath as do


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


149


the Jews, but that they should honour the
Lord's Day, on account of the Lord's resux-rec-
tion, and that on that day they should abstain
from manual labour and go to church. But
thus abstaining from work on Sunday they do


not lay down as a necessity, but they add,
" if they can." For if through need or any
other necessity any one worked on the Lord's
day this was not reckoned against him.


CANON XXX.

None of the priesthood, nor clerics [of lower rank] nor ascetics, nor any Christian
or layman, shall wash in a bath with women ; for this is the greatest reproach among

the heathen.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.

It is an abomination to bathe with women.

This canon was renewed by the Synod in
Trullo, canon Ixxvij.

Zonaras explains that the bathers were en-


tirely nude and hence arose the objection
which was also felt by the heathen.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pai's I., Dist.
LXXXI., c. xxviij.


CANON XXXI.

It is not lawful to make marriages with all [sorts of] heretics, nor to give our sons
and daughters to them ; but rather to take of them, if they promise to become Christians.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXI. I contract marriage with heretics or to join their

It is not right to give children in marriage to j children m such

errors, and lead them to embrace their own
perverse opinions.


for, as both Balsamon and
heretics, but they should be received if they Zonaras remark, " they imbue them with their
promise to become Christians.


Van Espen.
By this canon the faithful are forbidden to


CANON XXXII.

It is unlawful to receive the eulogise of heretics, for they are rather aXoyiau [i.e., fol-
lies], than eulogise [i.e., blessings].

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXII. male-dictiones, but at the expense of the ac-

The blessings of heretics are cursings. curacy of translation.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
To keep the Latin play upon the words Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
the translator has used bene-dictiones and i II., Qusest. I., Can. Ixvj.


CANON XXXIII.

No one shall join in prayers with heretics or schismatics.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.

Thou shall not pray with heretics or schis-
matics.


Van Espen.


The underlying principle of this canon is
the same as the last, for as the receiving of


150


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


the EulotfifE wliicli were seut bv heretics as a tlie same communion, and therefore to be
sifT^n of communion, siguitied a communion avoided. This is also set forth in Apostolical
■n-ith them in religious matters, so the sharing i Cauou number xlv.
with them common prayer is a declaration of I


CANON XXXIV.

No Christian shall forsake the martyrs of Claist, iuul turn to false martyrs, that is,
to those of the heretics, or those who formerly were heretics ; for they are aliens from
God. Let those, therefore, who go after them, be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIV.

TfTio.'to honours an heretical jjseudo-marlyr let
hitn be anathema.

Hefele.

This canon forbids the honouring of mar-
tyrs not belonging to the orthodox church.
The number of Montanist martyrs of Phrygia
was probably the occasion of this canon.


The ]>hrase which I have translated " to
those who formerly were heretics " has caused
great difficulty to all translators and scarcely
two agree. Hammond reads "those who have
been reputed to have been heretics ; " and with
him Fulton agrees, but wrongly (as I think)
by omitting the "to." Lambert translates
" to those who before were heretics" and cor-
rectly. With him agrees Van Espen, thus, vet
COS qui prius heretici fuere.


CANON XXXV.

Christians must not forsake the Church of God, and go away and invoke angels
and gather assemblies, which things are forl^idden. If, therefore, any one shall be
found engaged in this covert idolatry, let him be anathema ; for he has forsaken our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and has gone over to idolatry.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXV.
Whoso calls assemblies in opposition to those
of lice Church and iiamcs angels, is near to idol-
atry and let him be anathema.

Van Espen.

Whatever the worship of angels condemned
by this canon may have been, one thing is
manifest, tliat it was a species of idolatry, and
detracted from the worship due to Christ.

Theodoret makes mention of this supersti-
tious cult in his ex2:)Osition of the text of St.
Paul, Col. ii., 18, and when writing of its
condemnation by this synod he says, " they
were leading to worship angels such as were
defending the Law ; for, said they, the Law
was given through angels. And this vice
lasted for a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia.
Therefore it was that the synod whi(;h met at
Laodicea in Phrygia, prohibited b}- a canon,
that prayer should be offered to angels, and
even to-day an oratory of St. ^Michael can be
seen among them, and their neighbours."

In the Capitular of Charlemagne, a.d 789


(cap. xvi.), it is said, "In that same council
(Laodicea) it was ordered that angels should
not be given unknown names, and that such
should not be affixed to them, but that only
they should be named by the names which
we have by authority. Tliese are Michael,
Gabriel, Raphael." And tlien is subjoined
the present canon. The canon forbids " to
name " (ovoixdCfu) angels, and this was under-
stood as meaning to give them names instead
of to call upon them by name.

Perchance the authors of the Capitular had

'in mind the lloman Council under Pope

Zachary, a.d. 745, against Aldebert, who was

found to invoke by name eight angels in his

prayers.

It should be noted that some Latin ver-
sions of great authority and antifjuity read
ancjuhts for nnf/rlns. This would refer to do-
ing these idolatrous rites in corners, hiddenly,
secretly, occulle as in the Latin. But this
reading, though so respectable in the Latin,
has no Greek authority for it.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


151


This canon has often been used in contro-
versy as condemning the cultus which the
Catholic Church has always given to the an-
gels, but those who would make such a use
of this canon should explain how these inter-
pretations can be consistent with the cultus


of the Martyrs so evidently approved by the
same council ; and how this canon came to be
accepted by the Fathers of the Second Coun-
cil of Nice, if it condemned the then universal
practice of the Church, East and West. Gf.
Forbes, Considerationes Modestce.


CANON XXXYI.

They who are of the priesthood, or of the clergy, shall not be magicians, enchant-
ers, mathematicians, or astrologers ; nor shall they make what are called amulets, which
are chains for their own souls. And those who wear such, we command to be cast out
of the Church.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXYI.

Whoso vrill he priest must not be a magician,
nor one who uses incantations, or mathematical
or astrological charms, nor a putter on of amulets.

Some interesting and valuable information
on charms will be found in Ducange (Glossa-
rium, s. v. Phylacterea).

Balsamon.

" Magicians " are those who for any pur-
pose call Satan to their aid. " Enchantors "
are those who sing charms or incantations,
and through them draw demons to obey


them. " Mathematicians " are they who hold
the oj)inion that the celestial bodies rule the
universe, and that all earthly things are ruled
by their influence. " Astrologers " are they
who divine by the stars through the agency of
demons, and place theu* faith in them.

Yan Espen.

Zonaras also notes that the science of
mathematics or astronomy is not at all hereby
forbidden to the clergy, but the excess and
abuse of that science, which even more easily
may happen in the case of clergymen and
consecrated persons than in that of laymen.


CANON XXXYII.

It is not lawful to receive portions sent from the feasts of Jews or heretics, nor to
feast together with them.

CANON XXXYIII.

It is not lawful to receive unleavened bread from the Jews, nor to be partakers of their
impiety.

CANON XXXIX.

It is not lawful to feast together with the heathen, and to be partakers of their god-
lessness.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canons XXXYII., Apostles, and Canon Ix' of the Synod of

XXXYIII. AND XXXIX. Carthage.

Aristenus.

Thou shall not keep feasts icith Hehreios t • i - i j. i • ■i.\ t ^

, .. .r .• 7 yr ■ -c Liofht hath no communion with darkness.

or heretics, nor receive festival offerinns from mi j? r^^ • j.- i ii i i a

,, •' .u J J Therefore no Christian should celebrate a

-D feast with heretics or Jews, neither should he

receive anything connected with these feasts

Read canon Ixx. and canon Ixxj. of the Holy such as azymes and the like.


1 So both Zonaras and Balsamon give the number, but in this they follow the Latin numbers of the African Code, the Greek
number is Ixiij.


152


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


CANON XL.

BiSHOrs called to a s}Tiod must not be guilty of contempt, but must attend, and eitlier
teach, or be taught, for the reformation of tlie Church and of others. And if such an
one shall be guilty of contempt, he will condemn himself, unless he be detained by ill
health.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XL.

Whoso summoned to a synod shall spurn the
invitation, in^lexs hindered bi/ the force of cir-
cumstinees, shall not be free front blame.

Hefele.
By dvoj/xaXm, ilhiess is commonly under-


stood, and Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore . XVIII., c. v.


translated it, the former cegritudinem, and the
latter infrniitatem. But Balsamou justly re-
marks that the term has a wider meaning,
and, besides cases of illness includes other
unavoidable hinderauces or obstacles.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratiau's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.


CANON XLL

None of the priesthood nor of the clergy may go on a jom-ney, without the bidding
of the Bishop.

CANON XLIL

None of the priesthood nor of the clergy may travel without letters canonical.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canons XLL and XLIL

No clergyman shall undertake a journey u-ith-
out canonical letters or unless he is ordered to do
so.

Van Espen

(On Canon xli.)

It is well known that according to the
true discipline of the Church no one should
be ordained unless he be attached to some
church, wliich as an ecclesiastical soldier he
shall fi}^lit for and preserve. As, then, a secu-
lar soldier cannot without his prefect's bidding
leave his post and go to another, so the canons
decree that no one in the ranks of the ecclesi-
astical military can travel about except at the
bidding of the bishop who is in command of
the army. A slight trace of this discipline is
observed even to-day in the fact that priests
of other dioceses are not allowed to celebrate
unless they are provided with Canonical let-
ters or testimonials from their own bishops.


(On Canon xlii.)

The whole subject of Commendatory and
other letters is treated of in the note to
Canon VIII. of the Council of Autioch.

Canon xlj. is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars III., Dist.
v., De Consecraf, can. xxxvj.

Canon xlij. is appended to the preceding, but,
curiously enough, limited to laymen, reading
as follows : " a layman also without canonical
letters," that is "formed letters." shoidd not
travel anywhere. The Roman Correctors re-
mark that in the Greek order this last is canon
xli., and the former part of Gratian's canon,
canon xlij. of the Greek, but sucli is not the or-
der of the Greek in Zonaras nor in Balsamon.
The correctors add that in neither canon is
there any mention made of laymen, nor in
Dionysius's version ; the Prisca, however, read
for canon xlj., " It is not right for a minister
of the altar, even for a layman, to travel, etc."


CANON XLIIL

The subdeacons may not leave the doors to engage in the prayer, even for a short
time.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


153


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIII.

A subdeacon should not leave the gates, even
for a short time, to pray.

On this canon the commentators find noth-
ing to say iu addition to their remarks on
Canons xxj., and xxij., except that the
" prayer " is not their own private prayer, but
the prayer of the Liturgy. It has struck me
that possibly ■when there "was no deacon to


sing the litany outside the Holy Gates while
the priest was going on with the holy action
within, subdeacon s may have left their places
at the doors, assumed the deacon's stole and
done his part of the ofiice, and that it was
to prevent this abuse that this canon was
enacted, the "prayer'" being the litany. But
as this is purely my own suggestion it is
probably valueless.


CANON XLiy.


Women may not go to the altar.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIV.
The altar must not he approached by women.

Van Espen.

The discipline of this canon was often
renewed even in the Latin Church, and there-
fore Balsamon unjustly attacks the Latins
when he says-; "Among the Latins women
go without any shame up to the altar whenever
they -wish." For the Latins have forbidden
and do forbid this approach of women to the


altar no less than the Greeks ; and look upon
the contraiy custom as an abuse sprung of
the insolence of the women and of the negli-
gence of bishops and pastors.

Zonakas.

If it is prohibited to laymen to enter the
Sanctuary by the Ixixth canon of the Sixth
synod [i.e. Quinisext], much more are women
forbidden to do so who are unwillingly indeed,
but yet truly, jDolluted by the monthly flux
I of blood.


CANON XLV.

[Candidates] for baptism are not to be received after the second week in Lent.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLV.


After tivo weeks of Lent no one must be ad-
mitted for illumination, for all such should fast
from its beginning.

Van Espen.

To the understanding of this canon it must
be remembered that such of the Gentiles ^s
desired to become Catholics and to be bap-
tized, at first were privately instructed by the
catechists. After this, having acquired some
knowledge of the Christian religion, they
were admitted to the public instructions
given by the bishop in church ; and were
therefore called Audientes and for the first
time pi'operly-speaking Catechumens. But
when these catechumens had been kept in
this rank a sufficient time and had been there


tried, they were allow'ed to go uj) to the
higher grade called Genuflectentes.

And when their exercises had been com-
I j)leted in this order they w-ere brought by
the catechists who had had the charge of
them, to the bishop, that on the Holy Sab-
bath [Easter Even] they might receive bap-
tism, and the catechumens gave their names at
the same time, so that they might be set down
for baptism at the coming Holy Sabbath.

Moreover we learn from St. Augustine
(Serm. xiii., Ad Neophitos,) that the time for
the giving in of the names was the beginning
of Lent.

This council therefore in this canon decrees
that such as do not hand in their names at the
beginning of Lent, but after two weeks are
past, shall not be admitted to baptism on the
next Holv Sabbath.


15-i


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


CANON XLVL

They -who are to bo baptized must learn the faith [Creed] by heart, and recite it to
the bishop, or to the presbyters, ou the fifth day of the week.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVL
Vide infra.


Hefele.


which the catechumens received instruction.

The Creek comniontators are in favour of the

latter, but Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore,

and after them Biufj^ham, are, and probably

It is doubtfid whether by the Thursday of riijhtly, in favoiir of the former nieaiuiitr.

the text was meant only the Thursday of Holy This canon was rcjX'ated by the Trullan Synod

"Week, or every Thursday of the time during! in its seventy-eighth canon.


CANON XLVII.

They who arc baptized in sickness and afterwards recover, must learn the Creed by
heart and know that the Divine gifts have been vouchsafed them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canons XLVL and XLVII.

Mlioso is baptised by a bishop or presbyter let
him recite the faith on the fifth feria of the
iveek. Also anyone baptized clinically a short
ichile afterivards.

Balsamon.

Some unbelievers were baptized before they
had been catechized, by reason of the urgency
of the illness. Now some thought that as
their baptism did not follow their being cate-


chumens, they ought to be catechized and
baptized over again. And in support of this
opinion they urged Canon XII. of Neoctesarea,
which does not permit one clinically baptized
to become a priest rashly. For this reason it
is that the Fathers decree that such an one
shall not be baptized a second time, but as
soon as he gets well he shall learn the faith
and the mystery of baptism, and to a])preciate
the divine gifts he has received, viz., the con-
fession of the one true God and the remission
of sins which comes to us in holy baptism.


CANON XLVIIL

They who are baptized must after Baptism be anointed with the heavenly chrism,
and be partakers of the Kingdom of Christ.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVIIL


Those illuminated should after their baptism
be anointed.

Van Espen.

That this canon refers to the anointing with


AUBESPINE.

(Lib. i., Observat. cap. xv.)

Formei'ly no one was esteemed worthy of
the name Christian or reckoned among the
chrism on the forehead of the baptized, that Pf^i'ff^f't who had not been coiiHrmed and eu-
is to say of the sacrament of continuation, is | ^^"^^'^'^^ ""^'^^^^ ^^"^ oi^t of tlie Holy Gliost.
the unanimous opinion of the Greek conimen- |

tators, and Balsamon notes that this anointing The prayers for the consecration of the
is not sini])ly styled " clirisni " but "the heav- Holy Chrism .according to the rites of the
enly chrism," viz. : "that which is sanctified East and of the West should be carefully read
by holy prayers and through the invocation of by the student. Those of the East are found
the Holy Spirit ; and those who are anointed in the Euchologion, and those of the West in
therewith, it sanctities and makes jjartakers the Pontifirale Romanum, De Ollicio in feria
of the kingdom of heaven." I v. Ccena Domini.


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


155


CANON XLIX.


During Lent the Bread must not be offered except on the Sabbath Day and on the
Lord's Day only.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX.


In Lent the offering should be made only on
the Sabbath and on the Lord's day.

Hefele.

This canon, which was rei^eated by the
Trullan Synod in its fifty-second canon, or-
ders that on ordinary week days during Lent,
only a 3Iissa Prcesanctificatorum should take
place, as is still the custom with the Greeks
on all days of penitence and mourning, when


it appears to them unsuitable to have the full
liturgy, and as Leo Allatius says, for this
reason, that the consecration is a joyful act.
A comparison of the above sixteenth canon,
however, shows that Saturday was a special
exception.

To the Saturdays and Sundaj's mentioned
by Hefele must be added the feast of the
Annunciation, which is always solemnized with
a full celebration of the Liturgy, even when
it falls upon Good Friday,


CANON L.

The fast must not be broken on the fifth day of the last week in Lent \ie., on
Maunday Thursday], and the whole of Lent be dishonoured ; but it is necessary to fast
during all the Lenten season by eating only dry meats.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon L.


It is not 'right on the fifth feria of the last
week of Lent to break the fast, and thus spoil
the whole of Lent ; but the ivhole of Lent should
be kept ivith fasting on dry food.

That long before the date of the Quinisext
Synod the fasting reception of the Holy
Eucharist was Jlie universal law of the Church
no one can doubt who has devoted the slight-
est study to the point. To produce the evi-
dence here would be out of place, but the
reader may be referred to the excellent pres- j
entation of it in Cardinal Bona's De Rebus \
Liturgicis. \

I shall here cite but one passage, from St. '
Augustine :

" It is clear that when the disciples first re-
ceived the body and blood of the Lord they
had not been fasting. Must we then censure
the Universal Church because the sacrament is \
everywhere x>artaken of by persons fasting ? ■•
Nay, verily ; for from that time it pleased the
Holy Spirit to appoint, for the honour of so
great a sacrament, that the body of the Lord
should take the precedence of all other food
entering the mouth of a Christian ; and it is
for this reason that the custom referred to is
mnver sally observed. For the fact that the
Lord instituted the sacrament after other food
had been partaken of does not prove that j
brethren should come together to partake of I


that saci-ament after having dined or supped,
or imitate those whom the Apostle reiiroved
and corrected for not distinguishing between
the Lord's Sapper and an ordinary meal.
The Saviour, indeed, in order to commend the
depths of tliat mystery more affectingly to
his disciples, was pleased to impress it on
their hearts and memories by making its in-
stitution his last act before going froni them
to his passion. And, therefore, he did not
prescribe the order in which it was to be ob-
served, reserving this to be done by the Apos-
tles, through whom he intended to arrange
all things pertaining to the churches. Had
he appointed that the sacrament should be
always partaken of after other food, I believe
that no one would have departed from that
practice. But when the Apostle, speaking of
this sacrament, says, 'Wherefore, my brethren,
w^hen ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another, and if any man hunger let him eat at
home, that ye come not together unto con-
demnation,' he immediately adds, 'And the
rest Avill I set in order when I come.' Whence
we are given to understand that, since it was
too much for him to prescribe completely in
an epistle the method observed by the Uni-
versal Church throughout the world it was
one of the things set in order by him in per-
son ; for we find its observance uniform amid
all the variety of other customs." ^

1 Aug. Epitt. ad Januar.


150


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


In fact the utter absurdity of the attempt
to maintain the opposite cannot better be
seen than in reading Kiiii^'don's Fasting Com-
munion, an example of special pleading and
disingennousness rarely ((lualhMl even in con-
troversial tlifolugical hteratui-c. A V)ricf but
crushing refutation of the position taken by
that writer will be foimd in an appendix to a
pamphlet by H. P. Liddon, Ecening Commu-
nions contrary to the Tea' king and Practice of
the Church in all Ages.

But whih' this is true, it is also true that in
some few i)laces the custom had lingex-ed on
of making Maundy Thursday night an excep- j
tion to this rule, and of having tlien a feast,
in memory of our Lord's Last Supper, and
after this having a celebration of the Divine
Mysteries. This is the custom which is pro-
hibited by this canon, l)ut it is manifest both
from the wording of the canon itself and


from the remarks of the Greek commentators
that the custom was condemned not because
it necessitated an unfasting reception of the
Holy Eucharist, l)ut because it connoted a
feast whicli was a breaking of tlio Lenten
fast and a dishonour to the whole of the holy
season.

It is somewhat curious and a trifle amusing
to read Zonaras gravely arguing tlie point as
to wliether the drinking of water is forbidden
by this canon becau.se it speaks of " dry
meats," which he decides in the negative !

Balsamon.

Those, therefore, who without being ill, fast
on oil and shell-fish, do contrary to this law ;
and much more they who eat on the fourth
and sixth ferias fish.


CANON LI.


The nativities of Martyrs are not to be celebrated in Lent, but commemorations of
the holy Martyrs are to be made on the Sabbaths and Lord's days.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LI.
Commemorations of3fart>jrs shall only he held
on Lord's days and Sabbaths.

By this canon all Saints-days are forbidden
to be observed in Lent on the days on which
they fall, but must be transferred to a Sab-
bath or else to the Sunday, when they can be
kept with the festival service of the full
liturgy and not Avith the penitential incom-
pleteness of the Mass of the Presanctitied.
Comi)are canon xlix. of tins Synod, and canon
lij. of the Quinisext Council.


Balsamon.


The whole of Lent is a time of grief for our
sins, and the memories of the Saints are not
kept except on the Sabbaths.

Van Espen remarks how in old calendars
there are but few Saints-days in those
months in which Lent ordinarily falls, and
that the multitude of days now kej^t by the
Roman ordo are mostly of modern introduc-
tion.


CANON LIT.

Maeriages and birthday feasts are not to be celebrated in Lent.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LII. nafiditia nutrfyrum is not to be understood as

Marriage shall not be celebrated in Lent, nor f ^^'^' pre.-edmg canon, but the birthday

, . ,, , -^ leasts ot princes. This, as well as the pre-

birthdaiis. t | i ■ n ■ i.i r

"^ I ceding rule, was renewed in the sixth century

Hefele. I^^, ]3ish()p Martin of Bracara, now Braga, in

By " birthday feasts " in this canon the I Portugal.


CANON LIIL

Christians, wlicn they attend weddings, must not join in wanton dances, but mod'
estly dine or breakfast, as is becoming to Christians.


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


157


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of C.\non LIII.
It is unsuitable to dance or leap at weddings.


Van Espen.

This canon does not call for explanation
but for reflexion, and greatly it is to be
desired that it should be observed by Chris-


tians, and that through like improprieties,
wedding-days, which should be days of holy
joy and blessing, be not turned, even to the
bride and groom themselves, into days of
cursing. Moreover the Synod of Trent ad-
monishes bishops [Sess. xxiv., De lleform. Mat,
cap. X.) to take care that at weddings there
be only that which is modest and proper.


CANON LIV.

Members of the priesthood and of the clergy must not witness the plays at wed-
dings or banquets ; but, before the players enter, they must rise and depart.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV. i consecrated persons must not see the play at

Priests and clerics should leave before the play. Y.^'^'^'^'S^l ^""^ ^^^^^'^ *^e ^hymelici begin,

they must go out.

Compare with this Canons XXIV. and LI.,
of the Synod in Tnallo.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
and make a noise with them. For this is : Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars III., De
unworthy of the Christian standing. Butj Consecrat. Dist. v., can. xxxvij.


Aristentjs.

Christians are admonished to feast mod-
estly when they go to weddings and not to
dance nor (3a\Xt^eLv, that is to clap their hands


CANON LV.

Neither members of the priesthood nor of the clergy, nor yet laymen, may club to-
gether for drinking entertainments.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LV.

Neither a layman nor a cleric shall celebrate a
club feast.

These meals, the expenses of which were
defrayed by a number clubbing together and
sharing the cost, were called " symbola " by
Isidore, and by Melinus and Crabbe " comis-


salia," although the more ordinary foi-m is
" commensalia " or " comessalia." Cf. Du-
cange Gloss., s. v. Commensalia and Confer-
tum.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pai-s I., Dist.
XLIV., c. X. (Isidore's version), and c. xij.,
(Martin of Braga's version).


CANON LVI.

Presbyters may not enter and take their seats in the bema before the entrance of
the Bishop : but they must enter with the Bishop, unless he be at home sick, or absent.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI.


NOTES.

does not determine the order of dignity in an


g en-


A presbyter shall not enter the bema before ecclesiastical procession, but somethin
the bishop, nor sit doivn. [^f ^ different viz., it provides that when the

bishop enters the sanctuary he should not be

It is difficult to translate this canon with- alone and walk into a place already occupied,
out giving a false idea of its meaning. It but that he should have with him, as a guard


158


SYXOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


of honour, the clergy. "Whether these should ; This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
walk before or after him would be a mere Canonici, Gratian's JJecretum, Pars I., Dist.
matter of local custom, the rule Juniores ! XCV., can, viij.
priorcs did not universally prevail. I

CANON LYII.

BisHors must not be ai"»pointed in villages or country districts, but visitors ; and
those who have been already appointed must do nothin<i; without the consent of the
bishop of the city. Presbyters, in like manner, must do nothing without the consent of
the bishop.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LVII.

A bishop shall not be established in a village
or >n the country, but a periodeutes. But
should one be appointed he shall not pjf^rform
any function without the bishop of the city.

On the whole subject of Chorepiscopi see
the Excursus to Canon VIII. of Nice, in this
volume.

Hefele.

Compare the eighth and tenth canons of the
Synod of Antioch of 341, the thirteenth of the
Synod of Aucyra, and the second clause of
the sixth canon of tlie S^Tiod of Sardica. The
above canon orders that from henceforth, in


the place of the lairal bishops, priests of
higher rank shall act as visitors of the country
dioceses and country clerg}-. Di< nysius Exi-
guus, Isidore, the Greek commentators. Van
Espen, Kemi Ceillier, Neander, and others
thus interpret this canon ; but Herbst, in the
T'djingen Review, translates the wonl (Trepto-
SevTat) not visitors but physicians — physicians
of the soul, — and for this he appeals to j)as-
sages from the Fathers of the Church collected
by Suicer in his Thesaurus.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
LXXX., c. V.


CANON LVIII.

The Oblation must not be made by bishops or presbyters in any private houses.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVIII.
Neither a bishoj) nor a presbyter shall make the
offcriny in private houses.

Van Espen.


to the mind of the Greek intei-preters.
Zonaras says : '' The faithful can pray to God
and be intent upon their prayers everywhere,
wliether in the house, in the field, or in any
l^lace they possess : but to offer or perform


By " the oblation " here is intended the the oblation must by no means be done ex
oblation of the unbloody sacrifice according cept in a church and at an altar."


CANON LIX.

No psalms composed by private individuals nor any uncanonical books may be read
in the church, but only the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testaments.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LIX.
Fsalms of private origin, or books uncanoni-
cal are not to be sung in temples ; but the ca-
nonical ivritings of the old and new testaments.

Hefele.
Several lieretics, for instance Bardesanes,


composed psalms, i.e.. Church hymns. The
Synod of Laodicea forbade the use of any
composed by ])rivate individuals, namely all
unauthorized Church hymns. Liift remarks
that by this it was not intended to forbid the
use of all but the Bible psalms and hymns,
for it is known that even after tliis Synod
Paul of Samosata, and Apollinaris — had , many hymns composed by individual Chris-


SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


159


tians, for instance, Prudentius, Clement, and
Ambrose, came into use in the Church. Only
those not sanctioned were to be banished.

This idea was greatly exaggerated by some
Gallicans in the seventeenth century who
wished that all the Antiphons, etc., should be


in the words of Holy Scripture. A learned
but somewhat distorted account of this whole
matter will be found in the Insiitutions
Lifurf/iqxes by Dom Prosper Guerauger,
tome ij., and a shorter but more temperate
account in Dr. Batififol's Histoire clu Breviaire
Bomain, Chap, vj.


CANON LX.

{N. B. — Tins Canon is of most questionable genuineness.']

These arc all the books of the Old Testament appointed to be read : 1, Genesis of
the world; 2, The Exodus from Egypt; 3, Leviticus; 4, Numbers; 5, Deuteronomy;
6, Joshua, the son of Nun ; 7, Judges, Euth ; 8, Esther ; 9, Of the Kings, First and
Second ; 10, Of the Kings, Third and Fourth ; 11, Chronicles, First and Second ; 12,
Esdras, First and Second ; 13, The Book of Psalms ; 14, The Proverbs of Solomon ; 15,
Ecclesiastes ; 16, The Song of Songs ; 17, Job ; 18, The Twelve Prophets ; 19, Isaiah ;
20, Jeremiah, and Barucli, the Lamentations, and the Epistle ; 21, Ezekiel ; 22, Daniel.

And these are the books of the New Testament : Four Gospels, according to Mat-
thew, Mark, Luke and John ; The Acts of the Apostles ; Seven Catholic Epistles, to wit,
one of James, two of Peter, three of John, one of Jude ; Fourteen Epistles of Paul, one
to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the Galatiaus, one to the Ephesians, one
to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, one to the Hebrews,
two to Timothy, one to Titus, and one to Philemon.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LX.


But of the new, the four Gospels — of Matthew,
of Mark, of Luke, of John ; Acts ; Seven Catho-
lic epistles, viz. of James one, of Peter two, of
John three, of Jude one ; of Paul fourteen, viz. :
to ttie Bomans one, to tlie Corinthians tivo, to
the Galatians one, to tlie EpJiesians one, to the
Philippians one, to tlie Colossians one, to the
Tliessalonians tioo, to tlie Hebrews one, to Timo-
thy two, to Titus one, and to Philemon one.

It will be noticed that while this canon has
often been used for controversial purposes it
really has little or no value in this connexion,
for the absence of the Revelation of St. John
from the New Testament to all orthodox
Christians is, to say the least, as fatal to its
reception as an ecumenical definition of the
canon of Holy Scripture, as the absence of the
book of Wisdom, etc., from the Old Testa-
ment is to its reception by those who accept
the books of what we may call for conven-
ience the Greek canon, as distinguished
from the Hebrew, as canonical.

We may therefore leave this question


wholly out of account, and merely consider
the matter from the evidence we possess.

In 1777 SjDittler published a special trea-
tise ^ to shew that the list of scrij^tural books
was no part of the original canon adopted
by Laodicea. Hefele gives the following re-
sume of his argument : ~

(a) That Dionysius Exiguus has not this
canon in his translation of the Laodicean de-
crees. It might, indeed, be said with Dal-
Iseus and Van Espen, that Dionysius omitted
this list of the books of Scrij)ture because in
Rome, where he composed his work, another
by Innocent I. was in general use.

(b) But, apart from the fact that Dionysius
is always a most faithful translator, this six-
tieth canon is also omitted by John of Anti-
och, one of the most esteemed and oldest
Greek collectors of canons, Avho could have
had no such reasons as Dionysius for his
omission.

(c) Lastly, Bishop Martin of Braga in the
sixth century, though he has the fifty -ninth,
has also not included in his collection the six-
tieth canon so nearly related to it, nor does
the Isidorian translation appear at first to have


• See new edition of his collected works, vol. vlij., pp. 66 et seqq.


2 Hefele. Hist, of the Concils, Vol. II., pp. 323, 324.


100 SYNOD OF LAODICEA. A.D. 343-381


Lacl this canon.' Herbst, in the Tiihinrfcn Be- ness of the list, but his conclusions can

view, also accedes to these arguments of Spitt- lianlly be accepted Avhen the careful cousid-

ler's, as did Fuchs and others before liiin. oration and discussion of the matter by

Mr. Ffoulkes in his article on the Council of Bishop Westcott is kept in mind. (If/ston/

Laodicea in Smith and Clieetham's D/cfionay-i/ of flie Canon of the. New Te.^tamrnf, Illd. Pe-

of Christian Aiiticjuitic.-^ at Icui^th attempts to riod, chapter ii. [p. 428 of the 4th Edition.])
refute all objections, and alfirms the genuine-!


1 LeonJB. 0pp., Ed. Ballerini, torn, iii., p. 441, n. xlviij.


THE SECOND ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE FIEST COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


A.D. 381.

Emperor. — TnEODOsros.^
Pope. — Damasus.

Elenchus.


Historical Introduction.

The Creed and Epiphanius's two Creeds
tvith an Inti^oductory Note.

Historical Excursus on the introduction of
the words "and, the Son."

Historiccd Note on the lost Tome of this
council.

Synodal Letter to the Emperor.

Introduction on the number of the Canons.


The Canons tvith the Ancient Epitome and
Notes.

Excursus to Canon I., on the condemned
heresies.

Excursus on the Authority of the Second
Ecumenical Council.

Synodical Letter of the Council of Con-
stantinople, A.D. 382,


> Theodosius was Emperor of the East. Gratian was Emperor of the West, but had no share In calling this council.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

In the whole history of the Church there is no council which bristles with such astonish-
ing facts as the First Council of Constantinople. It is one of the "undisputed General
Councils," one of the four whicli St. Gregory said he revered as he did the four holy Gosj^els,
and he would be rash indeed who denied its right to the position it has so long occupied ;

and yet

1. It was not intended to be an Ecumenical Synod at all.

2. It was a local gathering of only mie hundred and fifty bishops. >f ) c

3. It was not summoned by thePi>^nor was he invited to it. hj^ r-M^^ '^ ^'-^ lUl*^^

4. No diocese of the West wdS'pi'esent either by representation or in the person of its
bishop ; neither the sec of Rome, nor any other see.

5 It was a council of Saints, Cardinal Orsi, the Roman Historian, says: "Besides St.
Gregory of Nyssa, and St. Peter of Sebaste, there were also at Constantinople on account
of the Svnod many otlier Bishops, remarkable either for the holiness of their life, or for
their zeal for the faith, or for their learning, or for the eminence of their Sees, as St. Amphi-
lochius of Iconiuni, Helhulius of Cesarea in Cappadocia, Optimus of Antioch in Pisidia,
Diodorus of Tarsus, St. Pelagius of Laodicea, St. Eulogius of Edessa, Acacius of Berea,
Isidorus of Cyrus, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Gelasius of Cesarea in Palestine, Vitus of Carres,
Dionysius of Diospolis, Abram of Batnes, and Antiochus of Samosata, all three Confessors,
Bosphorus of Colonia, and Otreius of Melitina, and various others whose names appear with
honour in history. So that perhaps there has not been a council, in which has been found
a greater number of Confessors and of Saints." '

6. It was presided over at first by St. Meletius, the bishop of Antioch who was tlio
bishop not in communion with Rome,' who died during its session and was styled a Saint
in the panegyric delivered over him and who has since been canonized as a Saint of the Roman
Church by the Pope.

7. Its second president was St. Gregory Nazianzen, who was at that time liable to cen-
sure for a breach of the canons whicli forbade his translation to Constantinople.

8. Its action in continuing the Meletian Schism was condemned at Rome, and its Canons
rejected for a thousand years.

9. Its canons were not placed in their natural position after those of Nice in the codex
which was used at the Council of Chalcedon, although this was an Eastern codex.

10. Its Creed was not road nor mentioned, so far as the acts record, at the Council of
Ephesus, fifty years afterwards.

11. Its title to being (as it undoubtedly is) the Second of the Ecumenical Synods rests
upon its Creed having found a reception in the whole world. And now — mirabile dicfu—
an English scholar comes forward, ready to defend the proposition that the First Council
of Constantinople never set forth any creed at all I '

' Orpi, /.s-/. A'ccZ, xviii.. €3. his "exaggeration of judgment." (Salmon. Criticism of the

"E. R. Piisev. The Councils of the Chvrc/i, AD. 51 381, p. Text of tlie .\nc Testament, p. 12, also see p 34/1 Sw.ninson. in

300. Tilloiiiont. .1/^»(0rre.f, xvj., (lOa, who savs, "If U'. neof those his The Xicetie and Apostles' Creeds, h&i^ i\\\ the material iioints

who die out of coninniiiioii with Rome can merit the title of found in Ilort's Dissertation. Hamack goes mucli furtlier He

Saints and Confessors, Uaroiiins should have the names of St. is of opinion that the Creed of Constantinople las we call it).

Meletius. St. Elias of .Terusali'm and St. I):iniel the Stvlite the Creed which has been the symbol of orthodoxy for fifteen

stricken from the Marfyrology." cf. V. W. Puller, The I'r'imi- htMKlred years, is really a Semi-Arian, anti Xirene and quasi

live .sVn'/i^T f/jir/ /Ac ycc o/ /toi/(C. pp. 171 and 2:w. Macctloniiin confession! The tirst ronlention he snppoTts. not

Many attempts have been made toexpiain this fact away, but wjlliout a shew of plausibility, by the fact that it omitsthe worda

without success. Not onlv was the (iresident of the Council a (which were really most crucial) " that is to s.iy of the substance

jicrstma non (jr'ita to the Pope, bul (he members of the Council of the Falhcr. " In support of the second opinion he writes as

were well aware of the fact, and much pleased that such was the follows: ••The words [with recraT-d to the Holy (ihostl are in

case, and Hefele acknowledges that the reason the council deter- entire liarmony with the form which the doctrine of the Holy

mined to continue the Meletian Schism was because allowing Spirit had in the sixties. A Pneumatochian could have subscribed

Paulinus to succeed to ^leletius would be ''100 great a couccs- this formula at a pinch; and just because of this it is certain

6ion to tlic Latins " 'vol. HI , p. :\AC<) that the Council of 3SI did not accept this creed." Some scholars

' F. .T. A. Hort, Too Dissertations. I. On ixovoytfrii; ©e'o? in arrive at ••certainlv" more easily than others, even Harnack

Scripture and tradition. II. On the Constantino/iohtan Creed himself only attains this "certainty" in the footnote! The

and other Eastern Creeds of the Mh Centurij. It should be added reader will "remark ihat wh t Harnack is '• certain " of in the

that Dr. Hort acknowledges that, • we ninv well believe tliat they foot note is tliat (he Council "did not accept" this creed, not

[i.e. the 150 fathers of C6nstai.tinoi)lel hail expressed api)rovar"' that it "did not frame" it. which is entirely a dill erent ques-

of the creed ordinarily attributi'd to lliem (p. 115). The whole tion. i Adolf Harnack, llistory of JDoi/ma, IKug. Trans.J, Vol.

dissertation is a fine example of what Dr. Salmon so well called iv., p. 99.)
Dr. Uort'8 " perfervidum ingenium us an advocate," and of


THE HOLY CREED WHICH THE 150 HOLY FATHERS SET
FORTH, WHICH IS CONSONANT WITH THE HOLY AND
GREAT SYNOD OF NICE^

{Found in all the Collections in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon.)

INTRODUCTOKY NOTE.

The reader should know that Tillemont {3Iemoires, t. ix., art. 78 in the treatise on St. Greg.
Naz.) broached the theoiy that the Creed adopted at Constantinoj^ie was not a new exj)an-
sion of the Nicene but rather the adoi^tion of a Creed already in use. Hefele is of the same
opinion [Ris(. of the Councih, II., p. 349). and the learned Professor of Divinity in the Uni-
versity of Jena, Dr. Lipsius, says, of St. E2:)iphanius : " Though not himself present at the
Ecumenical Council of Constantinoi^le, a.d. 381, which ensured the triumph of the Xicene
doctrine in the Oriental Churches, his shorter confession of faith, which is found at the end
of his Ancoratus, and seems to have been the baptismal creed of the Church of Salamis,
agrees almost word for word with the Constautinopolitan formula." (Smith and Wace, Diet.
Chr. Blog., ,s. u. Epiphanius). '• The Ancoratus," St. Epiphanius distinctly tells us, was written
as early as a.d. 374, and toward the end of chapter cxix., he writes as follows. " The children
of the Church have received from the holy fathers, that is from the hoi}- Apostles, the faith
to keep, and to hand down, and to teach their children. To these children you belong, and
I beg you to receive it and pass it on. And whilst you teach your children these things and
such as these from the holy Scriptures, cease not to confirm and strengthen them, and indeed
all who hear you : tell them that this is the holy faith of the H0I3- Catholic Chui'ch, as the
one holy Virgin of God received it from the holy Apostles of the Lord to keep : and thus
every person who is in preparation for the holy laver of baptism must learn it : they must
learn it themselves, and teach it expressly, as the one Mother of all, of you and of us, pro-
claims it, saying." Then follows the Creed as on page 164.

We believe in one God, the Father Al- ' And [Ave believe] in the Holy Ghost, the
mighty, maker of heaven and earth and of j Lord and Giver-of-Life, who proceedeth
all things ^dsible and invisible. And in one | from the Father, who with the Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son 1 Son together is worshipped and glorified,
of God, begotten of his Father before all [ avIio spake by the prophets. And [we be-
"worlds, Light of Light, very God of very lieve] in one, holy, (//) Catholic and Apos-
God, begotten not made, being of one sub- folic Church. We acknoAvledge one Baptism
stance with the Father, by whom all things for tlie remission of sins, [and] we look for
were made. Who for us men and for om* the resun*ection of the dead and the life of
salvation came down from heaven and was the world to come. Amen,
incarnate by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin i

Mary, and was made man, and was crucified NOTE I.

also for us under Pontius Pilate. He suf- r^i^i^ ^1^^,^ 1,^^^ already, so far as the mean-
fered and was buried, and the third day he ^^^ -^ concerned, been added to the Nicene
rose again according to the Scriptures, and c^ed, years before, in correction of the heresy
ascended into heaven, and sittt-th at the ^f Marcellus of Aucyra, of whose heresy a
Eight Hand of the Father. And he shall statement will be found in the notes on Canon
come again with glory to judge both the I. of this Council. One of the creeds of the
quick and the dead. Whose kingdom shall Council of Antioch in Encseniis (a.d. 341)
liave no end. (/) '< reads : " and he sitteth at the right hand of

» This is the title in the Acts of the IVth Coxincil. Labbe, Cone, iv., 342.


164


I. COKSTAXTIXOPLE. A.D. 381


the Father, and he shall come again to judge
both the quick and the dead, and he remaineth
God and King to all eternity."^

NOTE 11.

The word "Holy " is omitted in some texts
of tliis Creed, notabl}' in tlic Latin version in
the collection of Isidore Mercator. I'tde
Labile, Cone, II., 960. Cf. Creed in EngHsh
Prayer-Book. -

NOTES.

The Creed Found in Epiphanius's Ancoratus
{Cap. exx.)^

We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and eartli, and of all things
visible and invisilile : and in one Lord Josus
Christ, the only l>egotten Son of God, begot-
ten of the Father before all worlds, that is of
the substance of the Fatlier, Light of Light,
very God of very God, begotten not made,
con substantial with the Father : b}' whom all
things were made, both in heaven and earth :
who for us men and for our salvation came
down from heaven, and was incarnate of the
Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary, and was
made man, was crucified also for us under
Pontius Pilate, and suifered, and was buried,
and on tlie tliird day he rose again according
to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven,
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
and from thence he shall come again with
gloiy to judge both the quick and the dead,
whose kingdom shall have no end. And in
the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life,
who i)roc(;edeth from tlie Father ; who, with
the Father and the Son together is Avorshipped
and glorified, who spake by the proi)hets : in
one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. We I
acknowledge one baptism for the remission of
sins ; we look for the resurrection of the dead,
and the life of the world to come. And tliose
who say that there was a time when the Son ;
of God was not, and before he was begotten |
he was not, or that he was of things which are
not, or that he is of a ditltercnt hypostasis or
substance, or pretend that he is effluent or
changeable, these the Catholic and Apostolic
Church anathematizes.

Epiphanius thus continues :
" And this faith was delivered from the
Holy Apostles and in the Cliurch, the Holy

> Soc, H. E., II., 10 ; Soz.. H. £., m. 5 ; Athanas., De Sirnod.,
C. xxij.

^I have used Petavius'p edition, Coloene. 10^2 ; there are pome
differences in thu various editions about the nuniheriiii.' of the
cliapters, and this seems to I)e the origin of the curious mistake
Ilef ele makes in coufounding the longer with the shorter creed.


City, from all the Holy Bishops together
more than three hundred and ten in number."
"In our generation, that is in tlie times of
Valeutinus and Valens, and the ninetieth year
from the succession of Diocletian the tyrant,^
you and we and all the orthodox bishops of
! the whole Catholic Church together, make
this address to those who come to l)aptism,
in order that they may pi'oclaim and say as
follows : "

Epiphanius then gives this creed :

We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, maker of all things, invisible and
visible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ the
Son of God, begotten of God the Father, only
begotten, that is of the substance of the
Father, God of God, Light of Light, veiy God
of very God, begotten not made, being of one
I substance with the Father, by whom all
things were made, both which be in heaven
and in earth, whether they be visible or in-
visible. Who for us men and for our salva-
tion came down, and was incarnate, that is to
say was conceived perfectly through the Hoh'
Ghost of the holy ever-viigin Mary, and was
made man, that is to say a perfect man, re-
ceiving a soul, and body, and intellect, and all
that make up a man, bvit without sin, not from
human seed, nor [that he dwelt] in a man, but
taking flesh to himself into one holy entity ;
not as he inspired the prophets and spake and
worked [in them], but was perfectly made
man, fur the Woid was made flesh ; neither
did he experience any change, nor did he
convert his divine nature into the natui'e of
man, but united it to his one holy perfection
and Divinity.

For there is one Lord Jesus Christ, not two,
the same is God, the same is Lord, the same
is King. He suftered in the flesh, and rose
again, and ascended into heaven in the .same
l)ody, and with glory he sat down at the
right hand of the Father, and in the same body
he will come in glory to judge both the quick
and the dead, and of his kingdom there shall
be no end.

And Ave belicA'e in the Holy Ghost, who
spake in the Law, and preached in the Proph-
ets, and descended at Jordan, and spake in
the Apostles, and indwells the Saints. And
thus we believe in liini, that he is the Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of God, the perfect Spirit,
the Spiiit the Comfortei", uncreate, who j)ro-
ceedeth from the Father, receiving of the Son
(e/c ToS UaTpo<; CKTropcuo/ixevov, Kai ck tov Ylov Ka/j.-
fJav6fji€vov), and believed on. {koL 7r«rreud/xcvov,

' This would be tlie year 374, that is to say seven years before
this Second Ecumenical Council which was held at Constanti-
nople in 381.


I. COXSTAXTIXOPLE. A.D. 381 165


wliicli the Latin versi';n gives m qiiem credi- Catholic and Apostolic Church, the mother
mi(.^ ; and proceeds to insert, /-"rce/crm credi- botli of you and of us, anathematizes. And
vius in unam, etc. It certainly looks as if it further we anathematize such as do not con-
had read -Larevufxev, and had belonged to the fess the resurrection of the dead, as well as all
following phrase.) hei'esies which are not in accord with the true

[We believe] in one Catholic and Apostolic faith.

Church. And in one baptism of penitence, Finally, you and your children thus believ-

and in the resurrection of the dead, and the ing and keeping the commandments of this

just judgment of souls and bodies, and in the same faith, we trust that you will always pray

Kingdom of heaven and in life everlasting. for us, that we may have a share and lot in

And those who say that there was a time that same faith and in the keeping of these

when the Son was not, or when the Holv same commandments. For us make vour

Ghost was not, or that either was made of that intercessions you and all who believe thus,

which previously had no being, or that he is and keep the commandments of the Lord in

of a different nature or substance, and affirm our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and

that the Son of God and the Holy Spirit are with whom, glory be to the Father with the

subject to change and mutation ; all such the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen.


HISTORICAL EXCURSUS OX THE IXTRODUCTIOX IXTO THE CREED OF

THE WORDS "AXD THE SOX."

The introduction into the Nicene Creed of the words " and the Son " {Filioque) has given
rise to, or has been the pretext for, such bitter reviling between East and West (during
which many statements unsupported by fact have become more or less commonly believed)
that I think it well in this place to set forth as dispassionately as possible the real facts of
the case. I shall briefly then give the proof of the following propositions :

1. That no joretence is made by the West that the words in dispute formed part of the
oi'iginal creed as adopted at Constantinople, or that they now form part of that Creed.

2. That so far from the insertion being made by the Pope, it was made in direct opposi-
tion to his wishes and command.

3. That it never was intended by the words to assert that there were two 'Ap^at in the
Trinity, nor in any respect on this point to differ from the teaching of the East.

4. That it is quite possible that the words were not an intentional insertion at all.

5. And finally that the doctrine of the East as set forth by St. John Damascene is now
and always has been the doctrine of the West on the procession of the Holy Spirit, however
much through ecclesiastico-political contingencies this fact may have become obscured.

With the truth or falsity of the doctrine set forth by the Western addition to the creed
this work has no concern, nor even am I called upon to treat the historical question as to
when and where the expression " and the Son " was first used. For a temperate and emi-
nently scholarly treatment of this point from a Western point of view, I would refer the
reader to Professor Swete's On the Hisfor// of the Doctrine of the Procession of the Holy Spirit.
In J. M. Xeale's Histonj of the Hoty Eastern Church will be found a statement from the oppo-
site point of view. The great treatises of past years I need not mention here, but may be
allowed to enter a warning to the reader, that they were often written in the period of hot
controversy, and make more for strife than for peace, magnifying rather than lessening dif-
ferences both of thought and expression.

Perhaps, too, I may be allowed here to remind the readers that it has been said that
while " ex Patre Filioque procedens " in Latin does not necessitate a double source of the
Holy Spirit, the expi'ession £K--op€uo/Aevov ex tov Trarpo? KOL Ik tov Ylov does. On such a point I
am not fit to give an opinion, but St. John Damascene does not use this expression.

1. That no pretence is made by the West that the words in dispute ever formed part of


166 I. COXSTANTINOPLE. A.D. :5S1


the creed as adopted at Constantinoi:)le is evidently proved by the patent fact tliat it is
printed without those words in all our ConriIia.< and iu all our histories. It is true that at
the Council of Florence it was asserted that the words were found in a copy of the Acts of
the Seventh Ecumenical which they had, hut no stress was even at that eminently "Western
council laid upon the point, which even if it had been the case would have shewn iiothing-
with regard to the true reading of the Creed as adopted by the Second Synod.' On this
point there never was nor can be any doubt.

2. The addition was not made at the will and at the bidding of flic Pope. It has fre-
quently been said that it was a proof of the insufferable arrogancy of the See of Rome that
it dared to tamper with the creed set forth by the authority of an Ecumenical Synod and
which had been received by the world. Now so far from the history of this addition to the
creed being a ground of pride and complacency to the advocates of the Papal claims, it is a
most marked instance of the w^eakness of the papal power even in tlic West.

" Baronius," says Dr. Pusey, " endeavours in vain to find any Pope, to whom the ' formal
addition ' may be ascribed, and rests at last on a statement of a writer towards the end of
the 12th century, writing against the Greeks. 'If the Council of Constantinople added to
the Nicene Creed, " in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, and Giver of life," and the Council of
Chalcedon to that of Constantinople, " jierfect in Divinity and perfect in Humanity, consub-
stantial with the Father as touching his Godhead, consubstantial with us as touching his
manhood," and some other things as aforesaid, the Bishop of the elder Rome ought not to
be calumniated, because for explanation, he added one word [that the Holy Spirit proceeds
from the Son] having the consent of very many bishops and most learned Cardinals.' ' For
the truth of which,' says Le Quien, 'be the author responsible ! ' It seems to me incon-
ceivable, that all account of any such proceeding, if it ever took place, should have been
lost." ^

We may then dismiss this point and briefly review the history of the matter.

There seems little doubt that the woi-ds were first inserted in Spain. As early as the
year 400 it had been found necessary at a Council of Toledo to affirm the double procession
against the Priscillianists,^ and in 589 by the authority of the Third Council of Toledo the
newly converted Goths were required to sign the creed with the addition.' From this time
it became for Spain the accepted form, and was so recited at the Eighth Council of Toledo
iu 653, and again in 681 at the Twelfth Council of Toledo.^

But this was at first only true of Spain, and at Rome nothing of the kind was known. In
the Gelasian Sacramentary the Creed is found in its original form.^ The same is the case
with the old Galilean Sacramentary of the viith or viiith century.''

How'ever, there can be no doubt that its introduction spread very rapidly through the
West and that before long it was received practically everywhere except at Rome.

In 809 a council was held at Aix-la-Chapelle by Charlemagne, and from it three divines
were sent to confer with the Pope, Leo III, upon the sul)ject. The Pope opposed the inser-
tion of the Filioque on the express ground that the General Councils had forbidden any
addition to be made to their formulary.*^ Later on, the Fiankish Emperor asked his bishops
what was "the meaning of the Creed according to the Latins,"'' and Fleury gives the result
of the investigations to have been, "In France they continued to chant the creed with the
word Filioque, and at Rome they continued not to chant it.""^


' In fact the contention of the Latinp was that the words were I ^'Hefele. Hist, of the Councils, Vol. III., p. 175.

inserted by II. Nice! To tliis the Easterns answered most perti- * Ilefele. Ifist. (\iunc., Vol. IV.. p. 41f).

iicntly " VVhy did yo\i not tell us this longap" ? " They were not | ' Ilpfele. Ilmf. ("onnc. Vol. IV., )). 470 ; Vol. V., p. 208.

so fortunate when they iiis'sted that St. Thomas would have " Muratorius. Ortl linm.. Tom. 1.. col. 541.

(juoted it. for some scholars have thought St. Thomas but ill ac- ' .Mabillou. Mus. Ital., Tom. I.. J'. 313 and p S'lV

quainted with thf proceedings at the Seventh Synod. Vide Ue- " Labbe and ("ossart. ('(nicilia., Tom. vij., col. 1194.

fele, CnnHl. XLVIII., § 810. » Capit Keg. Franc, Tom. I., i). 483.

^E-B. Pusey. On t/»« ctoiwe " and The Son," p. 68. 1 »» Fleurj. i/wt. ii'cc/., Liv. xlv., chap. 48.


I. CONSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. 381 167

So firmly resolved was the Pope that the clause should not be introduced into the creed
that he presented two silver shields to the ConfcHsio in St. Peter's at Rome, on one of which
was engraved the creed in Latin and on the other in Greek, without the addition. This act the
Greeks never forgot during the controversy. Photius refers to it in writing to the Patriarch
of Acquileia. About two centuries later St. Peter Damian ^ mentions them as still in place ;
and about two centuries later on, Veccur, Patriarch of Constantinople, declares they hung
there still. ^

It was not till 1014 that for the first time the interpolated creed was used at mass with
the sanction of the Pope. In that year Benedict VIII. acceded to the urgent request of
Henry II. o^ Germany and so the papal authority was forced to yield, and the silver shields
have disappeared from St. Peter's.

3. Nothing could be cleai-er than that the theologians of the West never had any idea of
teaching a double source of the Godhead. The doctrine of the Divine Monarchy was always
intended to be preserved, and while in the heat of the controversy sometimes expressions
highly dangerous, or at least clearly inaccurate, may have been used, yet the intention must
be judged from the prevailing teaching of the approved theologians. And what this was is
evident from the definition of the Council of Florence, which, while indeed it was not received
by the Eastern Church, and therefore cannot be accepted as an authoritative exposition of
its views, yet certainly must be regarded as a true and full expression of the teaching of the
West. " The Greeks asserted that when they say the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father,
they do not use it because they wish to 'exclude the Son ; but because it seemed to them, as
they say, that the Latins assert the Holy SjDirit to proceed from the Father and the Son, as
from two principles and by two spirations, and therefore they abstain from saying that the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son. But the Latins affirm that they have no
intention when they say the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son to deprive
the Father of his prerogative of being the fountain and principle of the entire Godhead, viz.
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ; nor do they deny that the very pi'ocession of the Holy
Ghost from the Son, the Son derives from the Father ; nor do they teach two principles or
two spirations ; but they assert that there is one only principle, one only spiration, as they
have always asserted up to this time."

4. It is quite possible that when these words were first used there was no knowledge on
the part of those using them that there had been made any addition to the Creed. As I have
already pointed out, the year 589 is the earliest date at which we find the words actually
introduced into the Creed. Now" there can be no doubt whatever that the Council of Toledo
of that year had no suspicion that the creed as they had it was not the creed exactly as
adopted at Constantinople. This is capable of the most ample j^roof.

In the first place they declared, " Whosoever believes that there' is any other Catholic
faith and communion, besides that of the Universal Church, that Church which holds and
honours the decrees of the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, I. Ephesus, and Chalcedon,
let hira be anathema." After some further anathemas in the same sense they repeat " the
creed published at the council of Nice," and next, " The holy faith which the 150 fathers of
the Council of Constantinople explained, consonant with the great Council of Nice." And
then lastly, " The holy faith which the translators of the council of Chalcedon explained."
The creed of Constantinople as recited contained the words "and from the Son." Now the
fathers at Toledo were not ignorant of the decree of Ephesus forbidding the making of " an-
other faith " {irepav TricTTiv) for they themselves cite it, as follows from the acts of Chalcedon ;
" The holy and universal Synod forbids to bring forward any other faith ; or to write or

1 Pet. Damian. Op«sc., xxxviij. » Leo AUat. Grcec. Orthod., Tom. I., p. 1T3.


16S I. CONSTAT TI.NUPLE. A.D. 381

believe or to teach other, or be othei"wise mindeil. But whoso shall dare either to expound
or produce or deliver any other faith to those who wish to be converted etc." Upon this
Dr. Pusey well x*emarks,' "It is, of course, impossible to sui)pose that they can have believed
any addition to the creed to have been forbidden by the clause, and, accepting it with its
anathema, themselves to have added to the creed of Constantinojile."

But while this is the case it might be that they understood kripav of the Ephesine decree
to forbid the making of contradictory and new creeds and not explanatory additions to the
existing one. Of this iutei-j^retation of the decree, which would seem without any doubt to
be the only tenable one, I shall treat in its proper place.

We have however further proof that the Council of Toledo thought they were using the
unaltered creed of Constantinople. In these acts we find they adopted the following ; "for
reverence of the most holy faith and for the strengthening of the weak minds of men, the
holy Synod enacts, with the advice of our most pious and most glorious Lord, King Re-
carede, that through all the churches of Spain and Galltecia, the symbol of faith of the coun-
cil of Constantinople, i.e. of the 150 bishops, should be recited according to the form of the
Eastern Church, etc."

This seems to make the matter clear and the next question which arises is, How the words
could have got into the Spanish creed ? I venture to suggest a possible explanation.
Epiphanius tells us that in the year 37-4 '' all the orthodox bishops of the whole Catholic
Church together make this address to those who come to baptism, in oi'der that they may
proclaim and say as follows."'- If this is to be understood literally of course Spain was
included. Now the creed thus taught the catechumens reads as follows at the point about
wliich our interest centx'es : '

Kal €ts TO ayiov irvev^a —LcrTevoiiev, , . . Ik tov Trarpos €K7ropev6fji€vov koI £k tov Ylov Xafx/Savo-

fxevov KoX TTia-Tevo/jLevov, els fxiav kuSoXikiji' k. t. X. Now it looks to me as if the text had got cor-
rupted and that there should be a full stop after Aa^^ai d/J.€^■oI/, and that ■n-icrrfvofxevoi' should
be 7ria-T€t'o^€i , These emendations are not necessary however for my suggestion although
they would make it more perfect, for in that case by the single omission of the word
Xajj.lSaiofj.ei'ov the Western form is obtained. It will be noticed that this was some years
before the Constantinopolitan Council and therefore nothing would be more natural than
that a scribe accustomed to writing the old baptismal creed and now given the Constantino-
politan creed, so similar to it, to copy, should have gone on and added the /cat ck tov Ylov,
according to habit.

HoAvever this is a mere suggestion, I think I have shewn that there is strong reason to
believe that whatever the explanation may be, the Spanish Church was unaware that it had
added to or changed the Constantinopolitan creed.

5. There remains now only the last point, which is the most important of all, but which
does not belong to the subject matter of this volume and which therefore I shall treat with
the greatest brevity. The wi'itings of St. John Damascene are certainly deemed entirely or-
thodox by the Easterns and always have been. On the other hand their entire orthodoxy
has never been disputed in the West, but a citation from Damascene is considered by St.
Thomas as conclusive. Under these cixxumstances it seems hard to resist the conclusion
that the faith of the Ea-t and the West, so far as its official setting forth is concerned, is the
same and always has been. And perhaps no better proof of the Western acceptance of the
Eastern doctrine concerning the eternal procession of the Holy Spirit can be found than the
fact that St. John Damascene has been in recent years raised by the pope for his followers to
the rank of a Doctor of the Catholic Church.


> E. B. Pusey. On the claxue, " and the Son," p. 43. 'Epiphanius. Ancoratiu, ess.


I. COXSTAXTIXOPLE. A.D. 381


1G9


Perhaj)s I may be allowed to close -unth two moderate statements of the "Western posi-
tion, the one by the learned and pimis Dr. Pusov and the other by the none less famous
Bishop Pearson.

Dr. Puse}- says :

" Since, however, the clause, which found its way into the Creed, was, in the first instance,
admitted, as being supposed to be part of the Constantinopolitan Creed, and, since after it
had been rooted for 200 years, it was not uprooted, for fear of uprooting also or peii:)lexing
the faith of the people, there was no fnuU either in its first reception or in its subsequent
retention.

"The Greeks would condemn forefathers of their own, if they were to pronounce the
clause to be heretical. For it would be against the principles of the Church to be in com-
munion with an heretical body. But from the dejjosition of Photius, a.d. 886 to at least
A.D. 1009, East and West retained their own expression of faith without schism.'

" A.D. 1077, Theophylact did not object to the West, retaining for itself the confession
of faith contained in the words, but only excepted against the insertion of the words in the
Creed." 2

And Bp. Pearson, explaining Article VIII. of the Creed says : " Now although the ad-
dition of words to the formal Creed without the consent, and against the protestations of
the Oriental Chvu'ch be not justifiable ; yet that which was added is nevertheless a certain
tinith, and may be so used in that Creed by them who believe the same to be a tmth ; so
long as they jDretend it not to be a definition of that Council, but an addition or explication
inserted, and condemn not those who, out of a greater respect to such synodical determina-
tions, will admit of no such insertions, nor speak any other language than the Scriptures
and their Fathers spake."

HISTORICAL NOTE ON THE LOST "TOME" OF THE SECOND COL^N^CIL.

We know from the Synodical letter sent by the bishops who assembled at Constantinople
in A.D. 382 (the next year after the Second Ecumenical Council) sent to Pope Damasus and
other Western bishops, that the Second Council set forth a " Tome," containing a statement
of the doctrinal points at issue. This letter will be found in full at the end of the treatment
of this council. The Council of Chalcedon in its address to the Emperor says : " The bishoj^s
vs'ho at Constantinople detected the taint of Apollinariauism, communicated to the Westerns
their decision in the matter." From this we may reasonably conclude, with Tillemont,'
that the lost Tome treated also of the Apollinarian heresy. It is moreover by no means
unlikely that the Creed as it has come down to us, was the summaiy at the end of the Tome,
and was followed In* the anathemas which now form our Canon I. It also is likely that
the veiy accvirate doctrinal statements contained in the Letter of the Synod of 382 may be
taken almost, if not quite, verbafivi from this Tome. It seems perfectly evident that at least
one copy of the Tome was sent to the West but how it got lost is a matter on which at pres-
ent we are entirely in the dark.


' Peter of Antioch abont ad. 1054, says that he had heard the
name of the Roman PontifE recited from the Diptychs at the mass
at Constantinople forty-five years before. Le Qaien, p. xii.


2 E. B. Pusey. On the dame 'and the Son,'" p. 72.

3 TUlemont. Memoires, Tom. ix., art. 78, in the treatise on St.
Greg. Nonz.


LETTER OF THE SAME HOLY SYNOD TO THE MOST PlOrS EMrEROR
THEODOSIUS THE GREAT, TO WHICH ARE APPENDED THE CANONS
ENACTED BY THEM.

{Fomul in Lahhe, Concilia, Tom. IT., 0J^5.)

To the most religious Emperor Tlieodosius, the Holj Sjnod of Bishops assembled
in Constantinople out of different Provinces.

We begin our letter to your Piety with thanks to God, who has established the empire
of your Piety for the common peace of the Churches and for the support of the tme
Faith. And, after rendering due thanks unto God, as in duty liound we lay before
3'our Piety the things which have been done in the Holy Synod. AMien, then, we had
assembled in Constantinople, according to the letter of your Piety, we first of all renewed
our unity of heart each with the other, and then we pronounced some concise definitions,
ratifying the Faith of the Nicene Fathers, and anathematizing the heresies Avhich have
sprung uj), contrary thereto. Besides these things, we also framed certain Canons for
the better ordering of the Churches, all which we have subjoined to this our letter.
Wherefore we beseech your Piety that the decree of the Synod may be ratified, to the
end that, as you have honoured the Church by your letter of citation, so you should set
yom" seal to the conclusion of what has been decreed. May the Lord establish your
empire in peace and righteousness, and prolong it from generation to generation; and
may he add unto your earthly power the fruition of the heavenly kingdom also. May
God by the prayers (evxaU tmv dyicov) of the Saints,' shew favour to the world, that you
may be strong and eminent in all good things as an Emperor most truly pious and
beloved of God.


' On the whole subject of the prayers of the Saints see H. R.
Perciva'., 27t« Jnrncatioii of Saints. (Lougmans. London, 1896.)

1 liave the less hesitation in referring to my own work as it is,
80 far as I can discover, the only book in the English language


devoted to an historical and theological consideration of the sub-
ject. Of course the subject is treated of cursorily in numerous
theological treatises and dictionaries.


INTRODUCTION ON THE NUMBER OF THE CANONS.
(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. II., p. 351.)

The number of cauons drawn up by this synod is doubtfuh The old Greek codices and
the Greek commentators of the Middle Ages, Zonaras and Balsamon, enumerate seven ; but
the old Latin ti-auslatious — viz. the Frisca, those by Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore, as well
as the Codex of Luna — only recognize the fii'st four canons of the Greek test, and the fact
that they agree in this point is the more important as they are wholly independent of each
other, and divide and arrange those canons of ConstantinojDle which they do acknowledge
quite differently.

Because, however, in the Prisca the canons of Constantinople are only j^laced after those
of the fourth General Council, the Ballerini brothers conclude that they were not contained
at all in the oldest Greek collections of canons, and were inserted after the Council of Chal-
cedon. But it was at this very Council of Chalcedon that the first three canons of Constan-
tinople were read out word for word. As however, they were not separately numbered, but
were there read under the general title of Synodicon Synodi Secundee, Fuchs concluded that
they were not originally in the form in which we now possess them, but, without being di-
vided into numbers, formed a larger and unbroken decree, the contentsof which were divided
by later copyists and translators into several different canons. And hence the very different
divisions of these canons in the Prisca, Dionysius, and Isidore may be explained. The fact,
however, that the old Latin translations all agree in only giving the first four canons of the
Greek text, seems to show that the oldest Greek manuscrij^ts, from which those translations
were made, did not contain the fifth, sixth, and seventh, and that these last did not properly
belong to this Synod, but were later additions. To this must be added that the old Greek
Church-historians, in speaking of the affairs of the second General Council, only mention
those points which are contained in the first four canons, and say nothing of what, accord-
ing to the fifth, sixth, and seventh canons, had also been decided at Constantinople. At the
very least, the seventh canon cannot have emanated from this Council, since in the sixth cen-
tury John Scholasticus did not receive it into his collection, although he adopted the fifth
and sixth. It is also missing in many other collections ; and in treating sj^ecially of this
canon further on, we shall endeavour to show the time and manner of its origin. But the
fifth and sixth canons probably belong to the Synod of Constantinople of the following year,
as Beveridge, the Ballerini, and others conjectured. The Greek scholiasts, Zonaras and
Balsamon, and later on Tillemont, Beveridge, Van Espen and Herbst, have given more or less
detailed commentaries on all these canons.


CANONS OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FATHERS
WHO ASSEMBLED AT CONSTANTIXOPLE DURING THE
CONSULATE OF THOSE ILLUSTRIOUS MEN, FLAVIUS
EUCHERIUS AND FLAVIUS EVAGRIUS ON THE VII
OF THE IDES OF JULY.^

The Bishops out of different provinces assembled by the grace of God in Constan-
tinople, on the smnnious of the most religious Emperor Theodosius, have decreed as
follows :

CANON I.

The Faith of the Three Hundred and Eighteen Fathers assembled at Nice in Bithy-
nia shall not be set aside, but shall remain hrm. And every heresy shall l)e anathema-
tized, particularly that of the Eunomians or {Anoina'ans, fhc ArinriH or] Eudoxiaus, and
that of the Semi-Arians or Pneumatomachi, and that of the Sabellians, and that of the
Marcellians, and that of the Photiuians, and that of the Apolliuariaus.

N0TE3.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I. | fies -with the Avians [acoorrling to his text,

ride .sv/^^/y/,] is meant that faction who, in con-
tradistinction to the strict Arians or Anomse-
ans on one side, and the Semi-Arians on the


Let the Nicene faith stand firm. Anathema
to heresy.


There is a difference of reading in the list other side, followed the leadership of the
of the heretics. The reading I have followed Court Bishop Eudoxius (Bishop of Constan-
in the text is that given in Beveridge's >%- tinople under the Emperor Valens), and with-
nodicon. The Greek text, however, in Labhe, out being entirely AnonicX-an, yet very decid-
and with it agree the version of Heivetus and edly inchned to the left of the^ Arian party —
the text of Hefele, reads : " the Eunomians or proljably claiming to represent the old and
Anomseans, the Arians or Eudoxians, the Semi- original Arianism. But this canon makes
Arians or Pneumatomachi, the Sabellians, the Semi-Arians identical with the Pneuma-
Marceiiians, Photinians and Apollinarians." tomachians, and so far rightly, that the latter
From this Dionysius only varies by substi- [ sprang from the Semi-Arian party, and ap-
tuting "Macedonians" for "Semi-Arians." jihed the Arian principle to their doctrine of
It would seem that this was the correct read- the Holy Ghost. Lastly, by the ^larcellians
ing. I, however, have followed the other as are meant those pupils of Marcellus of Ancy


being the more usual


'o


Hefele.


ra who remained in the errors formerly pro-
pounded by him, while afterwards others,
and indeed he himself, once more acknowl-


By the Eudoxians, whom this canon identi- edged the truth.

EXCURSUS ON THE HERESIES C0NDE:\IXED IN CANON I.

In treating of these heresies I shall invert the order of the canon, and shall speak of the
Macedonian and Apollinarian heresies first, as being most nearly connected with the object
for which the Constantinopolitan Synod was assembled.

The Semi-Aiuans, Macedonians or Pneumatom.achi.

Peace indeed seemed to have been secured by the Niceuc decision but there was an ele
ment of discord still extant, ami so shortly afterwards as in 359 the double-sjmod of Rimini


' Such is the caption in the old Greek codices. The vijth of | that this synod which according to Socrates E., v. 8) begun
the Ides is July 9th. " From this (says Hefele) we may conclude i May 3ai, lasted uutil July of that year."


I. CONSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. 381 173

(Ariminum) and Selencia rejected the expressions homousion and homoeusion equally, and
Jerome gave birth to his famous j^hrase, " the world awoke to find itself Arian." The cause
of this was the weight attaching to the Semi-Arian party, Avhich counted among its numbers
men of note and holiness, such as St. Cyril of Jerusalem. Of the developments of this party
it seems right that some mention should be made in this place, since it brought forth the
Macedonian heresy.

(Wm. Bright, D.D., St. Leo on the Incarnation, pp. 213 et seqq.)
The Semi-Arian party in the fourth century attempted to steer a middle course between
calling the Son Consubstantial and calling him a creature. Their position, indeed, was
untenable, but several persisted in clinging to it ; and it was adopted by Macedonius, who
occupied the see of Constantinople. It was through their adoption of a more reverential
language about the Son than had been used by the old Arians, that what is called the Mace-
donian heresy showed itself. Arianism had spoken both of the Son and the Holy Spirit as
creatures. The Macedonians, rising up out of Semi-Arianism, gradually reached the Church's
belief as to the uncreated majesty of the Son, even if they retained their objection to the
homoousion as a formula. But having, in their previously Semi-Arian position, refused to
extend their own " homoiousion " to the Holy Spirit, the}' afterwards persisted in regarding
him as " external to the one indivisible Godhead," Newman's Arians, p. 226 ; or as Tille-
mont says {Hem. vi., 527), " the denial of the divinity of the Holy Spirit was at last their
capital or only error." St. Athanasius, while an exile under Constantius for the second
time, " heard with pain," as he says (Ep. i. ad Serap., 1) that "some who had left the Arians
from disgust at their blasphemy against the Son of God, yet called the Sj)irit a creature, and
one of the ministering spiiits, differing only in degree from the Angels : " and soon after-
wards, in 362, the Council of Alexandria condemned the notion that the Spirit was a creat-
ure, as being " no true avoidance of the detestable Arian heresy." See " Later Treatises of
St. Athanasius," p. 5. Athanasius insisted that the Nicene Fathers, although silent on the
nature of the Holy Spirit, had by implication ranked him with the Father and the Son as an
object of belief [ad Afros, 11). After the death of St. Athanasius, the new heresy was re-
jected on behalf of the West by Pope Damasus, who declared the Spirit to be truly and
properly from the Father (as the Son from the Divine substance) and very God, " omnia
posse et omnia nosse, et ubique esse," coequal and adorable (Mansi, iii., 483). The Illyriau
bishops also, in 374, wrote to the bishops of Asia Minor, affirming the consubstantiality of
the Three Divine Persons (Theodoret, H. E , iv., 9). St. Basil wrote his De Spiritu Sancto in
the same sense (see Swete, Earl'i History of the Doctrine of the Holy Spirit, pp. 58, 67), and
in order to vindicate this truth against the Pneumatomachi, as the Macedonians were called
by the Catholics, the Constantinopolitan recension of the Nicene Creed added the w^ords,
" the Lord and the Life- giver, proceeding from the Father, with the Father and the Son
worshipped and glorified " etc., which had already formed part of local Creeds in the East.

From the foregoing by Canon Bright, the reader will be able to understand the connex-
ion between the Semi-Arians and Pneumatomachi, as well as to see how the undestroyed
heretical germs of the Semi-Arian heresy necessitated by their development the condemna-
tion of a second synod.

The Apollinaeians.

(Philip Schaff, in Smith and Wace, Did. Christ. Biog., s. v. Apollinaris.)
Apollinaris was the first to apply the results of the Nicene controversy to Christology
proper, and to call the attention of the Church to the psychical and pneumatic element in
the humanity of Christ ; but in his zeal for the true deity of Christ, and fear of a double


lU 1. (■oXsTA.N'i'lAul'LK. A.l). 381


personality, he fell into the error of a partial denial of his true humanity. Adopting the
psychological trichotomy of Plato {awfxa, 4'^xv^ TrieifjLu), for which he quoted I. Thess. v. 23
and Gal. v. 17, he attributed to Christ a human body (awfj.a) and a human soul (the ipvxy
aAoyos, the aiiima animans which man has in common Avith the animal), but not a rational
spirit {vov<;, TnevfjLa, xpvxv AoyiKY;, anima i^ationalis,) and i)ut in the place of the latter the divine
Logos. In opjDosition to tlie idea of a mere connection of the Logos with the man Jesus, he
wished to secure an organic unity of the two, and so a tnxe incarnation ; but he sought this
at the expense of the most important constituent of man. He reached only a 0eos aupKo<f>6pos
as Nestorianism onlj' an avSp(jiTro<; Seo(f>6po<; instead of the proper .VcaiSpwros. He appealed
to the fact that the Scripture says, "the Word was made Jlc.sh" — not spirit ; "God was
manifest in the Jlesh" etc. To which Gregory Nazianzen justly replied that in these pas-
sages the term adp^ was used by synecdoche for the whole human nature. In this way Apolli-
naris established so close a connection of the Logos with human flesh, that all the divine
attributes were transferred to the human natui-e, and all the human attributes to the divine,
and the two merged in one nature in Christ. Hence he could speak of a crucifixion of the
Logos, and a worship of his flesh. He made Christ a middle being between God and man,
in whom, as it were, one part divine and two parts human were fused in the unity of a new
nature. He even ventured to adduce created analogies, such as the mule, midway between
the horse and the ass ; the grey colour, a mixture of white and black ; and spring, in distinc-
tion from winter and summer. Christ, said he, is neither whole man, nor God, but a mixture
{p.iii<;) of God and man. On the other hand, he regarded the orthodox view of a union of full
humanity with a full divinity in one person — of two wholes in one whole — as an absurdity.
He called the result of this construction avSpoTr6.'}eo';, a sort of monstrosity, which he put in
the same category with the mythological figure of the Minotaur. But the Apollinarian idea
of the union of the Logos with a truncated human nature might be itself more justly com-
pared with this monster. Starting from the Nicene homoousi(m as to the Logos, but denying
the completeness of Christ's humanity, he met Arianism half-way, which likewise put the
divine Logos in the place of the human spirit in Christ. But he stx'ongly asserted his
unchangeableness, while Arians taught his changeableness (tpctttott^s).

The faith of the Chui'ch revolted against such a mutilated and stunted humanity of Christ
which necessarily involved also a merely partial redemption. The incarnation is an assump-
tion of the entire hiiman nature, sin only excluded. The ci/o-a/D/cwo-is is ivavSpMirrjaLs. To be a
full and complete Redeemer, Christ must be a perfect man (Ti\€io<; ai'9pw-o<;). The spirit or
rational soul is the most important element in man, his crowning glory, the seat of intelli-
gence and freedom, and needs redemption as well as the soul and the body ; for sin has
entered and corrupted all the faculties.

In the sentence immediately preceding the above Dr. Schaff remarks " but the peculiar
Christology of Apollinaris has reai:)peared from time to time in a modified shape, as isolated
theological opinion." No doubt Dr. Schafi" had in mind the fathers of the so-called "Ke-
noticism " of to-day, Gcss and Ebrard, w ho teach, unless they have been misunderstood,
that the incarnate Son had no human intellect or rational soul (vov?) but that the divine per-
sonality took its place, by being changed into it. By this last modification, they claim to
escape from tlio taint of the Apollinarian heresj'.'

' The thc'olojrical views of Gesp aud Ebnird 1 know only frotn dem in's Werdon ein<re<ran<renen Logos noch eine becondere

the statements of thcin in writerp on the mbjcct of the Iiicarnn- nienech'.iche Seele in .Jesu war ?" ((iess. D.e I.ehre i. <l. I'erttm

tion. especially from those made by the Kev. A. I?. Rrure, I) D., clirisli. ii.. p. 321.) Bnire understands Gcss to teach that ''The

Professor at Free Church follege, Glasgow, in his work " The only difference between the Logos and a human soul was. that he

Uuniiliation of Christ." (Lecture IV ) The followins: passatre became human by voluntary kenosis, while an ordinary human

'Cited by Dr. Bruce) .seems to prove his contention so far soul derives its existence from a creative act." (And refers to

as Gess is concerned. " Uass eine wahrhaft menschliche Seele Gess, tit mipra. p. 32.5 et seqq. i For Ebrard's view, see his Christ-

in .Icsu war. versteht sich fiir und von selbt : cr war ja son«t ke'n Imhe Dngmntik. ii., p. 40. Ritschl dubbed the whole kenotic

wirklicher Mensch. Aber die Frage ist. ol) der in's Werden theory as " Verschiimter Sociuianismus."
eingegangene Logos selbst diese menschliche Seele, oder ob neben


^


I. COXSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381 175

The Eunomians or Anomceans.
(Bright, Notes on the. Canons, Cauon I. of I. Const.)
"The Eunomians or Anomoeans." These were the ultra- Arians, who carried to its legitimate
issue the original Arian denial of tlie eternity and uncreatedness of the Son, while they further
rejected what Arius had affirmed as to the essential luysteriousuess of tlie Divine nature
(Soc, H. E., iv., 7 ; comp. Athan., De Synod., 15). Their founder was Aetius, the most versatile
of theological adventurers {cf. Athan., De Synod., 31 ; Soc, H. E., ii., 45 ; and see a summary of
his career in Newman's Arians, p. 347) ; but their leader at the time of the Council was the
daring and indefatigable Eunomius (for whose personal characteristics, see his admirer Philos-
torgius, X., 6) He, too, had gone through many vicissitudes from his first employment as
the secretary of Aetius, and his ordination as deacon by Eudoxius ; as bishop of Cyzicus, he
had been lured into a disclosure of his true sentiments, and then denounced as a heretic
(Theod., H. E., ii., 29) ; with Aetius he had openly separated from Eudoxius as a disingenuous
time-server, and had gone into retirement at Chalcedon (Philostorg., ix., 4). The distinctive
formula of his adherents was the "Anomoion." The Son, they said, was not "like to the
Father in essence " ; even to call him simply " like " was to obscure the fact that he was sim-
ply a creature, and, as such, " unlike " to his Creator. In other words, they thought the
Semi- Arian "homoiousiou" little better than the Catholic " homoousion " : the "homoion"
of the more "respectable" Arians represented in their eyes an ignoble reticence ; the plain
truth, how^ever it might shock devout prejudice, must be put into words which would bar
all misunderstanding : the Son might be called " God," but in a sense merely titular, so as to
leave an impassable gulf between him and the uncreated Godhead (see Eunomius's Exposi-
tion in Valesius's note on Soc, H. E., v., 10). Compare Basil {Epist., 233, and his work against
Eunomius), and Epiphanius [Hoer., 76).

The Arians or Eudoxians.
(Bright. TJt supra.)
" The Arians or Eudoxians." By these are meant the ordinary Arians of the period, or, as
they may be called, the Acacian party, directed for several years by the essentially worldly
and unconscientious Eudoxius. His real sympathies were with the Anomceans (see Tillemont,
Ilemoires, vi., 423, and compare his profane speech recorded by Socrates, H. E., ii., 43) : but,
as a bishop of Constantinople, he felt it uecessaiy to discourage them, and to abide by the
vague formula invented by Acacius of Csesarea, which described the Son as "like to the
Father," without saying whether this likeness was supposed to he more than moral (cf. New-
man, Arians, p. 317), so that the practical eifect of this "homoion" was to prepare the way
for that very Anomoeanism which its maintainers were ready for political purposes to disown.

The Sabellians.

(Bright. Ut supra.)

"The Sabellians," whose theory is traceable to Noetus andPraxeas in the latter part of the
second century : they regarded the Son and the Hoh- Spirit as aspects and modes of, or as
emanations from, the One Person of the Father (see Newman's Arians, pp. 120 et seqq.). Such
a view tended directly to dissolve Christian belief in the Trinity and in the Incarnation ( Vide
Wilberforce, Incarnation, pp. 112, 197). Hence the gentle Dionysius of Alexandria charac-
terised it in severe terms as involving " blasphemy, unbelief, and irreverence, towards the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit" (Euseb., H. E., vii., 6). Hence the deep repugnance
which it excited, and the facility with which the imputation of " Sabellianizing " could be
utilised by the Arians against maintainers of the Consubstantiality (Hilary, De Trinit., iv.,
4; De Synod., 68 ; Fragm., 11 ; Basil, Epist., 189, 2). No organized Sabelhan sect was in exist-


176 I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381

ence at the date of this anathema : but Sabellian ideas were "in the air," and St. Basil could
speak of a revival of this old misbelief (Epist., 12G). We find it again asserted by Chilperic
I., King of Neustria, in the latter part of the sixth century (Greg. Turon., Hist. Fr., v., 45).

The Marcellians.
(Bright. Ut siq^ra.)

" The IMarccllians," called after Marcollus bishop of Ancyra, who was persistently
denounced not only by the Arianizers, but by St. Basil, and for a time, at least, suspected by
St. Athanasius {Vide Epiphan.,^«?r., 72, 4) as one who held notions akin to Sabellianism, and
fatal to a true belief in the Divine Sonship and the Incai'nation. The theory ascribed to him
■was that the Logos was an impersonal Divine power, immanent from eternity in God, but
issuing from him in the act of creation, and entering at last into relations with the human
person of Jesus, who thus became God's Son. But this expansion of the original divine
iinity would be followed by a "contraction," when the Logos would retire from Jesus, and
God would again be all in all. Some nine years before the council, Marcellus, then in extreme
old age, had sent his deacon Eugenius to St. Athanasius, with a written confession of faith,
quite orthodox as to the eternity of the Trinity, and the identity of the Logos with a pre-
existing and personal Son, although not vei'bally explicit as to the pennanence of Christ's
"kingdom," — the point insisted on in one of theEj^ijjhanian-Constantinopolitan additions to
the Creed (Montfaucon, Collect. Nov., ii., 1). The question whether Marcellus was personally
heterodox — i.e. whether the extracts from his treatise, made by his adversary Eusebius of
Csesarea, give a fair account of his real views — has been answered unfavourably by some writ'
ers, as Newman (Afhanaf^ian Treatises, ii., 200, ed. 2), and Dolliuger [Hippolytus and CaUistus,
p. 217, E. T. J). 201), while others, like Neale, think that "charity and truth" suggest his
" acquittal " [Hist. Patr. Antioch., p. lOG). Montfaucon thinks that his written statements
might be favourably interpreted, but that his oral statements must have given ground for

suspicion.

The Photixiaxs.

(Bright. Ut supra.)

"The Photinians," or followers of Marcellus's disciple Photinus, bishop of Sirmium, the
ready-witted and pertinacious disjiutant Avhom four successive synods condemned before he
could be got rid of, by State power, in a.d. 351. (See St. Athanasius s Historical Writings,
Introd. p. Ixxxix.) In his representation of the "Marcellian " theology, he laid special stress
on its Christological position — that Jesus, on whom the Logos rested with exceptional fulness,
was a mere man. See Athanasius, Be Synodis, 26, 27, for two creeds in which Photinianism
is censured; also Soc. //. E. ii., 18, 29, 30 ; vii., 32. There is an obvious affinity between it
and the " Samosatene " or Paulionist theory.

CANON n.

The bishops are not to go beyond their dioceses to clnirclies lying outside of their
bounds, nor bring confusion on the churches ; but let the Bishop of Alexandria, accord-
ing to the canons, alone administer the affairs of Eg^'pt ; and let the bishops of the
East m;inag(^ the East nlojie, tlie ])rivileg(\s of the Churcli in Antioch, which are men-
tioned in the canons of Nice, being pres«'rved ; and let the bishops of tlie Asian Diocese
administer the Asian affairs only; and the Pontic bishops only Pontic matters; and
the Thracian bishops only Tliracian affairs. And let not bishops go beyond their
dioceses for ordination or any otlior ecclesiastical ministrations, unless they be invited.
And the aforesaid canon concerning dioceses being observed, it is evident that the


I. COXSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. 381


177


synod of every province will administer tlie affairs of that particular province as was
decreed at Nice. But tlie Churches of God in heathen nations must be governed
according to the custom which has prevailed from the times of the Fathers.


NOTES.


AxciEXT Epitome of Canon IL


No traveller shaU introduce confusion into
the Churches either by ordaining or by en-
throning. Nevertheless in Churches rrhich are
among the heathen the tradition of the Fidhers
shall be preserved.

In the above Ancient Epitome it will be
noticed that not only is ordination mentioned
but also the " inthronization " of bishojDs.
Few ceremonies are of greater antiquity in
the Christian Church than the solemn plac-
ing of the newly chosen bishop) in the episco-
pal chair of his diocese. It is mentioned
in the Apostolical Constitutions, and in the
Greek Pontiticals. Also in the Arabic ver-
sion of the Nicene Canons. (No. Ixxi.). A ser-
mon was usually delivered by the newly
consecrated bishop, called the " sermo en-
throuisticus." He also sent to neighbouring
bishops (TvKXafSaL ivSpovLaTLKal, and the fees
the new bishops paid were called rd ivSpovt-


CTTtKtt.


Vai^sius.


(Note on Socrates, H.E. v., 8).

This rule seems to have been made chiefly
on account of Meletius. Bishop of Antioch,
Gregory Nazianzen, and Peter of Alexandria.
For Meletius leaving the Eastern diocese had
come to Constantinople to ordain Gregory
bishop there. And Gregory having aban-
doned the bishopriek of Sasima, which was
in the Pontic diocese, had removed to Con-
stantinople. While Peter of Alexandria had
sent to Constantinople seven Egyptian bishops
to ordain Maximus the Cynic. For the pur-
pose therefore of repressing these [disorders],
the fathers of the Synod of Constantinople
made this canon.

Balsamon.

Take notice from the px-esent canon that
formerly all the Metropolitans of provinces
were themselves the heads of their own prov-
inces, and were ordained by their own svnods.
But all this was changed by Canon xxviij of
the Sj-nod of Chalcedon, which directs that
the Metropolitans of the dioceses of Pontus,
Asia, and Thrace, and certain others which
are mentioned in this Canon should be


ordained by the Patriarch of Constantinople
and should be subject to him. But if you
find other chui'clies which are autocephalous
as the Church of Bulgaria, of Cj^prus, of
Iberia, you need not be astonished. For the
Emi^eror Justinian gave this honour to the
Archbishop of Bulgaria. . . The third

Synod gave this lujuour to the Ai'chbishop of
Cyprus, and by the law of the same synod
((Jauon viii.), and by the Sixth Synod in its
XKxixth Canon, the judgment of the Synod of
Antioch is annulled and this honoiu' granted
to the bishop of Iberia.

TiLLEMONT.

{Meni. ix., 489).

The Council seems likewise to reject,
whether designedly or inadvertently, what
had been ordained by the Council of Sardica
in favour of Rome. But as assuredly it did
not affect to prevent either Ecumenical Coun-
cils, or even general Cour.cils of the East,
from judging of matters brouglit before them,
so I do not know if one may conclude abso-
lutely that they intended to forljid appeals to
Rome. It regulates proceedings between Di-
oceses, but not what might concern superior
tribunals.

Fleuey.
{Hist. Eccl. in loc).

This Canon, which gives to the councils of
particular places full authority in Ecclesiasti-
cal matters, seems to take away the power of
ajDpealing to the Pope granted by the Coun-
cil of Sardica, and to restore the ancient
right.

Hefele.

An exception to the rule against interfer-
ence in other patriarchates was made with
regard to those Churches newly founded
amongst barbarous nations (not belonging to
the Roman Empire), as these were of course
obliged to receive their first bishops from
strange patriarchates, and remained after-
wards too few in number to form patriarch-
ates of their own and were therefore governed
as belonging to other patriarchates, as, for
instance, Abyssinia by the jDatriarchate of
Alexandria.


178


I. C0:N'STANTIN0PLE. A.D. 381


CANON III.

The Bishop of Constantinople, however, shall have the prerogative of honour after
the Bishop of Itoinc ; because Constantinople is New liome.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.


The bishop of Constantinople is to he honoured
next after the Ijishop of liotne.

It should be remembered that the eliaiige
effected by this canon did not affect Rome
directly in any May, but did seriously affect
Alexandria and Antioch, which till then had
ranked next after the see of Rome. When
the pope refused to acknowledge the authoi*-
ity of this canon, he was in reality defending
the principle laid down in the canon of Nice,
that in such matters the ancient customs
should continue. Even the last clause, it
would seem, could give no offence to the most
sensitive on the papal claims, for it implies a
wonderful power in the rank of Old Rome, if
a see is to rank next to it because it happens
to be " New Rome. " Of course these remarks
only refer to the wording of the canon which
is carefully guarded ; the intention doubtless
was to exalt the see of Constantinojile, the
chief see of the East, to a j^osition of as near
equality as possible with the chief see of the
West.

ZONARAS.

In this place the Council takes action con-
cerning Coustantino2:)le, to which it decrees
the prerogative of honour, the priority, and
the glory after the Bishop of Rome as being
New Rome and the Queen of cities. Some
indeed wish to understand the preposition
/icTtt here of time and not of inferiority of
grade. And they strive to confirm this inter-
pretation by a consideration of the XXVIII
canon of Chalcedon, urging that if Constanti-
nople is to enjoy equal honours, the pi-eposi-
tion "after" cannot signify subjection. But
on the other hand the hundred and thirtieth
novel of Justinian,' Book V of the Imperial
Constitutions, title three, understands the
canon otherwise. For, it says, " we decree
that the most holy Pope of Old Rome, accord-
ing to the decrees of the holy synods is the
first of all priests, and that the most blessed
bishop of Constantinople and of New Rome,
should have the second place after the Apos-
tolic Tlirone of the Elder Rome, and sho\ild
be snjierior in honour to all others." From

' The reader will notice that this is not even an approximnl«ly
contemporaneous interpretation, but more than a century and a


this therefore it is abundantly evident that
" after " denotes subjection {vTro(3t(3a(Tfji(>v) and
diminution. And otherwise it would be im-
possible to guard this equality of honour in
each see. For in reciting their names, or
assigning them seats when they are to sit to-
gether, or arranging the order of their signa-
tures to documents, one must come before
the other. Whoever therefore shall explain
this particle /xe-ra as only refening to time, and
does not admit that it signifies an inferior
grade of dignity, does violence to the passage
and draws from it a meaning neither true
nor good. Moreover in Canon xxxvj of the
Council in Tridlo, ixera manifestly denotes
subjection, assigning to Constantinople the
second place after the throne of Old Rome ;
and then adds, after this Alexandria, then Anti-
och, and last of all shall be placed Jerusalem.

Hefei.e.

If we enquire the reason why this Council
tried to change the order of rank of the great
Sees, which had been established in the sixth
Nicene canon, we must first take into consid-
eration that, since the elevation of Constanti-
nople to the Im})erial residence, as New
Rome, the bishoi)s as well as the Emperors
naturally wished to see the new imperial resi-
dence. New Rome, placed immediately after
Old Rome in ecclesiastical rank also ; the
ratluu-, as with the Greeks it was the rule for
the ecclesiastical rank of a See to follow the
civil rank of the city. The Synotl of Antioch
in 1541, in its ninth canon, had i)laiidy ileclared
this, and subsequently the fourth General
Council, in its seventeenth canon, spoke in
the same sense. But how these j^rinciples
Avere ])rotested against on the side of Rome,
we shall see further on in the history of the
fourth General Council. For the present, it
may suffice to add that the aversion to Alex-
andria which, by favouring ]\Iaximus, had ex-
ercised such a disturbing influence on Church
affairs in Constantinople, may well have helped
to effect the elevation of the See of Constan-
tinople over that of Alexandria. Moreover,
for many centuries Rome did not recognize
this change of the old ecclesiastical order.
In the sixteenth session of the fourth General


half later, after Leu I. had done so mncb to eetablish the power
of his see.


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381


179


Council, the Papal Legate, Lucentius, express-
ly declaimed this. In like manner the Popes
Leo the Great and Gregory the Great pro-
nounced against it ; and though even Gratian
adopted this canon in his collection the Ro-
man critics added the following note : Canon
hie ex lis est, quos Apoi^tolica Romana Sedes a
principio et longo poxt tempore non recepit. It
was only when, after the conquest of Con-
stantinople by the Latins, a Latin patriarchate
was founded there in 1204, that Pope Inno-
cent III, and the twelfth General Council, in
1215, allowed this patriarch the first rank
after the Roman ; and the same recognition
was expressly awarded to the Greek Patriarch
at the Florentine Union in 1439.

T. W. Allies.'

Remarkable enough it is that when, in the
Council of Chalcedon. appeal was made to
this third Canon, the Pope St. Leo declared
that it had never been notitied to Rome. As
in the mean time it had taken effect through-
out the whole East, as in this very council
Nectarius, as soon as he is elected, presides
instead of Timothy of Alexandria, it puts in a
strong point of view the real self-government
of the Eastern Church at this time ; for the
giving the Bishop of Constantinople prece-
dence over Alexandria and Antioch was a pro-
ceeding which affected the whole Church, and
so far altered its original order — one in which
certainly the West might claim to have a
voice. Tillemont goes on : " It would be very
difficult to justify St. Leo, if he meant that
the Roman Church had never known that the
Bishop of Constantinople took the second
place in the Church, and the first in the East,
since his legates, whose conduct he entirely
approves, had just themselves authorized it as
a thing beyond dispute, and Eusebius of Dory-


Iseum maintained that St. Leo himself had aj)-
proved it. " The simple fact is, that, exceeding-
ly unwilling as the Bishops of Rome were to
sanction it, from this time, 381, to say the least,
the Bishop of Constantinople appears uni-
formly as first bishop of the East.

Cardinal Baronius in his Annals (a.d. 381,
n. 35, 36) has disputed the genuineness of
this Canon ! As already mentioned it is found
in the (Jorpus Juris Canonici, Decretum, Pars
I , Dist. XXII., c. iij. The note added to
this in Gratian reads as follows :

Note in Gratian's " Decretum."

This canon is of the number of those which
the Apostolic See of Rome did not at first nor
for long years afterwards receive. This is
evident from Epistle LI. (or LIII.) of Pope
Leo I. to Anatolius of Constantinoj^le and
from several other of his letters. The same
thing also is shewn by two letters of Leo
IX. 's, the one against the presumptuous acts
of Michael and Leo (cap. 28) and the other
addressed to the same Michael. But still
more clearly is this seen from the letter of
Blessed Gregory (xxxj., lib. VI.) to Eulogius
of Alexandria and Anastasius of Antioch, and
from the letter of Nicholas I. to the Emperor
Michel which begins " Proposueramus."
However, the bishops of Constantinople, sus-
tained by the authority of the Emperors,
usurped to themselves the second place among
the patriarchs, and this at length was granted
to them for the sake of peace and tranquillity,
as Pope Innocent III. declares (in cap. anfiqua
de pirlvileg.).'-

This canon Dionysius Exiguus appends to
Canon 2, and dropping 5, 6, and 7 he has but
three canons of this Synod.


CANON IV.

Concerning Maximus the Cynic and the disorder which has happened in Constanti-
nople on his account, it is decreed that Maximus never was and is not now a Bisho]) ;
that those who have been ordained by him are in no order whatever of the clergy ; since
all which has been done concerning him or by him, is declared to be invalid.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.


Let Maximus the Cynic he cast out from
among the bishops, and anijone ivho was in-
scribed by him on the clergy list $hall be held as
profane.


Edmund Venables.
(Smith and Wace, Diet. Christ. Biog.)
Maximus the Cynic ; the inti'usive bishop of
Constantinople, a.d. 380. Ecclesiastical his-
tory hardly presents a more extraordinary


' T. W. Allies. The Ch. of Eng. cleared from the Charge I '^ For some reason this canon does not seem to be any more ac-
of Schism. (Written while an Anglican; p. 94 (2d Edition). | ceptable to modern champions of the Papacy than it was to the


180


I. CO^'STANTl.NurLK. A.i). ;J8l


career than that of this man, who, after a
most disrepiitahle youth, more than once
hroucicht to justice for liis misdeeds, and bear-
ing the scars of his punishments, by sheer
impudence, clever flattery, and adroit manage-
ment of opportunities, contrived to gain tlie
confidence successively of no less men than
Peter of Alexandria, Gregory Nazianzen, and
Ambrose, and to install himself in one of the |
first sees of the church, from which he was
with difficulty dislodged by a decree of an
ecumenical council. His history also illus-
trates the jealousy felt by the churches of
Alexandria and Rome towards their young '•
and vigorous rival for i^atriarchal honours, the
church of Constantinople ; as well as their i
claim to interfere with her government, and
to impose prelates upon her according to their
pleasure. Alexandria, as the chief see of the
Eastern world, from the first asserted a juris-
diction which she has never formally relin-
quished over the see of Constantinople, more
particularly in a vacancy in the ei^iscopate
(Neale. Pafr. of Alexrtndrvf,!., 206). The con-
duct of Peter, the successor of Athanasius, first
in instituting Gregory Nazianzen bishop of
Constantinople by his letters and sending a
formal recognition of his appointment and ,
then in substituting Maximus, as has been '
remarked by Milman {Ilisfonj of Christianifi/, \
iii., 115, note) and Ullman (Greg. Naz.. p. 203
[Cox's translation] ), furnish unmistakable
indications of the desire to erect an Oi'iental
papacy,by estal)lisliing the i)rimacy of Alexan-
dria over Constantinople and so over the East,
Avhich was still further illustrated a few years
lat(!r by the high-handed behaviour of The-
ophilus towards Chrysostom.

Maximus was a native of iUexandria of low
pai'entage. He boasted that his family had
produced martyrs. He got instructed in the
rudiments of the Clu"istian faith and received
baptism, but strangely enough sought to com-
bine the Christian profession with Cynic phi-
losophy.

When he presented himself at the Eastern
capital he wore the white robe of a Cynic, and
carried a philosopher's staff, his head being-
laden with a huge crop of crisp curling hair,
dyed a golden yellow, and swinging over his
shoulders in long ringlets. He represented
himself as a confessor for the Nicene faith,
and his banishment to the Oasis as a suftering
for the truth {Oraf. xxiii., p. 419). Before
long he completely gained the ear and heart
of Gregory, who admitted him to the closest


companionship. Maximus j^roclaimed the
most unbounded admiration for Gregory's
discourses, which he praised in private, and,
according to the custom of the agt-, applauded
in public. His zeal against heretics was most
fierce, and his denunciation of them uncom-
promising. The simple-hearted Gregory be-
came the complete dupe of Maximus.

All this time Maximus was secretly matur-
ing a plot for ousting hisnususpicious patron
from his throne. He gained the ear and the
confidence of Peter of Alexandria, and induced
him to favour his aud)itious views. Greg-
ory, he asserted, had never been formally en-
throned l)ishop of Constantinople ; his trans-
lation thither was a violation of the canons of
the church ; rustic in manners, he had proved
himself quite unfitted for the place. Con-
stantinople was getting weary of him. It was
time the patriarch of the Eastern world should
exercise his prerogative and give New Rome
a more suitable bishop. The old man was
imposed on as Gregory had been, and lent
himself to Maximus's j^rojects. Maximus
found a ready tool in a presbyter of Constan-
tinople, envious of Gregory's talents and popu-
larity {de Til., p. 13). Others were gained by
I bribes. Seven unscrupulous sailor fellows
' were desi^atched from Alexandria to mix with
I the people, and watch for a favourable oppor-
tunity for carrying out the plot. AVhen all
was ripe they were followed by a bevy of
bishops, with secret instnictions from the pa-
triarch to consecrate Maximus.

The conspirators chose the night for the
accomplishment of their enterprise. Gregory
they knew was confined by illness. They
forced their way into the cathedral, and com-
menced the rite of ordination. By the time
they had set the Cynic on the archiepiscopal
throne, and had just begun shearing away his
long curls, they were surprised by the dawn.
The news quickly spread, and everybody
nished to the church. The magistrates ap-
peared on the scene with their officers ; Maxi-
mus and his consecrators were driven from
the sacred precincts, and in the house or shop
of a flute-player the tonsure was completed.
Maximus repaired to Thessalonica to lay his
cause before Theodosius. He met with a
cold reception from the emperor, who com-
mitted the matter to Ascholius, the much re-
spected bishop of that city, charging him to
refer it to pope Damasus. "We have two
letters of Damasus's on this subject. In the
first, addressed to Ascholius and the Mace-


Church of Rome fifteen hundred years ago I pivc nf; a sample
of this the followinc; from a recent Koman Catholic wTiter : " The
decree which goes by the numo of the Third Canon of Constanti-


nople was tlie trenn of the successful mendacitv of the arch-rebel
Photius." (Hivington. The /'rim. ch., p. 2fi3V " The phraseology
seems to suggest warm disuontent at the canon.


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.T). 381


181


(Ionian bishops, lie vehemently condemns the
"ardor animi et fceda presumptio " which
had led certain persons coming from Egypt,
in violation of the rule of ecclesiastical disci- '\
jDline, to have proposed to consecrate a rest-
less man, an alien from the Chi'istian profes- 1
sion, not worthy to be called a Christian, who I
wore an idolatrous garb (" habitus idoli ")
and the long hair which St. Paul said w^as a ^
shame to a man, and remarks on the fact that
being expelled from the church they were ^
compelled to complete the ordination " intra
parietes alieuos." In the second letter, ad- ,
dressed to Ascholius individually (Ej). vi.) he I
repeats his condemnation of the ordination of
the long-haired Maximus (" comatum") and
asks him to take special care that a Catholic
bishop mavbe ordained (Migue, Patrolog., xiii.,
pp 366-369 ; Kp. 5 ; 5, 6).

Maximus returned to Alexandria, and de-
manded that Peter should assist him in re-
establishing himself at Constantinople. But
Peter had discovered the man's true character,
and received him as coldly as Theodosius had
done. Determined to carry his point he pre-
sented himself to the patriarch at the head of
a disorderly mob, with the threat that if he
did not help him to gain the throne of Con-
stantinople he would have that of Alexandria.
Peter appealed to the prefect, by whom Maxi-
mus was driven out of Egypt. The death of
Peter and the accession of Timotheus are


placed Feb. 14, 380. The events described
must therefore have occurred in 379. When
the second ecumenical council met at Con-
stantinople in 381, the question of Maximus's
claim to the see of Constantinople came up
for consideration. His pretensions were
unanimously rejected.

Bright.

(Notes on the Canons, in loc.)

Maximus, however, having been expelled
from Egypt, made his way into Northern
Italy, presented to Gratiau at Milan a large
work which he had written against the Arians
(as to which Gregory sarcastically remarks —
" Saul a prophet, Maximus an author ! " Garm.
adv. Max., 21), and deceived St. Ambrose and
his suffragans bv showing the record of his
consecration, with letters which Peter had
once written in his behalf. To these prelates
of the "Italic diocese" the appeal of Maximus
seemed like the appeal of Athanasius, and
more recently of Peter himself, to the sym-
pathy of the church of Rome ; and they re-
quested Theodosius to let the case be heard
before a really General Council (Mansi, iii.,
631). Nothing further came of it ; perhaps,
says Tillemont, those who thus wrote in favour
of Maximus " reconnurent bientot quel il
etait " (ix., 502) : so that when a Council did
meet at Rome towards the end of 382, no
steps were taken in his behalf.


CANON V.

(Probably adopted at a Council held in Constantinoi^le the next year, 382.
duction on the number of the Canons.)


Vide. Intro-


In regard to the tome of the Western [Bishops], we receive those in Antioch also
who confess the unity of the Godhead of the Father, and of the Sou, and of the Holy
Ghost.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

The Tome of the Westerns which recognizes
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit as con-
substantial is highly acceptable.

Beveridge and Van Espen translate this
canon differently, thus, " With regard to the
tome of the Westerns, we agree with those in
Antioch [i.e. the Synod of 378] who (accept-
ed it and) acknowledged the unity of the
Godhead of the Father etc." In opposition
to this translation Hefele urges that a-TvoMxea-
SuL in ecclesiastical language usually refers to
receiving persons and recogni2dng them, not
opinions or doctrines.


Hefele.

This canon probably does not belong to
the second General Council, but to the Synod
held in the following year at Constantiuoi)le
consisting of nearly the same bishops.

It is certain that by the "Tome of the
AVesterns " a dogmatic work of the Western
bishops is to be understood, and the only
question is which Tome of the Westerns is
here meant. Several — for instance, the Greek
commentators, Balsamon and Zouaras, and
the spokesman of the Latins at the Synod of
Florence in 1439 (Archbishop Andrew of
Rhodes) — understood by it the decrees of the
Synod of Sardica ; but it seems to me that


182


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.I). 381


this canon undoubtedly indicates that the
Tome of the Westerns also mentioned the con-
dition of the Antiochian Church, and the di-
vision into two parties of the orthodox of that
j)lace — the Meletian schism. Now, as this
was not mentioned, nay, could not have been,
at the Synod of Sardica — for this schism at
Antioch only broke out seventeen years later
— some other document of the Latins must
certainly be meant. But we know that Poi^e
Damasus, and the synod assemble<l by him in
3G9, addressed a Tome to the Orientals, of
which fragments are still preserved, and that
nine years later, in 379, a great synod at
Antioch of one hundred and forty-six
orthodox Oriental bishops, under Meletius,
accepted and signed this Tome, and at the
same time sought to put a stop to the Mele-
tian schism. Soon afterwards, in 380, Pope
Damasus and his fourth Roman Synod again
sent a treatise on the faith, of which we still
possess a portion, containing anathemas, to
the Orientals, especially to Bishop Paul of
Antioch, head of the Eustathians of that city.
Under these circumstances, we are justified in
referring the expression " the tome of the
Westerns " either to the Roman ti'eatise of
369 or to that of 380, and I am disposed to
give the preference to the former, for the
following reasons : —

(1.) As has been already obsei*ved, this
canon belongs to the Synod held at Constan-
tinople in 382.

(2.) We still possess in Theodoret a Syno-
dal Letter to the Latins from this later
Synod.

(3.) The canon in question, as pi'oceeding
from the same source, is, of course to a certain
extent, connected with this letter.

(4.) In this Synodal Letter, the Eastern
bishops, in order to convince the Latins of
their orthodoxy, appeal to two documents,
the one a " tome " of an Antiochian Synod,
and the other a "tome" of the Ecumenical
Council held at Constantinople in 381.

(5.) By the Antiochian Synod here men-
tioned, I understand the great synod of 378,
and, as a necessary consequence, believe the
" tome " there produced to be none other than
the Roman Tome of 3(59, which was then ac-
cepted at Antiocli.

(6.) It is quite certain that the Synod of
Antioch sent a cop}' of this Tome, with the
declai'ation of its acceptance and the signa-


tures of the members, back to Rome, as a
supplement to its Synodal Letter ; and hence
Lucas Holstenius was still able to find frag-
ments of it in Rome.

(7.) Tije Synod of Constantinople of 382
might well call this Tome, sent back to Rome
with the acceptance and signatures of the
Easterns, a " Tome established at Antioch,"
althcnigh it was really drawn up at Rome.

(8.) If, however, the S^-nod of Constanti-
nople in its Synodal Letter speaks of this
Tome, we are justitied in supp(jsing that the
one mentioned in its canon is the same.

(9.) That which still remains of the Roman
Tome of 3G9, treats expressly of the oneness
of the Godhead of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost ; and such were the contents
of the Tome according to this canon.

(10.) It is true that the fragments still pre-
sented of this Tome contain no passage di-
rectly referring to the Antiochian schism ;
but, in the first place, very little remains of
it, and there is the more reason to suppose
that the Meletian schism was sjDoken of in
the portion which has been lost, as it was the
same Antiochian Synod that accepted the
Tome which urged the putting an end to that
schism. It is still more to the purjDose that
the Italian bishojDS, in theii* letter to the
Easterns in 381, expressly say that they had
alread}' long before {dudum) written to the
Orientals in order to put an end to the divis-
ion between the orthodox at Antioch. By this
" dudum " I conclude that they refer to the
Roman Tome of 369 ; and if the Westerns in
their letter to the Easterns in 381 pointed to
this Tome, it was natural that the Synod of
Constantinople of 382 should also have re-
' ferred to it, for it was that very letter of the
Latins which occasioned and called the synod
into being.

Lastly, for the full understanding of this
canon, it is necessary to observe that the
Latins, in their letter just mentioned of 381,
I say that "they had already in their earlier
missive {i.e. as we suppose, in the Tome of
369 ) spoken to the effect that both parties at
Antioch, one as much as the other, were or-
thodox." Agreeing with this remark of the
Westerns, repeated in tlieir letter of 381, the
Easterns in this canon say, " We also recog-
nise all Antiochians as orthodox who acknowl-
edge the oneness of tlie Godhead of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost."


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381 183

CANON VI.

(Probably adopted at a Council held in Constantinople the next year, 382. Vide
Introduction on the number of Canons.)

Forasmuch as many wishinf^ to confuse and overturn ecclesiastical order, do con-
tentiously and slanderously fabricate charges against the orthodox bishops who have
the administration of the Churches, intending nothing else than to stain the reputation
of the priests and raise up disturbances amongst the peaceful laity ; therefore it seemed
right to the Holy Synod of Bishops assembled together in Constantinople, not to admit
accusers without examination ; and neither to allow all persons whatsoever to bring
accusations against the rulers of the Church, nor, on the other hand, to exclude all. If
then, any one shall bring a private complaint against the Bishop, that is, one relating
to his own affairs, as, for example, that he has been defrauded, or otherwise unjustly
treated by him, in such accusations no examination shall be made, either of the person
or of the religion of the accuser; for it is by all means necessary that the conscience of
the Bishop should be free, and that he who says he has been wronged should meet
with righteous judgment, of whatever religion he may be. But if the charge alleged
against the Bishop be that of some ecclesiastical offence, then it is necessary to examine
carefully the persons of the accusers, so that, in the first place, heretics may not be
suffered to bring accusations touching ecclesiastical matters against orthodox bishops.
And by heretics we mean both those who were aforetime cast out and those whom we
ourselves have since anathematizetl, and also those professing to hold the true faith who
have separated from our canonical bishops, and set up conventicles in opposition [to
them]. Moreover, if there be any who have been condemned for faults and cast out
of the Church, or excommunicated, whether of the clergy or the laity, neither shall it be
laAvful for these to bring an accusation against the bishop, until they have cleared away
the charge against themselves. In like manner, persons who are under previous accu-
sations are not to be permitted to bring charges against a bishop or any other clergy-
man, until they shall have proved their own innocence of the accusation biought against
them. But if any, being neither heretics, nor excommunicate, nor condemned, nor
under previous accusation for alleged faults, should declare that they have any ecclesi-
astical charge against the bishop, the Holy Synod bids them first lay their charges
before all the Bishops of the Province, and before them prove the accusations, whatso-
ever they may be, which they have brought against the bishop. And if the compro-
vincials should be unable rightly to settle the charges brought against the bishop, then
the parties must betake themselves to a greater synod of the bishops of that diocese
called together for this purpose ; and they shall not produce their allegations before
they have promised in writing to undergo an equal penalty to be exacted from them-
selves, if, in the course of the examination, they shall be proved to have slandered the
accused bishop. And if anyone, despising what has been decreed concerning these
things, shall presume to annoy the ears of the Emperor, or the courts of temporal
judges, or, to the dishonour of all the Bishops of his Province, shall trouble an Ecu-
menical Synod, such an one shall by no means be admitted as an accuser ; forasmuch
as he has cast contempt upon the Canons, and brought reproach upon the order of the
Church.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.
Even one that is of ill repute, if he have suf-
fered any injury, let him bring a charge against
the bishop. If however it be a crime of eccle-
siastical matters let him not speak. Nor shall
another condemned before, speak. Let not one
excommunicated, or cast forth, or charged ivith


those who should bring the charge are the ortho-
dox, who are communicants, uncondemned, un-
accused. Let the case be heard by the ^j?-orm-
cials. Lf however they are not able to decide
the case, let them have recourse to a gr'eater
synod and let them not be heard, ivithout a lorit-
ten declaration of liabilit// to the same suffer-


any crimes speak, until he is cleared of them. But | ings [i.e. of their readiness to be tried by the lex


184


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381


talionis.] But should anyone co)itrary to the
provisions appeal to the Emperor and trouble
him, let such be cast forth.

The phrase " who have tlie administration
of the Churches," Hatch in his Bampton
Lectui-es (Lect. I., p. 41) erroneously sup-
poses to refer only to the administration of
the Church's alms. But this, as Dr. Brii^ht
■well points out ("Notes on the Canons," in
loc.) cannot be the meaning of o'lKovafjulf when
used absolutely as in this canou. He says,
" When a merely ' economic ' function is
intended, the context shew^s it, as in Chalce-
don, Cauon xxvj." He also points out that in
Canon ij., and in Eusebius (H. E. iv., 4), and
■when St. Basil wishes his brother to oLKoi'()fj.iiv
a church suited to his temperament (Epist.
xcviij., 2) the meanintjf of the ■word is evi-
dently spiritual stewardship.

■

ZONARAS.

By " those who were cast out of the
Church " are to be understood those who
■were altogether cut off from the Church ; but
by those who were " excommunicated " the
holy fathers intend all those, whether clerics
or laymen, who are doj^rived of communion
for a set time.

Van Espen.

It is evident from the context of this canon
that " Diocese " here does not signify the dis-
trict or territory assigned to any one bishop,
as we to-day use the word ; but for a district,
which not only contained many ejjiscopal dis-
tricts, as to-day do ecclesiastical provinces,
but which contained also many provinces, and
this was the meaning of the word at the time
of this Councils session.

ZOXARAS.

We call Adrian ople, for example, or Philop-
opolis with the bishops of each a "Province,"
but the whole of Thrace or Macedonia we
call a " Diocese." When these crimes were
brought f orwai'd to be corrected, for the judg-


ing of which the provincial bishops were by no
means sufficient, then the Canon orders the
1)ishops of the diocese to assemble, and
determine the charges preferred against the
bishop.

Van Espen.

Both the Canou and the Civil Law require
the accusers to submit themselves to the law
of retaliation {le.r tnlionis). Vide Gratiau, Pt.
II., Causa 11., Qutest. III., 2 and 3, where we
read fiom the decree of Pope Hadrian ; " Who-
ever shall not pi'ove ■nhat he advances, shall
himself suffer the penalty due the crime he
charged." And undei* the name of Damasus,
"The calumniator, if he fail in jiroving his
accusation, shall receive his tale." The Civil
Law is in L. x.. Cod. dc CnhDiuivdoribus, and
reads, " Whoso charges a crime, shall not have
licence to lie M'ith impunity, since justice re-
quires that calumniators shall endure the pun-
ishment due the crime which they failed to
prove."

The Council wishes that all accusations of
bishops for ecclesiastical offences shall be kept
out of the secular courts, and shall be heard
by synods of bishops, in the manner and foi-m
here prescribed, which is in accordance with
the Constitution which under the names of
Valens, Gratian, and Valentiuian, the Emper-
ors, is referred to in law xxiij. of the Code of
Theodosius, Dc Episropis et Clericis.

Wliatever may be said of the meeting of
bishops at which this canon was enacted, this
is clear, no mention was made of the Roman
Pontilf, nor of the Council of Sardica, as Fleury
notes in his llistoire Ecclesiastiipie, Lib. xviij.,
n. 8. Fi'om this it is evident either that at that
time the Orientals did not admit, especially
for bishojis, appeals to the Roman Pontiif ; nor
did they accept the authority of the Synod of
Sardica, in so far as it permitted that the sen-
tence given in a provincial synod, should be
reopened by the neighbouring bishops to-
gether with the bishops of the province, and
if it seemed good, that the cause might be re-
ferred to Rome.


WARNING TO THE READER TOUCHING CANON YII.

(Beveridge, Synodicon, Tom. II., in loc.)

This canon, I confess, is contained in all the editions of the Commentaries of Balsamon
and Zonaras. It is cited also by Photius in Nomocanon, Tit. xii., cli. xiv., besides it is extant
in a contracted form in the Epitome of Alexius Aristenus. But it is wanting in all the Latin
versions of the Canons, in the ancient translations of Diouys. Exig., Isidore Mercator, etc. ;
also in the Epitome of Sym. Logothet., and the Arabic paraphrase of Josephus ^T^gyp., and
•what is particularly to be observed, in the collectiou and nomocanon of John of Antioch ; and


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381 185


this uot through want of attention on his part, as is clear from this namely, that in the order
of the Canons as given by hiiu he attributes six Canons only to this second General Council,
saying " . . . of the Fathers who assembled at Constantinople, by whom six Canons
were set forth," so that it is clear the present was not reckoned among the canons of this
council in those days. Nay, the whole composition of this canon clearly indicates that it is
to be ascribed, neither to this pi'esent council, nor to any other (unless perhaps to that of
Trullo, of which we shall speak afterwards). For nothing is ajDpoiuted in it, nothing con-
firmed, but a certain ancient custom of receiving converted hei-etics, is here merely recited.

(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. II., p. 368.)
As we possess a letter from the Church at Constantinople in the middle of the fifth cen-
tury to Bishop Martyrius of Antioch, in which the same subject is referred to in a precisely
similar May, Beveridge is probably right in conjecturing that the canon was only an extract
from this letter to Martyrius ; therefore in no way a decree of the second General Council,
nor even of the Synod of 382, but at least eighty years later than the latter. This canon,
with an addition, was afterwards adopted by the Quinisext Synod as its ninety -fifth, without,
however, giving its origin.

CANON VII.

Those avLo from heresy turn to orthodoxy, and to the portion of those who are being
saved, we receive according to the folloAviug method and custom : Arians, and Mace-
donians, and Sabbatians, and Novatians, who call themselves Cathari or Aristeri, and
Quarto-decimaus or Tetradites, and Apollinarians, we receive, upon their giving a Avrit-
ten renunciation [of their errors] and anathematize every heresy which is not in accord-
ance wdth the Holy, Catholic, and xlpostolic Church of God. Thereupon, they are first
sealed or anointed with the holy oil upon the forehead, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears ;
and when we seal them, we say, " The Seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost." But Euno-
mians, who are baptized with only one immersion, and Montanists, who are here called
Phrygians, and Sabellians, who teach the identity of Father and Sou, and do sundry
other mischievous things, and [the partisans of] all other heresies — ^for there are many
such here, particularly among those who come from the country of the Galatians : — all
these, when they desire to turn to orthodoxy, we receive as heathen. On the first day
we make them Christians ; on the second, catechumens ; on the third, we exorcise them
by breathing thrice in their face and ears ; and thus we instruct them and oblige them to
spend some time in the Church, and to hear the Scriptures ; and then we baptize them.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.' j ing with chrism of the eyes, the nostrils, the

ears, the mouth, and the brow ; and signing
Quarto-decimans or Tetradites, Arians, Mace- them with the words, "The Seal of the gift of
donians, Sabbatians, and Ajjollinarians ought to the Holy Ghost."


be received loith their books and anointed in all
their organs of sense.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.


For the "Cathari," see Notes on Canon viij.
of I. Nice.

Hammond.


Sabbatians. Sabbatius was a pi-esbyter
Ennomians baptized ivith one immersion, Sa- ^'lio adopted the sentiments of Novatius, but


hellians, and Phrygians are to be received as as it is clear from the histories of Socrates

and Sozomeu, that he did not do so till at
least eight years after the celebration of this
council, it is of course equally clear that this


heathen.

Aristemus {in Can. vij.).
Those giving up their books and execrat- ' canon could not have been framed by this


mg every heresy are received with only anoint- council.


' This canon is broken into two by the Ancient Epitome.


186 I. CO.N.STAM'i.Nui'LE. A. D. o8i

i

Aristeri. This is probably a false reading others Tertullian, but being condemnetl by
for Aristi, i.e. the best. In the letter above the Church, his followers formed a sect re-
mentioned the expression is Cathari and Ca- inarkable for extreme austerity. But al-
theroteri, i.e. the pure, and the more pure. though they asserted that the Holy Ghost

The Quarto-decimans, or Tetradites, were had inspired Montanus to introduce a system

those persons who persisted in observing the of greater perfection than the Church had be-

Easter festival with the Jews, on the four- fore known, and condemned those who would

teenth day of the first month, whatever day not join them as carnal, they did not at first

of the week it happened to be. innovate in any of the articles of the Creed.

Montanists. One of the older sects, so This sect lasted a long time, and spread much

called from Montanus, who embraced Chris- in Phrygia and the neighbouring districts,

tianity in the second centuiy. He professed whence they were called Phryges and Cata-

to be inspired in a peculiar way by the Holy phryges. and latterly adopted the errors of

Ghost, and to prophesy. He was supported Sabellius respecting the Trinity,
in his errors by two women, Priscilla and

Maximilla, who also pretended to prophesy. The other heresies mentioned in this canon

His heresy infected man}- persons, amongst have been treated of in the excursus to Canon j.


EXCURSUS ON THE AUTHORITY OF THE SECOND ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.

(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. IL, pp. 370, et seqq.)

Lastly, to turn to the question of the authority of this Council, it appeal's, first of aU,
that immediately after its close, in the same year, 381, several of its acts were censured by a
Council of Latins, namely, the prolongation of the Meletian schism (by the elevation of
Flavian), and the choice of Nectarius as Bishop of Constantinoi:)le, while, as is known, the
Westerns held (the Cynic) Maximus to be the rightful bishop of that city.

In consequence of this, the new Synod assembled in the following year, 382, at Con-
stantinople, sent the Latins a copy of the decrees of faith composed the year before, expressly
calling this Synod oiKovixeiiKy and at the same time seeking to justify it in those points which
had been censured. Photius ' maintains that soon afterwards Foye Damasus confirmed this
synod ; but, as the following will show, this confirmation could only have referred to the creed
and not to the canons. As late as about the middle of the fifth century. Pope Leo I. spoke
in a very depreciatory manner of these canons, especially of the third, which concerned the
ecclesiastical rank of Constantinople, remarking that it was never sent to the See of Rome.
Still later, Gregory the Great wrote in the same sense : liomana autem Ecclesia eosdam
canones vel gesta Si/nodi illius hactenus non habet, nee accepit ; in hoc autem cam accepit, quod
est per cam contra Macedonium definitum}

Thus, as late as the year 600, only the creed, but not the canons of the Synod of Con-
stantinople were accepted at Rome ; but on account of its creed, Gregory the Great reckons
it as one of the four Ecumenical Councils, which he compares to the four Gospels. So also
before him the popes Vigilius and Pelagius II, reckoned this Synod among the Ecumenical
Councils.

The question is, from what date the Council of Constantinople was considered ecumeni-
cal by the Latins as well as by the Greeks. We will begin with the latter. Although as
we have seen, the Synod of 382 had already designated this council as ecumenical, yet it
could not for a long time obtain an equal rank with the Council of Nicfea, for which reason
the General Council of Ephesus mentions that of Nicjea and its creed witli the greatest
respect, but is totally silent as to this Synod. Soon afterwards, the so-called Robber-Synod
in 449, spoke of two (General) Councils, at Nicsea and Ephesus, and designated the latter
as ^ hivripa (ruVoSos, as a plain token that it did not ascribe such a high rank to the assembly

' PhotiuB, he SynodU. p. 1143, ed. Justelli. " Greg., Epist., Lib. I., 2.5.


I. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 381 187


at Constantinople. It might perhaps be objected that only the Monophysites, who notori-
ously ruled the Robber-Syuod, used this language ; but the most determined opponent of
the Monophysites, their accuser, Bishop Eusebius of Doylseum, in like manner also brought
forward only the two Synods of Nicsea and Ephesus, and declared that " he held to the faith
of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers assembled at Nicsea, and to all that was done at
the great and Holy Synod at Ephesus."

The Creed of Constantinople appears for the first time to have been highly honoured at
the fourth General Council, which had it recited after that of Nicsea, and thus solemnly
approved it. Since then this Sj'nod has been universally honoured as ecumenical by the
Greeks, and was mentioned by the Emperor Justinian with the Councils of Nicaea, Ephesus,
and Chalcedon, as of equal rank.^

But in the West, and especially in Rome, however satisfied people were with the decree
of faith enacted by this Synod, and its completion of the creed, yet its thii'd canon, respect-
ing the rank of Constantinople, for a long time j) roved a hindrance to its acknowledgment.
This was especially shown at the Council of Chalcedon, and during the time immediately
following. When at that Council the creed of Constantinople was praised, rej^eated, and
confirmed the Papal Legates fully concurred ; but when the Council also renewed and con-
firmed the third canon of Constantinople, the Legates left the assembly, lodged a protest
against it on the following day, and declared that the rules of the hundred and fifty bishops
at Constantinople were never inserted among the Synodal canons (which were recognised at
Rome). The same was mentioned by Pope Leo himself, who, immediately after the close of
the Council of Chalcedon wrote to Bishop Anatolius of Constantinojile : " that document of
certain bishops (i.e. the third canon of Constantinople) was never brought by your predeces-
sors to the knowledge of the Ai:)ostolic See." - Leo also, in his lOStli letter to the Emj^ress
Pulcheria, speaks just as depreciatingly' of this Council of Constantinople ; and Quesnel is
entirely wrong in maintaining that the Papal Legates at the Synod of Chalcedon at first
practically acknowledged the validity of the third canon of Constantinople. Bishop Euse-
bius of Doylseum was equally mistaken in maintaining at Chalcedon itself, that the third
canon had been sanctioned by the Pope ; and we shall have occasion further on, in the
history of the Council of Chalcedon, to show the untenable character of both statements.

Pope Felix III. took the same view as Pope Leo, when, in his letter to the monks at
Constantinople and Bithynia in 485, he only spoke of three General Councils at Nicsea,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon ; neither did his successor Gelasius (492-490) in his genuine decree,
De libris rccipiendis, mention this Synod. It may certainly be said, on the other hand, that
in the sixth century its ecumenical character had come to be most distinctly acknoAvledged
in the Latin Church also, and, as we have seen above, had been expressly affirmed by the
Popes Vigilius, Pelagius II., and Gregory the Great. But this acknowledgment, even when
it is not expressly stated, only referred to the deci'ees on faith of the Council of Constanti-
nople, and not to its canons, as we have already observed in reference to the third and sixth
of them.

1 In his edict against the Three Chapters. ' Leo, £pist. cvi. n., ed. Ballerini, t. i., p. 1165.


COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

A.D. 382.
THE SYNODICAL LETTER.'

To the ri^ht Louonrable lords our ri-^lit revereml brethren antl colleagues, Damasus,
Ambrosius, Eritton, Yaleriaims, Ascholius, Anemius, Basilius aud the rest of the holj
bishops assembled in the great city of Rome, the hoi}' synod of the orthodox bishops
assembled at the great city of Constantinople sends greeting in the Lord.

To recount all tlie sufferings inflicted on us by the poAver of the Arians, and to attempt
to give information to yoiir reverences, as though you were not already well acquainted
with them, might seem superfluous. For we do not suppose your piety to hold what is
befalling us as of such secondary importance as that you stand in any need of informa-
tion on matters which cannot but evoke 3'our sym]:)athy. Nor indeed were the storms
which beset us such as to escape notice from their insignificance. Our persecutions are
but of yesterday. The sound of them still rings in the ears alike of those who suffered
them and of those whose love made the sufferers' pain their own. It was but a day or
two ago, so to speak, that some releascxl from chains in foreign lauds returned to
their own churches through manifold afflictions ; of others who had died in exile the
relics were brought home ; others again, even after their return from exile, found the
passion of the heretics still at the boiling heat, and, slain by them with stones as was
the Ijlessed Stephen, met with a sadder fate in their own than in a stranger's land.
Others, worn away with various cruelties, still l)car m their bodies the scars of their
wounds and the marks of Christ. Who could tell the tale of fines, of disfranchisements,
of individual confiscations, of intrigues, of outrages, of prisons? In truth all kinds of
tribulation were wrought out beyond number in us, i)erhai)s because we were paying the
penalty of sins, perhaps because the merciful God was trying us by means of the nmlti-
tude of our sufferings. For these all thanks to God, who by means of such afflictions
trained his servants and, according to the multitude of his mercies, brought us again
to refreshment. We indeed needed long leisure, time, and toil to restore the church
once more, that so, like physicians healing the body after long sickness and ex})elling
its disease b}' gradual treatment, we might bring her back to her ancient health of true
religion. It is true that on the whole we seem to have been delivered from the violence
of our persecutions and to be just now recovering the churches which have for a long
time been the prey of the heretics. But wolves are troublesome to us who, thouirh
they have been driven from the fold, yet harry the flock u]i and down the glades, daring
to hold rival assemblies, stirring seditions among the peo})le, and shrinking from nothing
which can do damage to the churches. So, as we have already said, we needs must labour
all the longer. Since, however, you showed your lirotherly love to us by inviting us (as
though we were your own members) by the letters of our most religious emjieror to the
synod which you are gathering by divine permission at Rome, to the end that since we
alone were then condemned to suffer persecution, you should not now, when our emper-
ors are at one with us as to triie religion, reign a])art from us, })ut that we, to use the
xVpostle's phrase, should reign with you, our prayer was, if it were possible, all in com-
pany to leave our churches, aud rather gratify our longing to see you than consult their
needs. For who will give us wings as of a dove, and we will fly and be at rest? But
this course seemed likely to leave the churches who were just recov(U'ing (|uit(> unde-
fended, and the undertaking was to most of us impossible, for, in accordanc(i with the let-
ters sent a year ago from your holiness after the synod at Acpiileia to the most ])ious
emperor Theodosius, we had journeyed to Constantinople, equipped only for travelling


' Foand in Theod., IT. R. v. 9. The reader i;^ ^^urll(•(i ag:iiu!-t iiKucurate tranelations of the dogmatic portions.


CONSTANTINOPLP:. A.D. 382 189

so far as Constantinople, and brinfjjiiig the consent of the bishops remaining in the prov-
inces of this synod alone. We had been in no expectation of any longer jonrney nor
had heard a word abont it, before our arrival at Constantinople. In addition to all
this, and on account of the narrow limits of the appointed time which allowed of no prep-
aration for a longer journey, nor of communicating with the bishops of our communion
in the provinces and of obtaining their consent, the journey to Home was for the major-
ity impossible. We have therefore adopted the next best course open to us under the
circumstances, both for the better administration of the church, and for manifesting our
love tow^ards you, by strongly urging our most venerated, and honoured colleagues and
brother bishops Cyriacus, Eusebius and Priscianus, to consent to travel to you.

Through them we wish to make it plain that our disposition is all for peace with unity
for its sole object, and that we are full of zeal for the right faith. For we, whether we
suffered persecutions, or afflictions, or the threats of emperors, or the cruelties of princes,
or any other trial at the hands of heretics, have undergone all for the sake of the evan-
gelic faith, ratified by the three hundred and eighteen fathers at Nicsea in Bithynia.
This is the faith Avhich ought to be sufflcient for you, for us, for all who wrest not the
word of the true faith ; for it is the ancient faith ; it is the faith of our baptism ; it is
the faith that teaches us to believe in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. According to this faith there is one Godhead, Power and Substance of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ; the dignity being ecpial, and the majesty being
equal in three perfect hypostases, i.e. three perfect persons. Thus there is no room
for the heresy of Sabellius by the confusion of the h^'postases, i.e. the destruction of the
personalities ; thus the blasphemy of theEunoraians, of the Arians, and of thePneumato-
maclii is nullified, which divides the substance, the nature, and the godhead, and super-
induces on the uncreated consubstantial and co-eternal Trinity a nature posterior, created
and of a different substance. We moreover preserve unperverted the doctrine of the
incarnation of the Lord, holding the tradition that the dispensation of the flesh is neither
soulless nor mindless nor imperfect ; and knowing full well that God's Word was perfect
before the ages, and became perfect man in the last days for our salvation.

Let this suffice for a summary of the doctrine which is fearlessly and frankly preached
by us, and concerning which you will be able to be still further satisfied if you will deign
to read the tome of the synod of Antioch, and also that tome issued last year by the
Ecumenical Council held at Constantinople, in which we have set forth our confession
of the faith at greater length, and have appended an anathema against the heresies which
innovators have recently inscribed.

Now as to the particular administration of individual churches, an ancient custom, as
you know% has obtained, confirmed by the enactment of the holy fathers of Nicsea, that in
every province, the bishops of the province, and, with their consent, the neighbouring bish-
ops with them, should perform ordinations as expediency may require. In conforming
with these customs note that other churches have been administered by us and the jjriests
of the most famous churches publicly appointed. Accordingly over the new made (if the
expression be allowable) church at Constantinople, which, as though from a lion's mouth,
we have lately snatched by God's mercy from the blasphemy of the heretics, we have or-
dained bishop the right reverend and most religious Nectarius, in the presence of the Ecu-
menical Council, with common consent, before the most religious emperor Theodosius, and
with the assent of all the clergy and of the whole city. And over the most ancient and
truly apostolic church in Syria, where first the noble name of Christians was given them,
the bisho]3S of the province and of the eastern diocese have met together and canonically
ordained bishop the right reverend and most religious Flavianus, with the consent of all
the church, who as though with one voice joined in expressing their respect for him.
This rightful ordination also received the sanction of the General Council. Of the church
at Jerusalem, mother of all the churches, we make known that the right reverend and
most religious Cyril is bishop, who was some time ago canonically ordained by the bish-
ops of the province, and has in several places fought a good fight against the Arians.
We beseech your reverence to rejoice at what has thus been rightly and canonically set-
tled by us, by the intervention of spiritual love and by the influence of the fear of the


190 COXSTANTINOPLK. A.D. 382


Lord, compelliug the feolinj^s of meu, aud making the edificatiou of churches of more
importance than individual grace or favour. Thus since among us there is agi'eement
in the faith aud Christian charity has been established, we shall cease to use the phrase
condemned by the aj^ostles, I am of Paul and I of A]>ollos and I of Cephas, and all
ap])earing as Christ's, who in us is not divided, by God's grace we will keep the body
of the church uurent, and will boldly stand at the judgment seat of the Lord.


k


THE THIRD ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE COUNCIL OF EPHESUS.


A.D. 431

Emperors. — Theodosius II. and Valentinian III.
Fope. — Celestine I.


Elenchus.


Historical Introduction.


Note on the Emperor s Edict to the Synod.

Extracts from the Acts, Session I.

St. CyriVs Letter to Nestorius, Intelligo
quos clam.

Continuation of Session I.

Historical Introduction to CyriVs Anathe-
matisms.

The Canonical Epistle of St. Cyril, Cum
Salvator noster.

The XII. Anathematisms of St. Cyril, and
Nestorins's Counter - anathematisms, ivith
Notes.

Excursus to Anath. I, On the ivord ®^ot6-

KOS.

Excursus to Analh. IX., On hmo our
Lord worJced Miracles, ivith Theodorefs
Counter-statement.

Extracts from the Acts, Session I. continued.


Decree against Nestorius, loith Notes.

Extracts from the Acts, Session II.

St. Celestine's Letter to the Synod.

Continuation of Session II.

Session III.

The Canons, luith the Ancient Epitome, and
Notes.

Excursus to Canon j.. On the Concilialm-
lum ff John of Antioch.

Excursus to Canon iv.. On Pelagianism.

Excursus to Canon vii.. On the luords
iriiTTLv kripav.

A Letter from the Synod to the Synod in
Pamphylia.

The Letter of the Synod to Pope Celes-
tine.

The Definition against the 3Iessalians,
ivith Notes.

The Decree re E^iprepius and Cyril.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

(Bossuet, Def. Cler. Gall., Lib. vij., Cap. ix. el .sajij. Abridged. Translation by Allies.)
The innovation of Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, is known ; how he divided into
two the person of Christ. Pojje St. Celestine, watchful, according to his ofidce, over the
affairs of the Church, had char'ied the blessed Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, to send him a
certain report of the doctrine of Nestorius, already in bad repute. Cyril declares this in liis
letter to Nestorius ; and so he writes to Celestine a complete account, and sets forth the
doctrines of Nestorius and his own ; he sends him two letters from himself to Nestorius,
who likewise, by his own letters and explanations, endeavoured to draw Celestine to his side.
Thus the holy Pontitl", having been most fully informed by letters from both sides, is thus
inquired of by Cyril. " We have not confidently abstained from Communion with him (Nes-
torius) before informing you of this ; condescend, therefore, to unfold your judgment, that
we may clearly know whether we ought to communicate with him who cherishes such erro-
neous doctrine." And he adds, that his judgment should be written to the other Bishops
also, " that all with one mind may hold firm in one sentence." Here is the Apostolic See
manifestly consulted by so great a man, presiding over the second, or at least the third,
Patriarchal See, and its judgment awaited ; and nothing remained but that Celestine, being
duly consulted, should perform his AjDostolic ofiice. But how he did this, the Acts have
shewn. In those Acts he not only approves the letters and doctrine of Cyril, but disap-
proves, too, the perverse dogma of Nestoriu.s, and that distinctly, because he was un\\-illing
to call the blessed Virgin Mother of God : and he decrees that he should be deprived of the
Episcopate and Communion unless, within ten days from the date of the announcing of the
sentence, he openly rejects this faithless innovation, which endeavours to separate what
Scripture joineth together — that is, the Person of Christ. Here is the doctrine of Nestorius
expressly disapproved, and a sentence of the Roman Pontiff on a matter of Faith most
clearly pronovinced under threat of deposition and excommunication : then, that nothing be
wanting, the holy Pope commits his authority to Cyril to carry into execution that sentence
" associating," he saitli to Cyril, " the authority of our See, and using our person, and place,
with power." So to Cyril ; so to Nestorius himself; so to the clergy of ConstantinoiDle ; so
to John of Antioch, then the Bishop of the third or fourth Patriarchal See ; so to Juvenal,
Bishop of the Holy City, Avhom the Council of Nice had ordered to be especially honoured :
so he writes to the other Bishoi:)S also, that the sentence given may be duly and in order
made known to all. Cyril proceeds to execute his office, and performs all that he had been
commanded. He promulgates and executes the decrees of Celestine ; dechires to Nestorius,
that after the ten days prescribed and set forth by Celestine, he would have no portion,
intercourse, or place with the priesthood. Nothing evidently is wanting to the Apostolical
authority being most fully exercised.

But Nestorius, bishop of the royal city, possessed such influence, had deceived men's
minds with sutdi an ai)pcarance of piety, had gained so many bishops and enjoyed such
favour with the younger Theodosius and the great men, that he could easily throw every-
thing into commotion ; and thus thei'e was- need of an Ecumenical Council, the question
being most important, and the person of the highest dignity ; because many bishops,
amongst these almost all of the East — that is, of the Patriarchate of Antioch, and the Patri-
arch John himself — were ill disposed to Cyril, and seemed to favour Nestorius : because
men's feelings were divided, and the whole empire of the East seemed to Ihictuate between
Cyril and Nestorius. Such was the need of an Ecumenical Council.

The Emperor, moved by these and otlior reasons, wrote to Cyril, — " It is our will that the


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 193


lioly doctrine be discussed and examined iu a sacred Synod, and that be ratified which ap-
peareth agreeable to the right faith, whether the wrong party be pardoned by the Fathers
or no."

Here we see three things : First, after the judgment of St. Celestine, another is still
required, that of the Council ; secondly, that these two things would rest with the Fathers,
to judge of doctrine and of persons ; thirdly, that the judgment of the Council would be
decisive and final.

He adds, " those who eveiywhere preside over the Priesthood, and through whom we our-
selves are and shall be professing the truth, must be judges of this matter." See on whose
faith we rest. See in whose judgment is the final and irreversible authority.

Both the Emperor affirmed, and the bishojDS confessed, that this was done according to
the Ecclesiastical Canons. And so all, and Celestine himself, prepared themselves for the
Council. Cyril does no more, though named by Celestine to execute the pontifical decree.
Nestorius remained in his original rank ; the sentence of the universal Council is awaited ;
and the Emperor had expressly decreed, " that before the assembling and common sentence
of the most holy Council, no change should be made in any matter at all, on any private
authority." Rightly, and in order ; for this was demanded by the majesty of an univer-
sal Council. Wherefore, both Cyril obeyed and the bishops rested. And it was established,
that although the sentence of the Roman Pontiff on matters of Faith, and on persons judged
for violation of the Faith, had been passed and promulged, all was suspended, while the
authority of the universal Council was awaited.

Having gone over what preceded the Council, we review the acts of the Council itself,
and begin with the first course of proceeding. After, therefore, the bishops and Nestorius
himself wei'e come to Ephesus, the universal Council began, Cyril being president, and rep-
resenting Celestine, as being apjiointed by the Pontiff himself to execute his sentence. In
the first course of proceeding this was done. First, the above-mentioned letter of the Em-
peror was read, that an Ecumenical Council should be held, and all proceedings in the
mean time be suspended ; this letter, I say, was read, and placed on the Acts, and it was ap-
proved by the Fathers, that all the decrees of Celestine in the matter of Nestorius had been
suspended until the holy Council should give its sentence. You wiU ask if it was the wiU
of the Council merely that the Emperor should be allowed to prohibit, in the interim, effect
being given to the sentence of the Apostolic See. Not so, according to the Acts ; but
rather, by the intervention of a General Council's authority (the convocation of which, ac-
cording to the discipline of those times, was left to the Emperor), the Council itself under-
stood that all proceedings were of course suspended, and dej)ended on the sentence of the
Council. Wherefore, though the decree of the Pontiff had been promulged and notified, and
the ten days had long been past, Nestorius was held by the Council itself to be a bishop, and
called by the name of most religious bishop, and by that name, too, thrice cited and sum-
moned to take his seat with the other bishops in the holy Council ; for this expression, " to
take his seat," is distinctly written ; and it is added, "in order to answer to what was
charged against him." For it was their full purpose that he should recognise in whatever
way, the Ecumenical Council, as he would then afterwards be, beyond doubt, answerable to
it ; but he refused to come, and chose to have his doors besieged with an armed force, that
no one might approach him.

Thereupon, as the Emperor commanded, and the Canons required, the rule of Faith was
set forth, and the Nicene Creed read, as the standard to which all should be referred, and
then the letters of Cyril and Nestorius were examined in order. The letter of Cyril was first
brought before the judgment of the Council. That letter, I mean, concerning the Faith, to
Nestorius, so expressly approved by Pope Celestine, of which he had declared to Cyril, " We


194 EPHESUS. A.D. 431


see tliat you hold and maintain all that -we hold and maintain '" ; which, by the decree against
Nestorius, published to all Chui-ches, he had approved, and wishes to be considered as a
canonical monition against Nestorius : that letter. I repeat, was examined, at the jn-oposition
of Cyril himself, in these words : " I am persuaded tJiat I have in nothing departed from
the orthodox Faith, or the Nicene Creed ; wherefore I beseech your Holiness to set forth
openly whether I have written this correctly, blamelessly, and in accordance with that
holy Council."

And are there those who say that questions concerning the Faith, once judged by the
Eoman Pontitf on his Apostolical authority, are examined in general Councils, in order to
understand their contents, but not to decide on their substance, as being still a matter of
question ? Let them heai- Cyril, the President of the Council : let them attend to what he
proposes for the inquiiy of the Council ; and though he were conscious of no error in him-
self yet, not to trust himself, he asked for the sentence of the Council in these words —
" whether I have written correctly and blamelessly, or not." This Cyiil, the chief of the
Council, proposes for their consideration. Who ever even heard it whispered that, after a
final and ii-revei-sible judgment of the Church on a matter of Faith, any such inquiry or
question was made ? It was never done, for that would be to doubt about the Faith itself,
when declared and discussed. But this was done after the judgment of Pope Celestine ;
neither Cvi-il, nor anvone else, thought of anv other course : that, therefore, was uot a tinal
and iiTeversible judgment.

In answer to this question the Fathers in order give their judgment — " that the Nicene
Creed, and the letter of Cyi-il, in all things agree and harmonise." Here is inquiry and ex-
amination, and then judgment. The Acts speak for themselves — we say not here a word.

Next that letter of Xestorius was produced, which Celestine had pronounced blasphe-
mous and impious. It is read : then at the instance of Cyril it is examined, " whether this,
too, be agreeable to the Faith set foi-th bv the holv Council of the Xicene Fathers, or not."'
It is precisely the same form according to which Cyril's letter was examined. The Fathers,
in order, give judgment that it disagreed from the Xicene Creed, and was, therefore, censur-
able. The letter of Nestorius is disapproved in the same manner, by the same mle, by
which that of Cyril was approved. Here, twice in the same proceeding of the Council of
Ephesus, a judgment of the Koman Pontiff concerning the Catholic Faith, uttered and pub-
lished, is reconsidered. "What he had approved, and what he had disapproved, is equally
examined, and, only after examination, confirmed.

In the mean time, the bishops Arcadius and Projectus, and the presbyter Philip, had been
chosen by Celestine to be present at the Council of Ephesus, with a special commission
from the Apostolic See, and the whole Council of the "West. So they come from Rome to
Ephesus, and appear at the holy Council, and here the second procedure commences.

After reading the letter of Celestine, the Legates, in pursuance, say to the bishops :
"Let your HoUness consider the form of the letters of the holy and venerable Pope Celes-
tine the Bishop, who hath exhorted your Holiness, not as instnicting those who are igno-
rant, but as reminding those who are aware : in order that you may command to be com-
pletely and finally .settled according to the Canon of our common Faith, and the utility of
the Catholic Church, what he has before determined, and has now the goodness to remind
you of." This is the advantage of a Council ; after whose sentence there is no new discus-
sion, or new judgment, but merely execution. And this the Legates request to be com-
manded by the Council, in which they recognise that supreme authority.

It behoved, also, that the Legates, sent to the Council on a special mission, should
understand whether the proceedings against Nestorius had been i)ursued according to the
requisition of the Canons, and due respect to the Apostolic See. This we have already often


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 195


said. Wherefore, with reason, thej require the Acts to be communicated, " that we, too,"
say thev, "may confirm them."' The proceedings themselves will declare what that confirma-
tion means. After that, at the request of the Legates, the Acts against Nestorius were given
them, they thus report about them at the third procedure : " We have found all things
judged canonically, and according to the Church's discipline." Therefore judgments of the
Apostolic See are canonically and, according to the Church's discipline, reconsidered, after
deliberation, in a General Council, and judgment passed uj^on them. After the Legates had
ajjproved the Acts against Nestorius communicated to them, they request that all which had
been read and done at Ephesus from the beginning, should be read afresh in public Ses-
sion, " in oi-der," they say, " that obeying the form of the most holy Pope Celestine, who
hath committed this care to us, we may be enabled to confirm the judgment also of your
Holiness." After these all had been read afresh, and the Legates agreed to them, Cyril pro-
poses to the holy Council, " That the Legates, by their signature, as was customaiy, should
make plain and manifest their canonical agreement with the Council." To this question of
Cyril the Council thus answers, and decrees that the Legates, by their subscrij^tion, confirm
the Acts ; by which i>lace this confirmation, spoken of by the Council, is clearly nothing else
but to make their assent plain and manifest, as Cyinl proj)osed.

Fiuallv, Celestine himseK, after the conclusion of the whole matter, sends a letter to the
holy Council of Ephesus, which he thus begins : " At length we must rejoice at the conclu-
sion of evils. " The learned reader understands where he recognizes the conclusion ; that is,
after the condemnation of Nestorius by the infallible authority of an Ecumenical Council,
viz., of the whole Catholic Chui'ch. He proceeds : "We see, that you, vdth us, have executed
this matter so faithfully transacted." All decree, and all execute, that is, by giving a com-
mon judgment. Whence Celestine adds, " We have been informed of a just dej)osition, and
a still juster exaltation : " the deposition of Nestorius, begun, indeed, by the Roman See, but
brought to a conclusion by the sentence of the Council ; to a full and complete settlement,
as we have seen above : the exaltation of Maximianus, who was substituted in place of Nes-
torius immediately after the Ephesine decrees ; this is the conclusion of the question. Even
Celestine himself recognises this conclusion to lie not in his own examination and judg-
ment, but in that of an Ecumenical Council. And this was done in that Council in which it
is admitted that the authority of the Aj^ostolic See was most clearly set forth, not only by
words, but by deeds, of any since the birth of Christ. At least the Holy Council gives cre-
dence to Philip utteiing these true and magnificent encomiums, concerning the dignity of
the Apostolic See, and "Peter the head and pillar of the Faith, and foundation of the Catho-
lic Chui-ch, and by Christ's authority administering the keys, who to this very time lives
ever, and exercises judgment, in his successors." This, he says, after having seen all the
Acts of the Council itself, which we have mentioned, so that we may indeed understand, that
all these privileges of Peter and the Apostolic See entirely agree vrith the decrees of the
Council, and the judgment entered into afresh, and deliberation upon matters of Faith held
after the Apostolic See.


NOTE ON THE EMPEROR'S EDICT TO THE SYNOD.

Neither of the Emperors coukl personally attend the Council of Ephesus and accord-
ingly Theodosius IL, appointed the Count Candidian, Captain of the imperial bodyguard, the
protector of the council, to sit in the room of the EmiDerors. In making this appointment
he addressed an edict to the synod which will be found in the Concilia and of which Hefele
gives the following synopsis.

(Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol III., p. 43.)
Candidian is to take no immediate part in the discussions on contested points of faith,
for it is not becoming that one who does not belong to the number of the bishops should
mix himself up in the examination and decision of theological controversies. On the con-
trary, Candidian was to remove from the city the monks and laymen who had come or
should afterwards come to Ephesus out of curiosity, so that disorder and confusion should
not be caused by those who were in no way needed for the examination of the sacred doc-
trines. He was, besides, to watch lest the discussions among the members of the S^Tiod
themselves should degenerate into violent disputes and hinder the more exact investigation
of truth ; and, on the contrary, see that every statement should be heard with attention, and
that every one jiut forward in view, or his objections, without let or hindrance, so that at
last an unanimous decision might be arrived at in peace by the holy Synod. But above all,
Candidian was to take care that no member of the Synod should attempt, before the close
of the transactions, to go home, or to the court, or elsewhere. Moreover, he was not to allow
that any other matter of controversy should be taken into consideration before the settle-
ment of the principal point of doctrine before the Council.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I.

[Befo^'e the arrival of tJte Papal Legates.']


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia

The Nicene Synod set forth this faith :

We believe in one God, etc.

When this creed had been recited, Peter
the Presbyter of Alexandria, and primicer-
ius of the notaries said :

We have in our hands the letter of the
most holy and most reverend archbishop
Cyril, which he wrote to the most reverend


, Tom. III., col. 459 et seqq.)

Nestorius, filled with counsel and advice,
on account of his aberration from the right
faith. I will read this if your holiness
[i.e., the holy Synod] so orders. . . .
The letter beG;an as follows :

KaTa({)\vapovcn jjuev, 0)9 aKovoo, k t. \.

Intelligo quosdam mese, etc.


THE EPISTLE OF CYRIL TO NESTORIUS.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 315 ; Migne, Patr. Grcec, Tom.
LXXVII. [Cyril., Opera, Tom. X.]; Epist. iv., col. 43.)


To the most religious and beloved of
God, fellow minister Nestorius, Cyril sends
greeting in the Lord,

I hear that some are rashly talking of


a brother in the Lord, to propose the word
of teaching and the doctrine of the faith
with all accuracy to the people, and to con-
sider that the giving of scandal to one even


the estimation in which I hold your holi- of the least of those who believe in Christ,
ness, and that this is frequently the case exposes a body to the unbearable indigna-
especially at the times that meetings are j tion of God. And of how great diligence
held of those in authority. And perchance and skill there is need when the multitude
they think in so doing to say something of those grieved is so great, so that we
agreeable to you, but they speak senseless- may administer the healing word of truth to
ly, for they have suffered no injustice at ; them that seek it. But this we shall ac-
my hands, but have been exposed by me complish most excellently if we shall turn
only to their profit ; this man as an oppress- i over the words of the holy Fathers, and are
or of the blind and needy, and that as one zealous to obey their commands, proving


who wounded his mother with a sword.
Another because he stole, in collusion with
his waiting maid, another's money, and had


ourselves, whether we be in the faith ac-
cording to that which is written, and con-
form our thoughts to their upright and ir-


always laboured under the imputation of reprehensible teaching,
such like crimes as no one would wish even : The holy and great Synod therefore says,
one of his bitterest enemies to be laden | that the only begotten Son, born according
with.' I take little reckoning of the words to nature of God the Father, very God of
of such people, for the disciple is not very God, Light of Light, by whom the
above his Master, nor would I stretch the Father made all things, came down, and


measure of my narrow brain above the
Fathers, for no matter what path of life one
pursues it is hardly possible to escape the
smirching of the wicked, whose mouths are
full of cursing and bitterness, and who at the
last must give an account to the Judge of all.
But I return to the point which especial


was incarnate, and was made man, suffered,
and rose again the third day, and as-
cended into heaven. These words and
these decrees we ought to follow, consider-
ing what is meant by the Word of God be-
ing incarnate and made man. For we do
not sav that the nature of the Word was


ly I had in mind. And now I urge you, as changed and became flesh, or that it was


' Rohrbacher, in his famous Histoire Universelle de Vh'h'ne
Catholiqxie, Tome TV. (Septieme Edition), Livre xsxix., p. 394, in-
forms us that this letter gives the names of some of Cyril's calum-


niators ! The text he used must have been different from the
one now accessible to scholars.


198


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


converted into a whole man consisting of
soul and body ; but rather that the Word
having" persDnally united to liiiiiself tiesh
animated by a rational soul, did in an in-
eft'able and inconceivable manner become
man, and was called the Son of Man, not
merely as willini;" or beiii^t;' ))leased to be so
called, neither on account of taking to him-
self a person, but because the two natures
being brought together in a true union,
there is of both one Christ and one Son ;
for the ditierence of the natures is not taken
away by the union, but rather the divinity
and the humanity make Y^crfect for us the
one Lord Jesus Christ by their ineffable and
inexi)ressible union. So then he who had
an existence before all ages and was born
of the Father, is said to have been born ac-
cording to the flesh of a woman, not as
though his divine nature received its begin-
ning oH existence in the holy Virgin, for it \
needed not any second generation after that I
of tlu' Father (for it would be absurd and
foolish to say that he who existed before all
ages, coeternal with the Father, needed any
second beginning of existence), but since, \
for us and for our salvation, he personally
united to himself an human body, and came
forth of a woman, he is in this way said to
be born after the flesh ; for he was not first
born a common man of the holy Yirgin, ;
and then the Word came doAvn and entered \
into him, but the union being made in the
womb itself, he is said to endure a birth
after the fiesh, ascribing to himself the birth

* • I

of his own flesh. On this account we say
that he suffered and rose again ; not as if
God the AVord suffered in his own nature
stripes, or the piercing of the nails, or any
other wounds, for the Divine nature is in-
capable of sufiering, inasmuch as it is incor-
poreal, but since that which had become his
own body suffered in this way, he is also
said to suffer for us ; for he avIio is in him-
self incnpable of suffering was in a sufier-
ing body. In the same manner also we
conceive respecting his dying ; for the Word
of God is by nature immortal and incor-
ru])tible, and life and life-giving; since,
however, his own body did, as Paul says, by
the grace of God taste ih^ath for every man,
he himself is said to have suft'ered death for
\ts,n()tas if he had any experience of death
in his own nature (for it would be madness
to say or think this), but because, as I have


just said, his flesh tasted death. In like
manner his flesh being raised again, it is
spoken of as his u'surrection, not as if he
had fallen into corruption (God forbid i, but
because his own body was raised again.
We, therefore, confess one Christ and Lord,
not as AV()rslii))ping a man iri//i the Word
(lest this expression " with the A\'ord "
should suggest to the mind the idea of di-
vision), but worship] )ing him as one and
the same, foi'asniuch as the Ixxly of the Word,
with which he sits with the Fatlier, is not sep-
arated from the Word liimself, not as if two
i^ons were sitting with him, but one by the
union with the fiesh. If, however, Ave reject
the personal union as impossible or unbe-
' coming, Ave fall into the error of speaking
of two sons, for it will be necessary to dis-
tinguish, and to say, that he Avho Avas prop-
erl}' man Avas honoured with the n])pella-
tion of Son, and that he who is proj)erly the
AVord of God, has by nature both the name
and the reality of Sonship. We must not,
therefore, divide the one Jjord Jesus Christ
into tAvo Sons. Neither Avill it at all avail
to a sound faith to hold, as some do, an
union of persons ; for the Scrijiture has not
said that the AA'ord united to himself the
person of man, but that he Avas made fiesh.
This expressicm, hoAvcAX'r, "the AVord Avas
made fiesh," can mean nothing else but
that he partook of flesh and blood like
to us ; he made our body his OAvn, and
came forth man from a Avoman, not casting
oft" his existence as God, or his generation
of God tli<; Father, but even in taking to
himself flesh i-emaining Avhat he was. This
the declaration of the correct faith pro-
claims everyAvhere. This Avas the senti-
ment of the holy Fathers ; therefore they
ventured to call the holy A irgin, the AFother
of God, not as if the nature of the A\ ord or
his divinity had its beginning from the holy
A^irgin, but because of her Avas born that
holy body Avith a rational soul, to which the
Word being ])ersonally united is said to bo
born according to the flesh. These things,
therefore, I now Avrite unto yon for the love
of Christ, besecH'hing you as a bi-other, and
testifyiug to you befort^ Christ and the
elect angels, that you Avould both think and
teach these things Avitli us, that the ])eace
(^f the Churcln^s may be ])reserved and the
bond of concord and loA'e continue unbrok-
en amongst the Priests of God.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I. (Continued).
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 462.)


And after the letter was read, Cyril, the
bishop of Alexandria, said : This holy and
great Synod has heard what I wrote to the
most religious Nestorius, defending the
right faith. I think that I have in no re-
spect departed from the true statement of
the faith, that is from the creed set forth by
the holy and great synod formerly assem-
bled at Nice. Wherefore I desire your
holiness [i.e. the Council] to say whether
rightly and blamelessly and in accordance
with that holy s^'nod I have written these
things or no.

\_A number of bishops tlien gave their
opinion, all favourable to Cyril ; after these
individual opinions the Acts continue (col.
491):]

And all the rest of the bishops in the
order of their rank deposed to the same
things, and so believed, according as the
Fathers had set forth, and as the E})istle of
the most holy Archbishop Cyril to Nes-
torius the bishop declared.

Palladius, tlie bishop of Amasea, said.
The next thing to be done is to read the let-
ter of the most reverend Nestorius, of
which the most religious presbyter Peter
made mention ; so that we may understand
Avhether or no it agrees with the exposition '
of the Nicene fathers. ...

And after this letter was read, Cyril, the
bishop of Alexandria, said, What seems
good to this holy and great synod with re-
gard to the letter just read? Does it also^


seem to be consonant to the faith set forth
by the holy Synod assembled in the city of
Nice?

[The bishops, then as before, individually
express their opinion, and at last the Acts
continue (col. 502) :]

All the bishops cried out together :
Whoever does not anathematize Nestorius
let him be anathema. Such an one the
right faith anathematizes ; such an one
the hoi}' Synod anathematizes. Whoever
communicates Avith Nestorius let him be
anathema ! We anathematize all the apos-
tles of Nestorius : we all anathematize Nes-
torius as a heretic : let all such as commu-
nicate Avith Nestorius be anathema, etc., etc.

Juvenal, the bishop of Jerusalem said :
Let the letter of the most holy and rever-
end Cselestine, archbishop of the Church of
Rome, be read, which he wTote concerning
the faith.

[Tlie letter of Ccelestine was read and no
opinion expressed.^

Peter the presbyter of Alexandi'ia, and
primicerius of the notaries said : Altogether
in agreement with the things just read are
those which his holiness Cyril our most
pious bishop wrote, which I now have at
hand, and Avill read if your piety so shall
order.

[The letter was read which begins thus :]

Tov Hcorrjpo^ rjficov Xejovro^ evap<yoi^, k.

T. A,.

Cum Salvator noster, etc.


HISTOEICAL INTRODUCTION TO ST. CYRIL'S ANATHEMATISMS.

There has been some diflerence of opinion among the learned as to whether St. Cyril's
Synodal letter which has at its end the anathemas against Nestorius, which hereafter follow,
was formally ajjproved at the Council of Ephesus. The matter is one only of archeological
and historical interest, for from a theological point of view the question is entirely uninter-
esting, since there is no jjossible doubt that the synod endorsed St. Cyril's teaching and for
that express reason proceeded at their first session to excommunicate Nestorius. Further
there is no one that disputes that the auathematisms were received at the next General
Council, i.e., of Chalcedon, only twenty years later, and that Theodoret was condemned by
the Fifth Ecumenical Council because he wrote against these very Anathemas. This being


200 EPIIESUS. A.D. -iOl


the case, to those who value the decrees of Ecumenical Councils because of theii' ecumeni-
cal character, it is quite immatei'ial whether these anathematisms were received and approved
by the third Council or no, provided, which is indisputably the case, the}' have been ap-
proved by some one council of ecumenical authority, so as to become thereby ])art and
parcel of the ecumenical faith of the Church.

But the historical question is one of some interest, and I shall very briefly consider it.
We have indeed the "Acta" of this council, but I cannot but agree with the very learned
Jesuit Petavius and the Galilean Tillemont in thinkin^^ thom in a very unsatisfactory con-
dition. I am fully aware of the temerity of making such a suggestion, but I cannot help
feeling that in the x*emarks of the Roman representatives, especially in those of the presby-
ter-legate, there is some anachronism. Be this as it may, it is a fact that the Acts do not
recite that this letter of Cyril's was read, nor do they state that the Anathemas were received.
I would suggest, however, that for those who defend John of Antioch, and criticise the action
of St. Cyril, it is the height of inconsistency to deny that the Council adopted the Anathemas.
If it was the bitterly partisan assembly that they would have us believe, absolutely under the
control of Cyril, there is nothing that, a j^riori, they would have been more sure to do than
adopt the Anathemas which were universally looked uj^on as the very fulcrum on which the
whole matter turned.

Bishop Hefele was at first of opinion that the letter was merely read, being led to this con-
clusion by the silence of the Acts with regard to any acceptance of it, and indeed at first
wrote on that side, but he afterwards saw grounds to change his mind and expresses them
with his usual clearness, in the following words :

(Hefele, Hist, of Councils. Vol. Ill, p. 48, note 2.)

We were formerly of opinion that these anathematisms were read at Ephesus, but not ex-
pressly confirmed, as there is hardly anything on the subject in the Acts. But in the Fifth
Ecumenical Council (collatio vj.) it is said : "The holy Council at Chalcedon approved this
teaching of Cyril of blessed memory, and received his Synodical letters, to one of which are
appended the xij. anathemas " (Mansi, t. ix., p. 341; Hardouin, t. iij., p. 167). If, how-
ever, the anathematisms of Cyril were expressly confirmed at Chalcedon, there was even more
reason for doing so at Ephesus. And Ibas, in his well-known letter to !!\Iaris, says expressly
that the Synod of Ephesus confirmed the anathematisms of Cyril, and the same was
asserted even by the bishops of Antioch at Ephesus in a letter to the Emperor.

From all these considerations it would seem that Tillemont's^ conclusion is well founded
that the Synod certainly discussed the anathemas of Cyril in detail, but that here, as in many
other places, there are parts of the Acts lacking. I shall add the opinion of Petavius.

(Petavius, ])e Incarnatione, Lib. VI.. cap. xvij.)
The Acts do not tell us what judgment the Synod of Ephesus gave with respect to the
third letter of Cyril, and with regard to the anathemas attached to it. But the Acts in other
respects also have not come down to us in their integrity. That that third letter was re-
ceived and approved by the Ephesine Council thex'e can be no doul)t. and this the Catho-
lics shewed in their dispute with the Acephali in the Collation held at Constantinople under
the Emperor Justinian in the year of Christ 811. For at tliat memorable meeting some-
thing was shewn forth concerning this letter and its anathemas, which has a connexion with
the matter in hand, and therefore must not be omitted. At that meeting the Opposers, that
is the Acephali, the enemies of the Council of Chalcedon, made tliis objection against that

> Tillemont, MOmoires. Tom. XR'., p. 405.


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


201


Council: "The [letter] of tlie Twelve Anathemas which is inserted in the holy Council of
Ephesus, and which you cannot deny to be synodical, why did not Chalcedon receive it ? "
etc., etc.

From this it is evident that the prevailing opinion, then as now, was that the Twelve Anath-
emas were defined as pai't of the faith by the Council of Ephesus. Perhaps I may close
this treatment of the subject in the Avords of Denziger, being the caption he gives the xij.
Anathematisrns in his Enchiridion, under "Decrees of the Third Ecumenical Council, that of
Ephesus." " The Third Synod received these anathematisms ; the Foui'th Synod placed them
in its Acts and styled the Epistles of Cyril ' Canonical ' ; the Fifth Synod defended them."


THE EPISTLE OF CYKIL TO NESTOKIUS WITH THE XII. ANATHE-
MATISMS.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 395; Migne, Pair. Grcec, Tom.
LXXVII. [Cyril, Opera, Tom. X.], col. 105 et seqq.)


To the most reverend and God-loving
fellow-minister Nestorius, Cyril and the
synod assembled in Alexandria, of the
Egyptian Province, Greeting in the Lord.

When our Saviour says, clearly : " He
that lovetli father or mother more than me
is not worthy of me : and hetliatlovetb son
or daughter more than me is not worthy of
me," what is to become of us, from whom
your Holiness requires that we love you
more than Christ the Saviour of us all?
Who can help us in the day of judgment, or
what kind of excuse shall we find for thus
keeping silence so long, with regard to the
blasphemies made by you against him ?
If you injured yourself alone, by teaching
and holding such things, perhaps it would
be less matter ; but you have greatly scan-
dalized the whole Church, and have cast
among the people the leaven of a strange
and new heresy. And not to those there
[i.e. at Constantinople] only; but also to
those everywhere [the books of your ex-
planation were sent]. How can we any
longer, under these circumstances, make a
defence for our silence, or how shall we not
be forced to remember that Christ said :
" Think not that I am come to send peace
on earth : I came not to send j^eace, but a
sword. For I am come to set a man at
variance against his father, and the daugh-
ter against her mother." For if faith be in-
jured, let there be lost the honour due to
parents, as stale and tottering, let even
the law of tender love towards children
and brothers be silenced, let deatli be better
to the pious than living ; " that they might
obtain a better resurrection," as it is written.


Behold, therefore, how we, together with
the holy synod which met in great Rome,
presided over by the most holy and most
reverend brother and fellow-minister, Celes-
tine the Bishop, also testify by this third
letter to you, and counsel you to abstain
from these mischievous and distorted dog-
mas, Avhich you hold and teach, and to re-
ceive the right faith, handed down to the
churches from the beginning through the
holy Apostles and Evangelists, who " were
eye-witnesses, and ministers of the Word."
And if your holiness have not a mind to
this according to the limits defined in the
writings of our brother of blessed memory
and most reverend fellow-minister Celes-
tine, Bishop of the Church of Rome, be
i well assured then that vou have no lot with
us, nor place or standing iXo'yov) among the
priests and bishops of God. For it is not
possible for us to overlook the churches
thus troubled, and the people scandalized,
and the right faith set aside, and the sheep
scattered by you, who ought to save them, if
indeed w^e are ourselves adherents of the
right faith, and followers of the devotion of
the holy fathers. And we are in commun-
ion with all those laymen and clergymen
cast out or deposed by your holiness on
account of the faith ; for it is not right that
those, who resolved to believe rightly,
should suffer by your choice ; for they do
well in opposing you. This very thing
you have mentioned in your epistle wa-itten
to our most holy and fellow-bishop Celes-
tine of great Rome.

But it would not be sufficient for your
reverence to confess Avith us only the sym-


202


El'llESUS. A.U. 4:31


l)ol of the f;iith set oxit some time aijo l»y
the Holy Ghost at the great and holy
synod coiivcihmI in Nice : for yon have
not held and interpreted it riglilly, bnt
rather perven jly ; even tlionj^di you confess
with your voice the form of words. But
in addition, in writiniLi; and by oath, yon
must confess that you also anathematize
those polluted and unholy dogmas of yours,
and that you will hold and teach that which
we all, l)ish()|)s, teachers, and h^adcM's of the
people both East and West, hold. The
holy synod of Rome and we all agreed on
the epistle Avritten to your Holiness from
the Alexandrinn Church as being I'ight and
blameless. We have added to thes(> our
own letters and that which it is necessarv
for yon to hold and teach, and Avhat you
should be careful to avoid. Now this is
the Faith of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church to which all Orthodox Jiishops,
both East and West, agree :

" We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and
invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
Only-begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father, that is, of the substance of the
Father ; God of God, Light of Light, Yery
God of very God, begotten, not made, be-
ing of one substance Avitli the Father, by
whom all things were made, both those in
heaven and those in the earth. Who for us
men and for our salvation, came down, and
was incarnate, and was made man. He
suffered, and rose again the third day. He
ascended into the heavens, from thence he
shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead. And in the Holy Ghost. But those
that say, There was a time when he was
not, and, before he was begotten lu; was
not, and that he was made of that which
previously was not, or that he was of some
other substance or essence; and that the
Son of God was callable of change or al-
teration ; those the Catholic and Apostolic
Church anathematizes."

Following in all ])oints the confessions
of the Holy Fathers which they made (the
Holy (ihost sp(\Mking in them), and folhnv-
ing the sco])o of their opinions, and going,
as it were, in the royal way, we confess that
tlie Oidy begotten Word of God, begotten
of the same substance^ of the Father, True
God fioni TiU(^ God, Light from Jjight,
ill things were made. t\\o.


throiigh Whom


things in heaven and the things in the
earth, coming down for our salvation, mak-
ing himself of no r(>])utation iKoSeU eavrov
etV KevuxJiv], was incarnate and made man;
that is, taking Hesh of the holy Virgin, and
having made it his own from the womb, he
subjected himself to birth for us, and came
forth man from a woman, without casting
' off that which he was ; but althougli he
assumed flesh and blood, he reuiained
what he was, God in essence and in truth.
Neither do we say that his tiesh was
changed into the nature of divinity, nor
that the ineflable nature of the Word of
God was laid aside for the nature of flesh ;
J for he is unchanged and absolutely un-
changeable, l)eing the same always, accord-
ing to the Scriptures. For althoiigh visible
and a child in swaddling clothes, and even
in the bosom of his Virgin Mother, he tilled
all creation as God, and was a fellow-ruler
j with him who begat him, for the Godhead
is without quantity and dimension, and can-
not have limits.

Confessing the Word to b(^ made one
with the fiesli according to substance, we
adore one Son and Lord Jesus Christ : we
do not divide the God from the man, nor
separate him into parts, as though the two
natures were mutualh' united in him only
through a sharing of dignity and authority
(for that is a novelty and nothing else),
; neither do we give se^jarately to the Word
I of God the mime Christ and the same
' name separatel}- to a different one born of
a woman ; but we know only <me Christ,
the Word from Gotl the Father with his
own Flesh. For as man he Avas anointed
with us, although it is he himself who
gives the Spirit to those who are woithy
and not in measure, according to the saying
of the blessed Evanifelist -lohii.

Bnt we do not say that the Word of God
dwelt in him as in a ccnnmon man born of
{\\o holy ^'irgin, lest Christ be thought of
as a Ciod-beaiing man; for although the
Word tabernacled among us, it is also said
that in Christ " dwelt all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily " ; but Ave understand that
he became llesh, not just as he is said
to dAvell in the saints, but Ave define that
that tabernacling in him Avas according to
equalitA' {Kara tov i(Tov ev aurfri Tpoirov).
But being made one Kara (f)vau\^ and m^t
converted into tlesh, he made his indwell-


> Vide noteR on this expression.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


203


mg m


Father,
lest we


such a way, as we may say that the
soul of man does iu his own body.

One therefore is Christ both Son and
Lord, not as if a man had attained only
such a conjunction with God as consists in
a unity ^ of dignity alone or of authority.
For it is not equality of honour which
unites natures ; for then Peter and John,
who were of equal honour with each other,
being both Apostles and holy disciples
[would have been one, andj,yetthe two are
not one. Neither do we understand the
manner of conjunction to be apposition, for
this does not sutWce for natural oneness
(Trpo? evoxjov (f>uaiK)]v). Nor yet according
to relative participation, as we are also
joined to the Lord, as it is written " we are
one Spirit in him." Rather we deprecate
the term of "junction" {crvva(^eia<i) as not
having sufficiently signified the oneness.
But we do not call the Word of God the
the God nor the Lord of Christ,
openly cut in two the one Christ,
the Son and Lord, and fall under the charge
of blasphemy, making him the God and
Lord of himself. For the Word of God,
as we have said already, was made hypo-
statically one in flesh, yet he is God of all
and he rules all ; but he is not the slave of
himself, nor his own Lord. For it is fool-
ish, or rather impious, to think or teach
thus. For he said that God was his
Father, although he was God by nature,
and of his substance. Yet we are not ig-
norant that while he remained God, he
also became man and subject to God, ac-
cording to the law suitable to the nature
of the manhood. But how could he become
the God or Lord of himself ? Conse-
quently as Juan, and with regard to the
measure of his humiliation, it is said that
he is equally with us subject to God ; thus
he became under the Law, although as God
he spake the Law and was the Law-giver.

We are careful also how we say about
Christ : " - - -

account
account of
Seen." It is

nexion as follows : " The assumed as well
as the assuming have the name of God."
For the saying of this divides again Christ
into two, and puts the man se]3arately by
himself and God also by himself. For this

' This passage is very difficult, and I have followed the Latin in
omitting one 0«ov.


" I worship the One clothed on
of the One clothing him, and on
the Unseen, I worship the
It is horrible to say in this con-


saying denies openly the ITnity according
to which one is not worslii])ped in the
other, nor does God exist together with the
other; but Jesus Christ is considered as
One, the Only-begotten Son, to be honoured
with one adoration together with his own
flesh.

We confess that he is the Son, begotten
of God the Father, and Only-begotten
God ; and although according to his own
nature he was not subject to suti'ering, yet
he suffered for us in the flesh according to
the Scri})tures, and although impassible,
yet in his Crucified Body he made his own
the sufl'erings of his own flesh; and by the
grace of God he tasted death for all : he
gave his own Body thereto, although he
was by nat^^re himself the life and the re-
surrection, in order that, having trodden
down death by his unspeakul)le power, first
in his own flesh, he might become the
first born from the dead, and the first-fruits
of them that slept. And that he might
make a way for the nature of man t<j attain
incorruption, by the grace of God (as we
just now said), he tasted death for every
man, and after three days rose again, having
despoiled hell. So although it is said that
the resurrection of the dead was through
man, yet we understand that man to have
been the Word of God, and the power of
death was loosed through him, and he shall
come in the fulness of time as the One Sou
and Lord, in the glory of the Father, in or-
der to judge the world in righteousness, as
it is written.

We will necessarily add this also. Pro-
claiming the death, according to the flesh,
of the Only-begotten Son of God, that is
Jesus Christ, confessing his resurrection
from the dead, and his ascension into
heaven, we ofl'er the Unbloody Sacrifice in
the churches, and so go on to the mystical
thanksgivings, and are sanctified, having
received his Holy Flesh and the Precious
Blood of Christ the Saviour of us all. And
not as common flesh do we receive it ; God
forbid ; nor as of a man sanctified and as-
sociated with the Word according to the
unity of worth, or as having a divine in-
dwelling, but as truly the Life-giving and
very flesh of the Word himself. For he is
the Life according to his nature as God,
and when he became united to his Flesh,
he made it also to be Life-giving, as also
he said to us : Verily, verily, I say unto


204


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of Man and drink his IMood. For we must
not think that it is tl(^sh of a man like us (for
how can the flesh of man he hfe-;4iving by
its own nature?) but as having become tru-
ly the very own of him who for us both be-
came and was calk'd Son of ^biu. ]>esidt's,
what tlie GosjHils say our ISavioiu' said of
himself, we do not divide between two hy-
postases or persons. For neither is he, the
one and only Christ, to be thouj^ht of as
double, although of two (€« Bvo) and they
diverse, yet he has joined them in an indi-
visible union, just as everyone knows a man
is not double although made up of soul and
body, but is one of l)oth. Wherefore when
thinking rightly, we transfer the human and
the divine to the same person {wap ev6<i
€ipi)a-^aL).

For when as God he speaks about him-
self: "He Avho hath seen me hath seen the
Father," and " I and my Father are one,"
we consider his ineftable divine nature
ncoording to which he is One with his
Father through the identity of essence —
" The injage and impress and brightness of
his glory." But w'hen not scorning the
measure of his luimanity, he said to the
Jews : " But now ye seek to kill me, a man
that hath told you the truth," Again no
less than before w^e recognize that he is
the AVord of God from his identity and like-
ness to the Father and from the circum-
stances of his humanity. For if it is neces-
sary to believe that being by nature God, he
became flesh, that is, a man endowed with
a reasonable soul, what reason can certain
ones have to be ashamed of this language
about him, which is suitable to him as
man? For if he sliould reject the words
suitable to him as n)an, who compelled him
to become man like us V And as \h\ humbled
himself to a voluntaiv abasement {KevuxTiv)
for us, for what cause can any one reject the
words suitable to such abasement? Tlicn-e-
fore all the words which are read in the
Gospels are to be a])plied to One Person,
to One hypostasis of the Word Incarnate.
For th<^ Lord Jesus Christ is One, accord-
ing to the Seriptu)-es, altiiough he is called
" the A]>ostle and High Priest of our pro-
fession," as ottering to God and the Father
the confession of faith which Ave make to
him, and through him to God even the Fath-
er and also to the Holy Spirit ; yet we say
he is, according to nature, the Only-begot-


ten of God. And not to any man diflerent
from him do we assign the name of priest-
hood, and th(> thing, for lie became "the
Ab'diator between God and men," and a
ie conciler unto peace, having ottered him-
self as a sweet smelling savour to God and
the Father. Therefore also he said : " Sac-
rifice and ottering thou wouldest uoi ; but a
body hast thou })iepared me : In l)urnt offer-
ings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no
pleasure. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to
do thy will, O God." For on account of
us he offered his body as a sweet smelling
savour, and riot for himself ; for what otter-
ing or sacrifice was needed for himself,
who as God existed above all sins? For
"all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God," so that we became prone to
fall, and the nature of man has fallen into
sin, yet not so he (and therefore we fall
I short of his glory). How then can there
be further doubt that the true Lamb died
for us and on our account? And to say
1 that he ottered himself for himself and us,
j could in no way escape the charge of im-
1 piety. For he never committed a fault at
all, neither did he sin. What ottering then
did he need, not having sin for which sac-
rifices are rightly ottered ? But when he
spoke al:»out the S])irit, he said: "He shall
glorify me." If we think rightly, we do not
say that the One Christ and Son as needing
glory from another received glory from the
Holy Spirit ; for neither greater than he
nor above him is his S})irit, but because
lie used the Holy S])irit to show forth his
own diviiiitv in his mightv works, therefore
he is said to have been glorified by him just
as if any one of us shoiild say concerning
his inherent strength for example, or his
knowledge of anything. " They glorified
me." For although the Spirit is the same
essence, yet we think of him by himself, as
he is the S])irit and not the Son ; but \\v is
not dili'erent from him ; for he is called the
Spirit of truth and Christ is the Truth, and
he is sent by him, just as, moreover, lie is
from (Jod and the Father. When then the
Spirit worked miracles through the hands
of the holy a]iostles after the Ascension of
Our Lord Jesus Christ into heaven, he glo-
rified him. For it isbelievi^d that lie who
works through his own S[)irit is God ac-
cording to nature. Therefore he said : " He
shall receive of mine, and shall shew it


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


unto yon." But we do not say this as if
the Spirit is wise and powerful through
some sharing; with another ; for he is all
perfect and in need of no good thing.
Since, therefore, he is the Si)irit of the
Power and Wisdom of the Father (that is,
of the Son), he is evidently Wisdom and
Power.

And since the holy Virgin brought forth
corporally God made one with flesh accord-
ing to nature, for this reason we also call
her Mother of God, not as if the nature of
the Word had the beginning of its existence
from the flesh.

For " In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was God, and the Word
was with God," and he is the Maker of the
ages, coeternal with the Father, and Crea-
tor of all ; but, as we have already said,
since he united to himself hypostatically
human nature from her womb, also he sub-
jected himself to birth as man, not as need-
ing necessarily in his own nature birth in
time and in these last times of the world,


but in order that he might bless the begin-
ning of our existence, and that that which
sent the earthly bodies of our whole race to
death, might lose its power for the future by
his being born of a woman in the flesh. And
this: "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth
children," being removed through him, he
showed the truth of that spoken by the
prophet, " Strong death swallowed them up,
and again God hath wiped away every tear
from off all faces." ' For this cause also we
say that he attended, having been called,
and also blessed, the marriage in Cana of
Galilee, with his holy Apostles in accordance
with the economy. We have been taught
to hold these things by the holy Apostles
and Evangelists, and all the God-inspired
Scriptures, and in the true confessions of
the blessed Fathers.

To all these your reverence also should
agree, and give heed, without any guile.
And what it is necessary your reverence
should anathematize we have subjoined to
our epistle.^


1 There is a most curious blunder in the editing of this Epistle
in Migne, where this passage, which is but one text, viz.: Isaiah
XXV. 8, is made into two, the first few words being assigned in
the margin to Hosea, xiii. 14. As a matter of fact the whole sen-
tence is turned into nonsense by making the words koI na.\iv as a
connective supplied by St. Cyril. What the text really says is that [
Death prevailed indeed, but God wiped away again the tears death
had caused. The same error is found in the letter as it occurs in i


Labbe and Cossart. and it should be remarked that it is both in
the Greek and Latin I rather suspect that St. Cyril had a purer
text of the LXX. than ours which read — " And he hath swallowed
death up and hath wiped away, etc.," as the Vulgate and A. V.
read This is the reading the context certainly seems to call for.
2 For critical notes and proposed emendations of the text, see
Routh's Scriptorum Eccles. Opuscula. Tom. II. (Ed. in.),
p. 17.


THE XII.


ANATHEMATISMS OF ST.
NESTORIUS.


CYRIL AGAINST


{Found in St. CyriVs Opera. Migne, Pat. Grsoc, Tom. LXXYH., Col. 119; and
the Coucilia.)

I.

If anvoTio will not confess that the Emmanuel is very GoJ, and that therefore the
Holy ^'ir,^in is the Mother of God (QeoroKo^), inasmuch as in the flesh she bore the
Word of God made flesh [as it is written, " The AVord was made flesh "] : let liim be

anathema.

NOTES.


THE ANATHEMATISMS OF THE HER-
ETIC NESTOKIUS AGAINST CYIUL.

{Found best in Migne's edition of Marius
Mercator.)

I.

If auvone says that the Emmanuel is true
God, and not rather God with us, that is, that
he has united himself to a like nature with
ours, which he assumed from the Yix'gin Mary,
and dwelt in it ; and if anyone calls Mary the
mother of God the Word, and not rather
mother of liiui who is Emmanuel ; and if he
maintains that God the Word has changed
himself into the flesh, which he onh' assumed
in order to make his Godhead visible, and to
be found in form as a man, let him be anath-
ema.

Petaviijs.^

{De Incarnatione, Lib. vj. cap. xvij.)

In this anatheinatism certain words are
found in the Greek copy of Dion^'sius which
are lacking in the ordinary copies, viz. " ac-
cording as it is written, 'And tlie Word was
made flesh' ; " unless forsooth Dionysius sup-
plied them of his own authority. For in
the Lateran Synod in the time of Martin I.
this anathematism was quoted Avithout the
appended words.

This anathematism breaks to pieces the
chief strength of the Nestorian impiety. For
it sets forth two facts. The one that the
Emmanuel, that is he who was born of a wom-


an and dwelt with us, is God : the other,
that !Mary who bare such an one is Mother of
God. That Christ is God is clearly proved
from the Nicene Creed, and he shews that
the same that was in the beginning the Son
of God, afterwards took flesh and was liorn
of Mary, without any change or confusion of
natures.

St. Cyril explains that by (rapKiKws, carnrdi-
tcr, he meant nothing else than Kara aupKa, .se-
cundum carnem, "according to the flesh." And
it was necessary to use this expression to over-
throw the perfidy of Nestorius ; so that we
may understand that the most holy Virgin
was tlie parent not of a simple and bare man,
but of God the Word, not in that he was God,
l)ut in that he had taken flesh. For God the
Father was the pai'cnt of the same Sou .'^ttK-d)?-
( divinely) as his mother was (xapKiKux; (after the
flesh). And the word (o-apKi/cois) in no degree
lessons the dignity of his begetting and bring-
ing foi'th ; for it shews that his flesh was not
simulated or shadowed forth ; but true and
like to ours. Amphilochius distinctly uses
tlie word, saying " Except he had been born
carnally {rrapKiKm), never wouldest thou have
been born spiritually (Trreu/uaTtK-uj?)." Cf. St.
Gregory Nazianzen {Orat. ,51).

Tlieodoret misunderstood St. Cyi'il to teach
in this first anathematism that the Word was
changed into the flesh he assumed. But
Cyril rightly treated this whole accusation as
a foolish calumny.


EXCURSUS ON THE AVOllD SeoroKo^.

There have been some who have tried to reduce all the great theological controversies on
the Trinity and on the Incarnation to mere log()niaehies,and have jeered at those who could
waste their time and energies over such trivialities. For example, it has been said that the

' Petavins privesa scholion onevery anathemstifinnnda rfisume I ^ This is a late form of detuf, but used only in its piTondurj
of the Orientals' objections and of Theodorefs criticiBiUi), with 1 BeuBe.
answers.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431 207


real difference between Arius and Athanasius was nothing more nor loss tlian an iota, and
that even Athanasius himself, in his more placid, and therefore presumably more rational
moods, was willing to hold communion with those who differed from him and who still re-
jected the homousion. But however catching and brilliant such remarks may be, thej' lack
all solid foundation in truth. It is perfectly manifest that a person so entirely lacking in
discrimination as not to* see the enormous difference between identity and likeness is not
one whose opinion on such a point can be of much value. A brilliant historian is not neces-
sarily an accurate historian, far less need he be a safe guide in matters of theological defini-
tion.'

A similar attempt to reduce to a logomachy the difference between the Catholic faith and
Nestorianism has been made by some writers of undoubted learning among Protestants,
notably by Fuchs and Schrockh. But as in the case of the homonstos so, too, in the case of
the fhcdfocos the word expresses a great, necessary, and fundamental doctrine of tlie Catholic
faith. It is not a matter of words, but of things, and the mind most unskilled in theology
cannot fail to grasp the enormous difference there is between affirming, as does Nestorian-
ism, that a God indwelt a man with a human personality of his own distinct from the per-
sonality ot the indwelling god ; and that God assumed to himself human nature, that is a
human body and a human soul, but without human personalit3^

(Wm. Bright, St. Leo on the Incarnation, pp. IGO, 161.)

It is, then, clear that the question raised by the wide circulation of the discourses of
Nestorius as archbishop of Constantinople was not verbal, but vital. Much of his language
was irrelevant, and indicated some confusedness of thought : much would, of itself, admit
of an orthodox construction ; in one of the latest of his sermons, which Garnier dates on
Sunday, December 14, 430, he grants that " Theotocos " might be used as signifying that
" the temple which was formed in Mary by the Holy Spirit w^as united to the Godhead ; "
but it was impossible not to ask whether by " the temple " he meant the body of Jesus, or
Jesus himself regarded as a human individual existing tSta, iSikws, nva fxepo^ — as Cyril rejDre-
sents his theory — and whether by " union " he meant more than a close alliance, ejusdeyn
gener-is, in the last analysis, with the relation between God and every saint, or, indeed, every
Christian in true moral fellowship with him — an alliance which would amount, in Cyril's
phrase, to no more than a " relative union," and would reduce the Saviour to a " Theophoros,"
the title claimed of old by one of his chief martyrs. And the real identity of Nestorius's
view with that of Theodore [of Mopsuestia] was but too plainly exhibited by such state-
ments as occur in some of the extracts preserved in Cyril's treatise Against Nestorius — to the
effect that Christ was one with the Word by participation in dignity ; that " the man " was
partaker of Divine power, and in that sense not mei'e man; that he was adored together
with the Word ; and that " My Lord and my God " was a doxology to the Father ; and
above all, by the words spoken at Ephesus, "I can never allow that a child of three months
old was God."

It is no part of my duty to defend the truth of either the Catholic or Nestorian propo-
sition— each has found many adherents in most ages since it was first started, and j^robably
what is virtually Nestorianism is to-day far more widely held among persons deemed to
be orthodox than is commonly supposed. Be this as it may, Nestorianism is clearly subver-
sive of the whole Catholic Doctrine of the Incarnation, and therefore the importance of
the word ©cotokos cannot be exaggerated.


' Cf . Bp. Lightfoot'R criticism on Gibbon as an historian, Ttw \ land will of course instantly present itself to the reader as a sam-
Apostolic Fathers, Vol. I., p. 46 n. Macaolay's History of Eng- \ pie of the brilliant variety of histories referred to in the text.


208 EPIIESUS. A.D. 4:U


I shall treat tlie word Theotocos under two heads ; (l)Its historj- (2) its meaninj?, first how-
ever quoting Bp. Pearson's words on its Conciliar authority. (Pearson, E.rp. of the Creed,
Art. III., n. 87). "It is jDlain that the Council of Ephesus which condemned Nestorius con-
finned this title ©eoTo/co? ; I sav confirmed it ; for it is evident that it was before used in the
Church, by the tumult which arose at the first denial of it by Anastasius [Nestorius's presby-
ter] ; and so confirmed it as received before, because they approved the Ejiistles of St. Cyril,
who proved it by the usage of those Fathers which preceded him."

(1) Tlisfon/ of Word 0eoTo/cos.

It has not been unfrequently assumed that the word Theotocos was coined to express the
peculiar view of the Incarnation held by St. Cyril. Such,'however, is an entire mistake. It was
an old term of Catholic Theology, and the very word was used by bishop Alexander in a letter
from the synod held at Alexandria in a.d. 320,^ to condemn the Arian heresy (more than a
hundred years before the meeting of the Council of Ephesus) ; " After this, we receive the doc-
trine of the resurrection from the dead, of which Jesus Christ our Lord became the first-
fruits ; who bore a body in tmth, not in semblance, which he derived from Mary the Mother of
God (eV Trj<; 0€otokou Mapt'a?)."^ The same word had been used by many church writers among
whom may be mentioned St. Athanasius, who says, "As the flesh was born of Mai-y, the
Mother of God, so we say that he, the "Word, was himself born of Mary " [Oro.t. c. Avian., iij.,
14, 29, 33 ; also iv., 32). See also Eusebius {Vif.Consf., iij., 43) ; St. Cyril of Jerusalem {Cat.,
X., 9); and esjiecially Origen, who (says Bp. Pearson) "did not only use, but expound at
large the meaning of that title ©cotokos in his first tome on the Epistle to the Romans, as
Socrates and Liberatus testify." ^ (Cf. Origen in Deut. xxii., 23 ; vol. ij., p. 891. A ; in Lmc.
apud Galland, Bib. Pair., vol. xiv., append., p. 87, D). A list is given by Dr. Routh, in his
Reliquiae Sacne. Vol. ij., p. 215 (1st Ed.), 332 (2d Ed.).

In fact Theodore of Mopsuestia was the first to object to it, so far as we know, writing
as follows : "Mary bare Jesus, not the Word, for the Word was and remained omnipresent,
although from the beginning he dwelt in Jesus in a peculiar manner. Thus ]\Iary is properly
the Mother of Christ (Christotocos) but not the mother of God (Theotocos). Only figura-
tively, ^^rr anaphoram, can she be called Theotocos also, because God was in Christ in a re-
markable manner. Properly she bare a man, in whom the union with the Word was begun,
but was still so little completed, that he M^as not yet called the Son of God." And in another
place he says : " It is madness to say that God is born of the Virgin. . . . Not God, but
the temple in which God dwelt, is born of Mary." ' How far Theodore had departed from
the teaching of the Apostolic days may be seen by the following quotations from St. Igna-
tius. " There is one only physician, of flesh and spirit, generate and ingenerate, God in
man, true Life in death. Son of Mary and of God, first passible and then impassible, Jesus
Christ our Lord." ^ Further on in the same epistle he says: "For our God, Jesus the
Christ, was borne in the Avomb by Mary etc."'' With the first of these passages Lp. Light-
foot very aptly compares the following from Melito. "Since he was incorporeal, he fashioned
a body for himself of our likeness ... he was carried by Mary and clothed by his
Father, he trod the earth and he filled the heavens." '^

Theodore was forced by the exigencies of his position to deny the doctrine of the com-
municatio idiomatum which had ali-eady at that early date come to be well understood, at
least so far as practice is concerned.

' The date is not certain, it may have been a year or bo differ- | * I tiikn this paceage as cited by Ilefele, liitt. Counc., Vol. m., 9.


ent

'Theod., Hist. Ecrl, I., 4.
'Pearson, An Expos. 0/ the Creed, Art. HI., n. 36


^Ignat., Alt. Eph., vii. * Ihi'd. xviij.

7 Melito. Fragm. 14 (ed. Otto) ; cit. Lightfoot. Apost. Path., IT.,
1, p. 4S, n.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431 209


(Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol. iii., p. 8.)

This doctrine, as is well known is predicating the same properties of the two natures in
Christ, not in abstracto (Godhead and manhood), but in concreto (God and man). Christ
himself had declared in St. John iii., 16: "God . . . gave his only begotten Son"
(namely, to death), and similarly St. Peter declared (Acts iii., 15) : "ye . . . killed the
Prince of Life," when in fact the being given up and being killed is a property (iStw^ta = pred-
icate) of man, not of God (the only begotten, the Prince of Life). In the same way Clement
of Rome, for example, spoke of " the sufferings of God " (Tra^Tj/xara ©eov) (1 Ad Cor. 2), Ignatius
of Antioch {Ad Ephes., c. 1, and Ad Bom., 6) of an alfxa and -n-dSo^ @eov, Tatian of a ©cos
-eirovSw^ {Ad Grcecos, c. 13) ; Barnabas teaches (c. 7) that " the Son of God could not suffer
except on our behalf . . . and on our behalf he has brought the vessel of his Spirit as
a sacrifice." Similarly Irengeus (iii., 16, 6) says, " The Only -begotten impassible Word {uni-
genitus impassibilis) has become passible " {2MSsibilis) ; and Athanasius, ia-Tavpwfjievov cTvat ©tov
{Ep. ad Epicfet, n. 10, t. j., p. 726. ed. Patav.)

It is, howevei-, to be remarked that the properties of the one nature were never trans-
ferred to the other nature in itself, but always to the Person who is at the same time both
man and God. Human attributes were not ascribed to the Godhead, but to God, and vice
versa.

For a full treatment of the figure of speech called the communicatio idiomatum the reader
is referred to the great works on Theology where it will be found set forth at large, with its
restrictions specified and with examples of its use. A brief but interesting note on it will
be found in St. John Damascene's famous treatise De Fide Orthodoxa, Book III., iij. (Migne's
Pat. Grcec, col. 994).

(2) Mean ing of the Word ©eoroKos.

We pass now to the meaning of the word, having sufficiently traced the history of its
use. Bishop Pearson says : " This name was first in use in the Greek Church, who,
delighting in the happy compositions of that language, called the blessed Virgin Theotocos.
From whence the Latins in imitation styled her Virginem Deiparam et Deigenitricem." '^ In
the passage to which the words just quoted are a portion of a foot-note, he says : " Where-
fore from these three, a true conception, nutrition, and parturition, we must acknowledge
that the blessed Virgin was truly and proj^erly the Mother of our Saviour. And so is she
frequently styled the Mother of Jesus in the language of the Evangelists, and by Elizabeth
particularly the ' Mother of her Lord,' as also by the general consent of the Church
(because he which was so born of her was God,) the Deipara ; which being a compound title
begun in the Greek Church, was resolved into its jDarts by the Latins and so the Virgin was
plainly named the Mother of God."

Pearson is mistaken in supposing that the resolution of the compound Theotocos into
/it^rryp tou ©eoO was unknown to the early Greek writers. Dionysius expressly calls Mary
7} li-rjfrqp Tov ©eoi) (xov {Contv. Paul. Samos., Qusest. viij.) ; and among the Latins Hater Dei
and Dei Genefrix were (as Pearson himself confesses in note 37) used before the time of St.
Leo I. It is not an open question whether Mater Dei, Dei Genefrix, Deipara, /Ji-^rrjp tov ©eoG
are proper equivalents for ©cotoko?. This jDoint has been settled by the unvarjdng use of the
whole Church of God throughout all the ages fx-om that day to this, but there is, or at least
some persons have thought that there was, some question as to how Theotocos shovdd be
translated into English.

Throughout this volume I have translated it " Mother of God," and I propose giving my

1 Pearson, An Expos, of the Creed, Art. UI., n. 36.


210 EPIIKSU.S. A.D. 431


reasons for considering this the only accurate translation of the word, both from a lexico-
graphical and from a theological point of view.

(a) It is evident that the word is a composite formed of 0eo? = God, and tlkthv = to be
the mother of a child. Now I have translated the verbal part "to be the mother of a child"
because " to bear " in English does not necessarily carry the full meaning of the Greek
word, which (as Bp. Pearson has well remarked in the passage cited above) includes "con-
ception, nutrition, and parturition." It has been suggested that "God-bearer" is an
exact translation. To this I object, that in the first place it is not English ; and in the
second that it would be an equally and, to my mind, more accurate translation of ©co^opo?
than of ©eoTOAcos.

Another suggestion is that it be rendered " the bringer forth of God." Again I object
that, from a rhetorical standpoint, the expression is vei-y open to criticism ; and from a
lexicographical point of view it is entirely inadequate, for while indeed the parturition does
necessarily involve in the course of nature the previous conception and nutrition, it cer-
tainly does not express it.

Now the word Mother does necessarily express all three of these when used in relation
to her child. The reader will remember that the question I am discussing is not whether
Mary can j^roperly be called the Mother of God ; this Nestorius denied and many in ancient
and modern times have been found to agree with him. The question I am considering is
what the Greek word Theotocos means in English. I do not think anyone would hesitate to
translate Nestorius's Christotocos by "Mother of Christ" and surely the expressions are
identical from a lexicographical point of view.

Liddell and Scott in their Lexicon insert the word ^f.oT6Ko% as an adjective and translate
"bearing God " and add : " especially 17 ©cotokos, Mother of God, of the Virgin, Eccl."

(b) It only remains to consider whether there is from a theological point of view any
objection to the ti'anslation, "Mother of God." It is true that some persons have thought
that such a rendering implied that the Godhead has its origin in Mary, but this was the
very objection which Nestorius and his followers urged against the word Theotocos, and this
being the case, it constitutes a strong argument in favour of the accuracy of the rendering.
Of course the answer to the objection in each case is the same, it is not of the Godhead
that Mary is the Mother, but of the Incarnate Son, who is God. " Mother " expresses
exactly the relation to the incarnate Son which St. Cyril, the Council of Ephesus, and all
succeeding, not to say also preceding, ages of Catholics, rightly or wrongly, ascribe to
Mary. All that every child derives from its Mother that God the Son derived from Mar}-,
and this without the co-operation of any man, but by the direct operation of the Holy
Ghost, so that in a fuller, truer, and more perfect sense, Mary is the Mother of God the Son
in his incarnation, than any other earthly mother is of her son.

I therefore consider it certain that no scholar who can and will divest himself of theo-
logical bias, can doubt that " Mother of God " is the most accurate translation of the term
Theotocos.

II.

If anyone shall not confess that the Word of God the Father is united hypostatieally
to flesh, and that with that flesh of his own, he is one only Christ both God and man at
the same time : let hiui be anathema.


NOTES.


Nestorius.


II.
If any one asserts that, at the union of the
Logos with the flesh, the di\'ine Essence


moved from one place to another ; or says
that the flesh is capable of receiving the di-
vine nature, and that it has been partially
united with the flesh ; or ascribes to the flesh,


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


211


by reason of its reception of God, an exten- that God and man are one and the same in
sion to the infinite and boundless, and says j natm-e ; let him be anathema.


III.


If anyone shall after the [hypostatic] union divide the hypostases in the one Christ,
joining them by that connexion alone, which happens according to worthiness, or even
authority and power, and not rather by a coming together {<7vp68q)), which is made by
natural union [epcoaiv (pva-tKrjv) : let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Nestorius.
III.


If any one says that Christ, who is also
Emmanuel, is One, not [merely] in conse-
quence of connection, but [also] in nature, and
does not acknowledge the connection (o-wa^eia)
of the two natures, that of the Logos and of
the assumed manhood, in one Son, as still
continuing without mingling ; let him be an-
athema.

Hefele.

{Hist, of the Counc., Vol. III., p. 7.)

Theodore [of Mopsuestia, and in this he
was followed by Nestorius,] (and here is his
fundamental error,) not merely maintained
the existence of two natures in Christ, but of
two persons, as, he says himself, no subsistence
can be thought of as perfect without person-
ality. As however, he did not ignore the fact
that the consciousness of the Church rejected
such a double personality in Christ, he en-
deavoured to get rid of the difficulty, and he
repeatedly says expressly : " The two, natures
united together make only one Person, as
man and wife are only one flesh. ... If
we consider the natures in their distinction,


we should define the nature of the Logos as
perfect and complete, and so also his Person,
and again the nature and the person of the
man as perfect and complete. If, on the
other hand, we have regard to the union
(fTwac^eta), we say it is one Person." The very
illustration of the union of man and wife
shows that Theodore did not suppose a true
union of the two natures in Christ, but that
his notion was rather that of an external con-
nection of the two. The expression uvvd4,€ta,
moi-eover, which he selectecl here instead of
the term hwaiv, which he elsewhere employs,
being derived from awd-n-TOi [to join together],
expresses onl}' an external connection, a fix-
ing together, and is therefore expressly re-
jected in later times by the doctors of the
Church. And again, Theodore designates a
merel}" external connection also in the phrase
already quoted, to the effect that " the Logos
dwells in the man assumed as in a temple."
As a temple and the statue set up within it
are one whole merely in outward appearance,
so the Godhead and manhood in Christ ap-
pear only from without in their actuality as
one Person, while they remain essentially two
Persons.


lY.

If anyone shall divide between two persons or subsistences those expressions
{(f>covd<;) which are contained in the Evangelical and Apostolical writings, or which have
been said concerning Christ by the Saints, or by himself, and shall apply some to him
as to a man separate from the Word of God, and shall apply others to the only Word
of God the Father, on the ground that they are fit to be applied to God : let him be
anathema.

NOTES.


Nestorius.

IV.

If any one assigns the expressions of the
Gospels and Apostolic letters, which refer to
the two natures of Christ, to one only of those
natures, and even ascribes suffering to the
divine Word, both in the flesh and in the
Godhead : let him be anathema.


St. Cyril.

(Apol. contra Orientates.)

For we neither teach the division of the
h}'postases after the union, nor do we say
that the nature of the Deity needs increase
and growth ; but this rather we hold, that
by way of an economical appropriation {Kar
olKiLW(TLv olKovofjiLKT]^), hc madc his own the


212


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


properties of the flesh, as having become
flesh.

[Quod inutf' csf Christus.)

For the wise Evangelist, introducing the
Word as become flesh, shows him economi-
cally submitting himself to his own flesh and
going through the laws of his own nature.
But it belongs to humanity to increase in
stature and in wisdom, and, I might add, in
grace, intelligence keeping pace with the
measure of the body, and differing according
to age. For it was not impossible for the
Word born of the Father to have raised the
body united to himself to its full height from
the very swaddling-clothes. I would say also,
that in the babe a w^onderful wisdom might
easily have appeared. But that would liave
approached the thaumaturgical, and would
have been incongruous to the laws of the
economy. For the mystery was accomplished
noiselessly. Therefore he economically al-
lowed the measures of humanity to have power
over himself.

A. B. Bruce.
(The Ifumdiation of Christ. Appendix
to Lect. II.)

The accommodation to the law's of the
economy, according to this passage, consist-
ed in this — in stature, real growth ; in wisdom,
apparent growth. The wonderful wisdom
was there from the first, but it was not al-
lowed to appear (eKt^i^i/ai), to avoid an aspect
of monstrosity.

St. Cyril.
(Adversus Nestorium.)

Therefore there would have been shown to
all an unwonted and strange thing, if, being
yet an infant, he had made a demonstration


of his wis<lom worthy of God ; but expanding
it gradually and in proportion to the age of
the body, and (in this gradual manner) mak-
ing it manifest to all, he might be said to in-
crease (in wisdom) very appropriately.

{Ad Beginas de recta fide, Orat. II., caj). xvi.)

"But the boy increased and waxed strong
in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the
grace of God M'as upon him." And again:
" Jesus increased in stature and wisdom, and
in favour with God and men." In aflirming
our Lord Jesus Christ to be one, and assign-
ing to him both divine and human jn-operties,
we truly assert that it was congruous to the
measures of the kenosis, on the one hand, that
he should receive bodily increase and grow
strong, the parts of the body gradually at-
taining their full development ; and, on the
other hand, that he should seem to be filled
with wisdom, in so far as the manifestation of
the wisdom dwelling within him proceeded,
as by addition, most congruousl}' to the stat-
ure of the body ; and this, as I said, agreed
with the economy of the Incarnation, and the
measures of the state of humiliation.

(Apol. contra Theod., ad Anath. iv.)

And if he is one and the same in virtue of
the true unity of natures, and is not one and
another (two persons) disjunctively and parti-
tively, to him will belong both to know and
to seem not to know. Therefore he knows on
the divine side as the "Wisdom of the Father.
But since he subjected himself to the measiu'e
of humanity, he economically appropriates
this also with the rest, although, as I said a
little ago, being ignorant of nothing, but
knowing all things with the Father.


V.

If anyone shall dare to say that the Christ is a Theophorus [that is, God-bearing]
man and not rather that he is very God, as an only Son through nature, because " the
Word was made flesh," and " hath a share in flesh and blood as w^e do : " let him be
anathema.

NOTES.


Nbstorius.

V.

If any one ventures to say that, even after
the assumption of human nature, there is only
one Son of God, namely, he who is so in nat-
ure (naturaliter filius = Logos), while he
(since the assumption of the flesh) is certainly
Emmanuel ; let him be anathema.


Petavius.

It is manifest that this anathematism is di-
rected against the blasphemy of Nestorius, by
which he said that Christ was in this sense
Emmanuel, that a man was united and asso-
ciated with God, just as God had been said
to have been with the Prophets and other
holv men, and to have had his abode in them ;


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


213


so that they were properly styled 0eo<^opot, be-
cause, as it were, they carried God about with
them ; but there was no one made of the two.
But he held tliat our Lord as man was bound
and united with God only by a commuuion of
dignity.

Nestorius [in his Counter Anathematism]
displays tlie hidden meaning of his heresy,
when he says, that the Son of God is not one
after the assumption of the humanity ; for he
who denied that he was one, no doubt thought
that he was two.

Theodoret in his criticism of this Anathe-
matism remarks that many of the Ancients,


including St. Basil had used this very word,
0£o<^dpo<;, for the Lord ; but the objection has
no real foundation, for the orthodoxy or het-
erodoxy of such a word must be determined
hj the context in which it is used, and also by
the known opinions of him that uses it. Ex-
pressions which are in a loose sense orthodox
and quite excusable before a heresy arises,
may become afterwards the very distinctive
marks and shibboletlis of ei-ror. Petavius has
pointed out how far from orthodox many of the
earliest Christian writers were, at least verbal-
ly, and Bj). Bull defended them by the same
line of argumenti have just used and which Pe-
tavius himself employs in this very connection.


VL

If anyone shall dare say that the "Word of God the Father is the God of Christ or
the Lord of Christ, and shall not rather confess him as at the same time both God and
Man, since according to the Scriptures, " The Word was made flesh " : let him be anath-
ema.

NOTES.


Nestoeius.


VI.


If anyone, after the Incarnation calls an-
other than Christ the Word, and ventures to
say that the form of a servant is equally with
the Word of God, without beginning and un-
created, and not rather that it is made by him
as its natural Lord and Creator and God, and
that he has promised to raise it again in the
words: "Destroy this temple, and in three
days I will build it up again " ; let him be
anathema.

Hefele.

This [statement of Nestorius's that any
should call " another than Christ the Word "]
has no reference to Cyril ; but is a hyper-Nes-
torianism, which Nestorius here rejects. This
[that " the form of a servant is without begin-
ning and uncreated "] was asserted by some
Apollinarists ; and Nestorius accused St. Cyril
of Apollinarianism .


Petavius.

As Nestorius believed that in Christ there
were two distinct entities (re ip><a duos) that is
to say two persons joined together ; it was
natural that he should hold that the Word was
the God and Lord of the other, that is of the
man. Cyril contradicts this, and since he
taught that there was, not two, but one of
two natures, that is one person or suppositum,
therefore he denied that the Word was the
God or Lord of the man ; since no one should
be called the Lord of himself.

Theodoret in his answer shuffles as usual,
and points out that Christ is styled a servant
by the Prophet Isaiah, because of the form of
a servant which he had received. But to this
Cyril answers ; that although Christ, inasmuch
as he was man, is called the servant of the
Father, as of a person distinct from himself ;
yet he denies that the same person can be his
own lord or servant, lest a separation of the
person be introduced.


VII.

If anyone shall say tbat Jesus as man is only energized by the "Word of God, and
that the glory of the Only-begotten is attributed to him as something not properly his :
let him be anathema.

NOTES.

Nestokius. morning star was (Ps. cix., 3) ^ and does not

rather confess that he has obtained the desig-

VII.


1 The editor of the English translation to this reference adds
Tf a-niT nna oottc. ■Hio<- -f-li^ -rviov, xvA^rv txtoo f/-wi.vr>o/l the following note : " This is the reference in the original ; but the

It any one says that the man who was formed ^^^^^^ jg mja1)ie to say to what it refers." (!) (Hefeie, mst. of the

of the Virgin is the Only-beqoften, who was born CoimcUs, Vol.in.. p. 36, n. 3^ "Exutero ante Luciferum genm
* i.1, i_ i! J.1 171 J.1 1 J! J.1 I te," the third verse of the Psalm Dixit Dommus, cix.. by the

irom the bosom oi the 1 ather, before the Hebrew numbering ex.


Zli


EPIIESUS. A.D. 4:31


nation of Onhi-bccfotien on account of bis con-
nection with him who in nature is tlie Only-
begotten of the Father ; and besides, if any
one calls another than the Emmanuel Christ ;
let him be anathema.

St. Cyiul.
[Dechiratio Septima.)

"When the blessed Gabriel announced to the
holy Virj^ciii the generation of the only-begot-
ten Son of God according to the flesh, he said,
"Thou shalt bear a son; and thou shalt call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his jieople
from their sins." But he was named also
Christ, because that according to his human
nature he was anointed with us, according to
the words of the P.salmist : "Thou hast loved
righteousness and hated iniquity : therefore
God, even thy God hath anointed thee with
the oil of gladness above thy fellows." For


although he was the giver of the Holy Spirit,
neitlier did ho give it by measure to thorn that
wore wortliy (for he was full of the Holy
Ghost, and of his fulness have we all received,
as it is written), nevertheless as he is man he
was called anointed economically, the Holy
Spirit resting upon him spiritually (ror^TfLs) and
not after the manner of men, in order that he
might abide in us, although he had been driven
forth from us in the beginning by Adam's fall.
He therefore the only begotten AVord of God
made flesh was called Christ. And since he
i:)ossessed as his own the power proper to God,
he wrought his wonders. "Whosoever there-
fore shall say that the glory of tho Only-be-
gotten was added to tho power of Ciirist, as
though the Only-bogotton was different from
Christ, they are thinking of two sons ; the one
truly working and tho other impelled (by the
strength of another, Lat.) as a man like to us ;
and all such fall under the penalty of this
anathematism.


VIII.

If anyone shall dare to say that the assumed man {avakrj^^evTa) ought to be wor-
shipped together with God the Word, and glorified together with him, and recognised
together with him as God, and yet as two different things, the one with the other (for
this "Together with " is added [/. e., by the NestoriansJ to convey this meaning); and
shall not rather wdth one adoration worship the Emmanuel and pay to him one glorifi-
cation, as [it is written] " The "Word was made flesh " : let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Nestorius.


vni.


If any one says that the form of a servant
should, for its own sake, that is, in reference
to its own nature, be reverenced, and that it
is the ruler of all things, and not rather that
[merely] on account of its connection with
the holy and in itself universally-ruling nat-
ure of
enced ;


the Only-begotten, it is to be rever-
let him be anathema.


Hefele.

On this point [made by Nestorius, that
" the form of a servant is the iniler of all
things "] Marius Mercator has already re-
marked with justice, that no Catholic had ever
asserted anything of the kind.


Petavius notes that the version of Diony-
sius Exiguus is defective.

Petavius.

Nestorius captiously and maliciously inter-
preted this as if the "form of a servant"
according to its very nature {ratio) was to be
adored, that is should receive divine woi-ship.
But this is nefarious and far removed from
the mind of Cyril. Since to such an extent
only the Imman nature of Christ is one sup-
positum with the divine, that he declares that
each is the object of one and an undivided
adoration ; lest if a double and dissimilar
cultus be attributed to each one, the divine
person should be divided into two adorable
Sons and Christs, as we have heard Cj'ril
often complaining.


IX.

If any man shall say that the one Lord Jesus Christ was glorified by the Holy
Ghost, so that he used tlirougli him a power not his own and from liim received power
against unclean spirits and power to work miracles before men and shall not rather con-


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 215


fess that it was bis own Spirit through which he worked these divine signs ; let him be
anathema.

NOTES. .

Nestoeius. Prophets had done, or as afterwards his

IX. disciples did, as a kind of gift {heneficii loco).

If anyone says that the form of a servant The Orientals objected that St. Cyril here
is of like nature with the Holy Ghost, and not ! contradicts himself, for here he says that
rather that it owes its union with the Word Christ did not work his wonders by tlie Holy
which has existed since the conception, to Ghost and in another place he frankly con-


his mediation, by which it works miracvilous
healings among men, and possesses the power
of expelling demons ; let him be anathema.

Petavius


fesses that he did so work them. But the
whole poiut is what is intended by working
through the Holy Ghost. For the Apostles
worked miracles through the Holy Ghost but


™, e ,^ • ,1 ,• • i 1 as bv a power external to themselves, but

The scope of this anatnematism is to shew , -^ /-ci • - ttti m • i. ^ ^ i

,^,,■,K^T^er^-\^ i i uot SO Christ. When Christ worked wonders

that the Word of God, when he assumed ,, , ,, -ri i m ^i i, i •

T^ 1 . . 1 i. 1 A ^ ^ • through the Holy Ghogt, he was working

flesh remaining what he was, and lacking ,, ^, i- i i- • 4.1

,1 . 1 • 1 ii TTi -1 J ^ through a power which was his own, viz. : th"

nothing which the Father possessed except ^, . « ^J^^^^ . .. -^. rr.--. . . ,,


only paternity, had as his own the Holy
Spirit which is from him and substantially
abides in him. From this it follows that


e
Third Person of the Holy Trinity ; from
whom he never was and never could be sepa-
rated, ever abiding with him and the Eternal


,1 ' 1 1 • * ii 1 11. Ii Father in the Divine Unity,

through him, as through a power and strength 1 -^

which was his own, and not one alien or I The Westerns have always pointed to


adventitious, he wrought his wonders and
cast forth devils, but he did not receive that
Holy Spirit and his power as formerly the


this anathematism as shewing that St. Cyril
recognized the eternal relation of the Holy
Spirit as being from the Son.


EXCURSUS ON HOW OUR LORD WORKED MIRACLES.

In view of the fact that many are now presenting as if something newly discovered, and
as the latest results of biblical study, the interpretations of the early heretics with regard to
our Lord's powers and to his relation to the Holy Ghost, I have here set down in full Theo-
doret's Counter-statement to the faith accepted by the Ecumenical Councils of the Church.

Theodoret,
(Counter Statement to Anath. IX. of Cyril.)
Here he has plainly had the hardihood to anathematize not only those who at the present
time hold pious opinions, but also those who were in former days heralds of truth ; aye even
the writers of the divine Gospels, the band of the holy Apostles, and, in addition to these,
Gabriel the archangel. For he indeed it was who first, even before the conception, an-
nounced the birth of the Christ according to the flesh ; saying in reply to Mary when she
asked, " How shall this be, seeing I know not a man ? " " The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee ; therefore also that holy
thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." And to Joseph he said,
"Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the
Holy Ghost." And the Evangelist says, " When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph
. . . she was found with child of the Holy Ghost." And the Lord himself when he had
come into the synagogue of the Jews and had taken the prophet Isaiah, after reading the
passage in which he says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he hath anointed me"
and so on, added, " This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." And the blessed Peter
in his sermon to the Jews said, " God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost."
And Isaiah many ages before had predicted '" There shall come forth a rod out of the stem


216 EP1IE8US. A.l). 431


of Jesse, and a branch shall wrow out of his roots ; and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the sj^irit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord " ; .and again, " Behold my servant whom I uphold, my
beloved in whom my soul delighteth. I will jjut my Spirit upon him : he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles." This testimony the Evangelist too has inserted in his own
writings. And the Lord himself in the Gospels says to the Jews, " If I with the Spirit of
God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you." And John says, " He
that sent me to bajatize with water, the same said unto me. Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizetli with the Holy Gliost."
So this exact examiner of the divine decrees has not onl}' anathematized proi)liets, apostles,
and even the archangel Gabriel, but has suffered his blasphemy to reach even the Saviour of
the world himself. For we have shewn that the Lord himself after reading the passage "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he had anointed me," said to the Jews, " This day is
this scripture fulfilled in your eai's." And to those who said that he was casting out devils
by Beelzebub he rejilied that he was casting them out by the Spirit of God. But Ave main-
tain that it was not God the Word, of one substance and co-eternal with the Father, that
was formed by the Holy Ghost and anointed, but the human nature which was assumed by
him at the end of days. We shall confess that the Spirit of the Son was his own if he spoke
of it as of the same nature and proceeding from the Father, and shall accept the expression
as consistent with true piety. But if he speaks of the Spirit as being of the Son, or as hav-
ing its origin through the Son we shall reject this statement as blasphemous and impious.
For we believe the Lord when he says, " The spirit which proceedeth from the Father " ; and
likewise the very divine Paul saying, " We have received not the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God."

In the foregoing will be found the very same arguments used and the same texts cited
against the Catholic faith as ai'o urged and cited by the Rev. A. J. Mason. The Conditions of
Our Lord's Life on Earth, and by several other recent writers.


Whosoever shall sa}- that it is not the di\dne Word himself, when he was made flesh
and had become man as we are, but another than he, a man born of a woman, yet dif-
ferent from him (tSt«to9 av^pwirov), who is become our Great High Priest and Apostle ; or
if any man shall say that he offered himself in sacrifice for himself and not rather for us,
whereas, being without sin, he had no need of offering or sacrifice : let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Nestorius.
z.


If any one maintains that the Word, who is
from the beginning, has become the high priest


St. Cyril.

(Declaratio decima.)

But I do not know how those who think
otherwise contend tliat the very Word of God


and apostle of our confession, and has offered made man, was not the apostle and high-priest

himself for us, and does not rather say that it of our profession, but a man different from

is the work of Emmanuel to be an apostle ; him ; who was born of the holy Virgin, was

and if any one in such a manner divides the called our apostle and high-priest, and came

sacrifice botween him who united [the Wordj to this gradually ; and tliat not only for us did

and him who was united [the manhood] refer- he offer himself a sacrifice to God and the

ring it to a common sonship, that is, not giving Father, but also for himself. A statement

to God that which is God's, aTid to man that which is wholly contrar}' to the right and un-
which is man's ; let him be anathema. j defiled faith, for he did no sin, but was sujdc-


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


217


rior to fault and altogether free from sin, and I thinking of tAvo sons, this anathematism be-
needed no sacrifice for himself. Since those came necessary that their impiety might ap-
who think differently were again unreasonably pear.


XI.

Whosoever shall not confess that the flesh of the Lord giveth life and that it per-
tains to the Word of God the Father as his very own, but shall pretend that it belongs
to another person who is united to him [i.e., the Word] only according to honour, and
who has served as a dwelling for the divinity ; and shall not rather confess, as we say,
that that flesh giveth life bscause it is that of the Word who giveth life to all : let him
be anathema.

NOTES.


Nestorius.

XI.

If any one maintains that the flesh which
is united with God the Word is by the power
of its own nature life-giving, whereas the Lord
himself says, "It is the Sjjirit that qviicken-
eth ; the flesh profiteth nothing " (St. John vi.
64), let him be anathema. [He adds, " God
is a Spirit " (St. John iv. 24). If, then, any
one maintains that God the Logos has in a
carnal manner, in his substance, become flesh,
and persists in this with reference to the Lord
Christ ; who himself after his resurrection said
to his disciples, " Handle me and see ; for a
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold
me having " (St. Luke xxiv. 39) ; let him be
anathema.]

Hefele.

The part enclosed in brackets is certainly a
spurious addition and is wanting in many
manuscripts. Cf. Marius Mercator [ed.
Migne], p. 919.


St. Cyril.

{Declaratio undechna.)

We perform in the churches the holy, life-
giving, and unbloody sacrifice ; the body, as
also the precious blood, which is exhibited we
believe not to be that of a common man and
of anv one like unto us, but receiving it rather
as his own body and as the blood of the Word
which gives all things life. For common flesh
cannot give life. And this our Saviour himself
testified when he said : " The flesh profiteth
nothing, it is the Spirit that giveth lite."' For
since the flesh became the very own of the
Word, therefore we understand that it is life-
giving, as the Saviour himself said : "As the
living Father hath sent me, and I live by the
Father ; so he that eateth me shall live by me."
Since therefore Nestorius and those who think
with him rashty dissolve the power of this
mystery ; therefore it was convenient that this
, anathematism should be put forth.


XII.

Whosoe^t^r shaU not recognize that the Word of God suffered in the flesh, that he
was crucified in the flesh, and that likewise in that same flesh he tasted death and that
he is become the first-begotten of the dead, for, as he is God, he is the life and it is he
that giveth life : let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Nestorius.

XII.


If any one, in confessing the sufferings of
the flesh, ascribes these also to the Word of
God as to the flesh in which he appeared, and
thus does not distinguish the dignity of the
natures ; let him be anathema.

St. Cyril.
{Adv. OriewfaZes, ad XII. Quoting Athanasius.)
For if the bodv is of another, to him also


must the sufferings be ascribed. But if the
flesh is the Word's (for " The Word was made
flesh ") it is necessary that the sufferings of
the flesh be called his also whose is the flesh.
But whose are the sufferings, such especially
as condemnation, flagellation, thirst, the cross,
death, and other such like infirmities of the
body, his also is the merit and the grace.
Therefore rightly and properly to none other
are these sufferings attribiited than to the
Lord, as also the grace is from him ; and we
shall not be guilty of idolati*}', but be the true


218


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


worshippers of Gocl, for we invoke liim who
is no creature nor any common man, but the
natural and true Son of God, made man, and
yet the same Lord and God and Savioui".

As I think, these quotations will suffice to
the learned for the proof of the propositions
advanced, the Divine Law j^lainly saying that
" In the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word shall he established." But if after this
anv one would still seem to be contentious,


we would say to him : " Go thine own way.
We however shall follow the divine Scriptures
and the faith of the Holy Fathers."

The student should read at full length all
Cyril's defence of his anathematisms, also his
answers to the criticisms of Theodoret, and
to those of the Orientals, all of which will be
found in his works, and in Labbe and Cossart,
Concilia, Tom. III., 811 e^ )ieqq.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I. {Continued).
(L. and C, Cone, Tom. III., Col. 503.)


[No action is recorded in the Acts as hav- j
ing been taken. A verbal report icas made
by certain iclio had seen Nestorius during the
past three days, that they loere hopeless of
any repentance on his part. On the motion
of Flavian, bishop of Philippi, a number of
passages from the Fathers ivere read ; and
after that some selections from the luritings I
of Nestorius. A letter from Capreolus, Arch-
bishop of Carthage, ivas next read, excusing
his absence ; after the reading of the letter,
ivhich makes no direct reference to Nestorius
whatever, bid jyi'ciys the Synod to see to it that
no novelties be tolerated, the Acts proceed.
(Col. 534).] ,

Cyiil, the bishop of the Church of Alex-
andria, said : As this letter of the most
reverend and pious Capreolus, bishop of


Carthage, which has been read, contains a
most lucid expression of opinion, let it be
inserted in the Acts. For it wishes that
the ancient dogmas of the faith should be
confirmed, and that novelties, absurdly con-
ceived and impiously brought forth, should
be reprobated and proscribed.

All the bishops at the same time cried
out : These are the sentiments {(fxovai) of
all of us, these are the tilings we all say —
the accomplishment of this is the desire of
us all.

[Immediately folloivs the sentence of de-
position and the subscriptions. It seems al-
most certain that something has dropped out
here, most probably the whole discussion of
CyriVs XII. Anathematisms.l


DECREE OF THE COUNCIL AGAINST NESTORIUS.

{Found in all the Concilia in Greek icith Latin Versions.)

As, in addition to other things, the impious Nestorius has not obeyed our citation,
and did not receive the holy bish()])s who were sent by us to him, we were compelled to
examine his ungodly doctrines. AVe discovered that 1h^ had liold and pulilished impi-
ous doctrines in his letters and treatises, as Avell as in discourses which he delivered iu
this city, and whicli have been testified to. Compelled thereto by the canons and by
the letter {dvayKaio)'^ /careTret^^'^uVTe'? utto re rwv Kavovwv, Kal eK t^9 €7naToXi]<;, k. t. \.)
of our most holy father and fellow-servant Coelestine, the Roman bishop, we have come,
with many tears, to this sorrowful sentence against him, namely, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom he has blasphemed, decrees by the holy Synod that Nestorius be excluded
from the episcopal dignity, and from all priestly communion.

NOTES.


The words for which I have given the origi-
nal Greek, are not mentioned by Canon
Bright in his Article on St. Cyril in Smith and


bvFfoulkesin his article on the Council of
Ephesus in Smith and Cheetham's Dictionnrij
(f (Jhristiaii A)/fir/itifirs. Tliey do not a]-)penr


Wace's iJicfiotKtn/ of C'hri.sdau Biof/riiph// ; nor , in Canon Robertsons Hisfon/ of {hr Chmrh.


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


219


And strangest of all, Dean Milman cites the
sentence in English in the text and in Greek
in a note but in each case omits all mention
of the letter of the Pope, marking however in
the Greek that there is an omission. [Lat.
Chr., Bk. II., Chap. III.) ' I also note that the
translation in the English edition of Hefele's
Bisfonj of the Councils (Vol. III., p. 51) is mis- .
leading and inaccurate, " Urged by the canons, [
and in accordance with the letter etc." The ]
participle by itself might mean nothing more \
than " urged " (ride Liddell and Scott on this
verb and also eTretyw) but the adverb which pre-
cedes it, avayKatoj-i, Certainly is sufficient to


necessitate the coacti of the old Latin version
which I have followed, translating " compelled
thereto." It will also be noticed that while
the prepositions used with regard to the
" canons " and the "letter" are different, yet
that their grammatical relation to the verb is
identical is shewn by the re — /cat, which proves
the translation cited above to be utterly in-
correct.

Hefele for the " canons " refers to canon
number Ixxiv. of the Apostolic Canons ; which
orders an absent bishop to be summoned
thrice before sentence be given against him.


EXTRACTS FEOM THE ACTS.
SESSION II.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 609.)


The most pious and God-beloved bishops,
Arcadius and Projectus, as also the most
beloved -of -God Philip, a presbytei- and
legate of the Apostolic See, then entered
and took their seats.^

Philip the presbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said : We bless the holy and
adorable Trinity that our lowliness has been
deemed worthy to attend your holy Synod


be able to see what care he has for all the
Churches.

Projectus, a bishop and legate of the Ro-
man Church said, May it please, etc. [The
same as Arcadius had said verbatim !]

And afterw^ards the most holy and be-
loved-of-God Cyril, bishop of the Church of
Alexandria, spoke as is next in order con-
tained ; Siricius, notary of the holy Catholic


For a long time ago (TraXat) our most holy (/ca^oXt/c^?) Church of Rome read it


and blessed pope Coelestine, bishop of the
Apostolic See, through his letters to that
holy and most pious man Cyril, bishop of
Alexandria, gave judgment concerning the
present cause and affair {copta-ev) which let-
ters have been shewn to your holy assem-
bly. And now again for the corroboration
of the Catholic ( Kal^oXiKpjq) faith, he has sent
through us letters to all your holinesses,
which you wall bid {KeXovaare) to be read
with becoming reverence {irpeirovTWi) and
to be entered on the ecclesiastical minutes.

Arcadius, a bishop and legate of the
Roman Church said : May it please your
blessedness to give order that the letters
of the holy and ever-to-be-mentioned-with-
veneration Pope Coelestine, bishop of the
Apostolic See, wdiich have been brought by
us, be read, from which your reverence will


Cyril, the bishop of Alexandria said :
Let the letter received from the most holy
and altogether most blessed Coelestine,
bishop of the Apostolic See of Rome be
read to the holy Synod with fitting honour.

Siricius, notary of the holy Catholic (/ca-
^dkiKrj'i) Church of the city of Rome read it.

And after it was read in Latin, Juvenal,
the bishop of Jerusalem said : Let the
writings of the most holy and blessed bishop
of great Rome which have just been read,
be entered on the minutes.

And all the most reverend bishops prayed
that the letter might be translated and read.

Philip, the presbyter of the Apostolic See
and Legate said : The custom has been
sufficiently complied with, that the writings
of the Apostolic See should first be read in
Latin.^ But now since your holiness has


' Complaint of all this has very justly been made recently by the
Rev. Lul^e Rivington, a Romau Catholic writer, in his work The
Primilice Church and the See of refer, p 336.

'■' It should be noted that in the Acts Cyril is described as hav-
ing '• the place of the most holy and sacred Archbishop of the
Roman Church Coelestine." Hefele says " that Cyril presided as
Pope's vicar is asserted also by Mennas of Constantinople and


other Greek bishops in their letter to Pope Vigilius. in Mansi, t.
ix., p. 62; Hardouin, t. iii., p. 10." (Hef., Hist, of the Councils,
Vol. HI., p. 46, n. 4.)

3 This seems to me to be the climax of improbable statements.
There are many other things which will induce the curious reader
to suspect that the Acts are not in good shape.


220


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


demanded that the}' be read in Greek also,
it is necessary that yonr holiness's desire
should be satisfied ; Vs'v have taken care
that this be done, and tliat the Latin be
turned into Greek. Give order therefore
that it be received and read in your holy
hearing.

Arcadius and Projectus, bishops and le-
j];ates said, As yom- blessedness ordered that
the writings which we brought should be


brought to the knowledge of all, for of our

■ holy brethren bishops there are not a few

who do not understand Latin, theitfoie the

' letter has been translated into Greek and if

yon so command let it be read.

Flavian, the l)isho]i of Phili])])i said : Let
the translation of the letter of the most
holy and beloved of God, bishop of the Ro-
man Church be received and read.

Peter, the ])resbvter of Alexandria and
primicerius of the notaries read as follows :


THE LETTER OF POPE CCELESTINE TO THE SYNOD OF EPHESUS.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 013. Also Migne, Pat. Lot, Tom. L.,

col. 505.')

Coelestine tlu^ bislioji to the holy Synod ] ceived a general command : for he wills that
assembled at Ephesus, brethren beloved and all of us should ])erform that office, which
most longed for, greeting in the Lord. j he thus entrusted in common to all the

A Synod of priests gives witness to the Apostles. We must needs follow our pred-
presence of the Holy Spirit. For true is ecessors. Let us all, then, undertake their
that which we read, siuce the Truth cannot labours, since we are the successors in their
lie, to wit, the promise of the Gospel ; honour. And we shew forth our diligence
*' WTiere two or three are gathered together in preaching the same doctrines that they
in my name, there am I in the midst of taught, beside which, according to the ad-
them." And since this is so, if the Holy monition of the Apostle, we are forbidden
Spirit is not absent from so small a number to add aught. For the office of keeping
how much more may we believe he is pres- what is committed to our trust is no less
ent when so great a multitude of holy ones dignified than that of handing it down,
are assembled together ! Every council is They sowed the seed of the faith. This


holy on account of a peculiar veneration
which is its due ; for in every such council
the reverence which should be ]3aid to that


shall be our care that the coming of our
great father of the family, to whom alone
assuredly this fulness of the Apostles is as-


most famous council of the Apostles of | signed, may find fruit uncorrupt and many
which we read is to be had regard to. Never : fold. For the vase of election tells us that
was the Master, whom they had received to it is not sufficient to plant and to Avatin- un-
preach, lacking to this, but ever was present less God gives the increase. We must strive
as Lord and Master ; and never were those therefore in common to keep the faith which
who taught deserted by their teacher. For has come down to us to-day, through the
he that had sent them Mas their teacher ; he Apostolic Succession. For we are expected
who had commanded what was to be taught, to walk according to the Apostle. For now
was their teacher ; he who afiirms that he not our ajipearance {spcvica) but our faith is
himself is heard in his Apostles, was their called in qiiestion. Spiritual weai)ons are
teacher. This duty of prc^aching has been those we must take, because the war is one
entrusted to all the Lord's ])riests in com- of minds, and the weapons are words ; so
mon, for by right of iidieiitance we are shall Ave be strong in the faith of our King,
bound to undertake this solicitutle, avIio- Now the Blessed Apostle Paul admonishes
ever of us ]n-each the name of the Lord in that all should remain in that place in which
divers lands in their stead : for he said to he bid Timothy remain. The same ]>lace
them, " Go, teach all nations." You, dear therefore, the same cause, lays upon us the
brethren, should observe that we have re- same dut}'. Let us now also do and study


' This letter we know was orieinally wTitten in Latin, and that
it was translated into Greek and fhen read afterwards in that lan-
pnage to the Council. There would seem to be no douht that the
Oreelt text we now find in the Acts Is that first translation, but
whether the Latin is the oriL'inal or whether it is a trans latiou back
a-^ain from the Greek is not known, so far as 1 am aware. Cer-


tainly the Latin is of the most extraordinary character, and sng-
pests that it was the work of one not skilled in that toncue. The
text in several places is manifestly corrupt and the Greek and
Latin do not always atrrce. If I may venture to express an opin-
ion I should say that the Greek was more liir'd. AlthouL-h fn
nineteen places Labbe considers the true readinp uncertain.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


221


that wliicli lie then commanded liim to do.
And let no one think otherwise, and let no
one pay heed to over strange fables, as he
himself ordered. Let iis be mianimons,
thinking the same thing, for this is expedi-
ent : let ns do nothing out of contention,
nothing out of vain glory : let us be in all
things of one mind, of one heart, when the
faith which is one, is attacked. Let the
whole body grieve and mourn in common
with us. He who is to judge the world is
called into judgment ; he who is to criticise
all, is himself made the object of criticism,
he who redeemed lis is made to sutler cal-
umny. Dear Brethren, gird ye with the ar-
mour of God. Ye know what helmet must
protect our head, what breast -plate our
breast. For this is not the first time the
ecclesiastical camps have received you as
their rulers. Let no one doubt that by the
favour of the Lord who maketli twain to be
one, there will be peace, and that arms will
be laid aside since the very cause defends
itself.

Let us look once again at these words of
our Doctor, which he uses with express
reference to bishops, saying, "Take heed
to yourselves and to the whole flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has placed you as
bishop, that ye rvile the church of God,
which he hath purchased with his blood."

We read that they who heard this at
Ephesus, the same place at which your holi-
ness is come together, were called thence.
To them therefore to whom this preaching
of the faith was known, to them also let
your defence of the same faith also be
knoAvn. Let us shew them the constancy
of our mind with that reverence which is
due to matters of great importance ; which
things peace has guarded for a long time
with pious understanding.

Let there be announced by you what
things have been preserved intact from the
Apostles ; for the words of tyrannical oppo-
sition are never admitted against the King
of Kings, nor can the business of truth be
oppressed by falsehood.

I exhort you, most blessed brethren, that


love alone be regarded in which we ought
to remain, according to the voice of John
the Ajiostle whose reliques we venerate in
this city. Let common prayer be offered
to the Lord. For we can form some idea
of what will be the power of the divine
presence at the united intercession of such
a multitude of priests, by considering how
the very place was moved where, as we
read, the Twelve made together their sup-
plication. And what was the purport of
that prayer of the Apostles ? It was that
they might receive grace to speak the word
of God with confidence, and to act through
its power, both of which they received by
the favour of Christ our God. And now
what else is to be asked for by yoiu" holy
council, except that ye may speak the Word
of the Lord with confidence? What else
than that he would give you grace to pre-
serve that which he has given you to
preach? that being filled Avith the Holy
Ghost, as it is written, ye may set forth
that one truth which the Spirit himself has
taught you, although with divers voices.

Animated, in brief, by all these consider-
ations (for, as the Apostle says : "I speak
to them that know the law, and I speak
wisdom among them that are perfect "),

J stand fast by the Catholic faith, and defend
the peace of the Churches, for so it is said,

; both to those past, present, and future, ask-
ing and preserving " those things which be-
long to the peace of Jerusalem."

Out of our solicitude, we have sent our
holy brethren and fellow priests, who are
at one with us and are most approved men,
Arcadius, and Projectus, the bishops, and
our presbyter, Philip, that they may be
present at what is done and may caiTy out
what things have been already decreed by
us {quce a nobis antea statuta sunt, exequan-
tur).

To the performing of which we have no
doubt that your holiness will assent when it
is seen that what has been decreed is for
the security of the whole church. Given

' the viij of the Ides of May, in the consulate

, of Bassus and Antiochus.


222


EPIIESU8. A.D. 431


EXTRACTS FRO]\r THE ACTS.


SESSION II. (ContiuuecL)
(Labbc and Cossart, Conc'dia, Tom, III., col. G17.)


And all tlio most reverend bishops at the
same time cried out. This is a just judg-
ment. To Ccelestine, a new Paul ! To Cyril
a new Paul ! To Ccelestine the guardian of
the faith ! To Ccelestine of one mind witli
tlie synod ! To Ccelestine the Avhole Synod
offers its thanks! One Ccelestine! One
Cyril ! One faith of the Synod ! One faith
of the world !

Projectus, the most reverend bishop and
legate, said : Let your holiness consider
the form (rvTrov) of the writings of the holy
and venerable pope Ccelestine, the bishop,
Avho has exhortetl your holiness (not as if
teaching the ignorant, but as reminding
them that knoAv) that those things Avhich
he had long ago defined, and now thought
it right to remind you of, ye might give
command to be carried out to the utter-
most, according to the canon of the com- 1
mon faith, and according to the use of the i
Catholic Church.

Firmus, the bishop of Cnesarea in Cappa-
docia said: The Apostolic and holy see of
the most holy bishop Ccelestine, hath pre-
viously given a decision and type (tvitov)
in this matter, through the writings which
were sent to the most God beloved l)ishops,
to wit to Cyril of Alexandria, and to Juvenal
of Jerusalem, and to Kufus of Thessalonica,
and to the holy churches, both of Constan-
tinoj)le and of Antioch. This we have also
f(jllo\ved and (since the limit set for Nesto-
rius's emendation was long gone by, and
much time has passed since our arrival at
the city of Ephesus in accordance with the
decree of the most pious emperor, and
thereupon having delayed no little time so
that the day fixed by the emperor was past ;
and since Nestoriiis although cited had not
appeared) we carried into effect the type
(rvirov) having ])ronounced against him a
canonical and apostolical judgment.

Arcadius the most reverend bishop and
legate, said : Although our sailing was


slow, and contrary winds hindered us espe-
cially, so that we did not know whether
Ave should arrive at the destined place, as
we had hoped, nevertheless b}' God's good
]n'ovidence . . . Wherefore we desire
to ask your blessedness, that you command
that we be taught what has been already
decreed by your holiness.

Philip, presbyter and legate of the Apos-
tolic See said : We offer our thanks to the
hcily and venerable Synod, that when the
writings of our holy and blessed i)0])e had
been read to you, the holy members by our
[or yoiu'l holy voices,' ye joined yourselves
to the holy head also by your holy acclama-
tions. For your blessedness is not igncn-ant
that the head of the whole faith, the head
of the Apostles, is blessed Peter the Apos-
tle. And since now our mediocrity, after
having been tempest-tossed and much vexed,
has arrived, we ask that ye give order that
there be laid before us what things were
done in this holy Synod before our arrival ;
in order that according to the opinion of
our blessed pope and of this present holy
assembly, we likewise may ratify theii' de-
termination.

Theodotus, the bishop of Ancyra said:
The God of the whole world has made
manifest the justice of the judgment pro-
nounced by the hoi}' Synod by the writings
of the most religious bishop Ccelestine, and
by the coming of your holiness. For ye
have made manifest the zeal of the most
holy and reverend bishop Ccelestine, and
his care for the pious faith. And since
very reasonably your reverence is desirous
of learning Avhat has been done from the
minutes of the acts concerning the deposi-
tion of Nestorius your reverence Avill be
fully convinced of the justice of the sen-
tence, and of the zeal of tlu; holy Synod,
and the symphcmy of the faith which the
most pious and holy l)isli()]) Co'lcstine has

' Thin seeme to be certainly corrupt. 1 have literally followed
the Greek.


EPIIE8US. A.I). 431


223


proclaimed with a great voice, of course af-
ter your full conviction, the rest shall be
added to the present action.

[In the Acts foUoiv tivo short letters from


Ccelestine, one to the Emperor and the other
to Cyril, but nothimj is said about them, or
how they got there, and thus abruptly ends
the account of this session.]


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.
SESSION III.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 621.)


Juvenal the bishop of Jerusalem said to
Arcadius and Projectus the most reverend
bishops, and to Philip the most reverend
presbyter : Yesterday while this holy and
great synod was in session, when your
holiness was present, you demanded after
the reading of the letter of the most holy
and blessed bishop of Great Rome, Cceles-
tine, that the minutes made in the Acts
with regard to the deposition of Nestorius
the heretic should be read. And thereupon
the Synod ordered this to be done. Your
holiness will be good enough to inform us
whether you have read them and under-
stand their power.

Philip the pi*esbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said : From reading the Acts
we have found what things have been done
in your holy synod with regard to Nesto-
rius. We have found from the minutes that
all things have been decided in accordance
with the canons and with ecclesiastical dis-
cipline. And now also we seek from your
honour, although it may be useless, that
what things have been read in your synod,
the same should now again be read to us
also ; so that we may follow the formula
{ruTTft)) of the most holy pope Ccelestine
(who committed this same care to us), and
of your holiness also, and may be able to
confirm {^e^atcocrac) the judgment.

[Arcadius J caving seconded Philip's motion,
3Iemnon directed the acts to be read luhich was
done by the primicerius of the 7iotaries.]

Philip the presbyter and legate of the
Apostolic See said : There is no doubt, and
in fact it has been known in all ages, that
the holy and most blessed Peter, prince
{e^ap')^o^) and head of the Apostles, pillar
of the faith, and foundation (Se/^eXio?) of
the Catholic Church, received the keys of
the kingdom from our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Saviour and Redeemer of the human


race, and that to him was given the power
of loosing and l)inding sins : who down
even to to-day and forever both lives and
judges in his successors. The holy and
most blessed pope Ccelestine, according to
due order, is his successor and holds his
place, and us he sent to supply his place
in this holy synod, which the most humane
and Christian Emperors have commanded
to assemble, bearing in mind and continu-
ally watching over the Catholic faith. For
they both have kept and are now keeping
intact the apostolic doctrine handed down
to them from their most pious and humane
grandfathers and fathers of holy memory
down to the present time, etc.

[There is no further reference in the speech
to the papal prerogatives.]

Arcadius the most reverend bishop and
legate of the Apostolic See said : Nestorius
hath brought us great sorrow. . . . And
since of his own accord he hath made him-
self an alien and an exile from us, we fol-
lowing the sanctions handed down from the
beginning by the holy Apostles, and by the
Catholic Church (for they taught what they
had received from our Lord Jesus Christ),
also following the types {TV7roi<i) of Cceles-
tine, most holy pope of the Apostolic See,
who has condescended to send us as his ex-
ecutors of this business, and also following
the decrees of the holy Synod [we give this
as our conclusion] : Let Nestorius know that
he is deprived of all episcopal dignity, and
is an alien from the whole Church and from
the communion of all its priests.

Projectus, bishop and legate of the Ro-
man Church said : Most clearly from the
reading, etc. . . . Moreover I also, by
my authority as legate of the holy Apostolic
See, define, being with my brethren an ex-
ecutor (iK^i,/3a(TTT}<i) of the aforesaid sen-
tence, that the beforenamed Nestorius is an


224


El'IiESL'JS. A.D. 431


enemy of the truth, a corrupter of the faith,
and as guilty of the tilings of which he was
accused, has been roinovcd from the grade
of Episcopal honour, and moreover from the
communion of all orthodox priests.

Cyril, the bishoj) of Alexandria said : The
professions which have been made b}' Ar-
cadius and Projectus, the most holy and
pious bishops, as also by Philip, the most
religious ]iV(^sbytor of the Pioman Church,
stand manifest to the holy Synod. For they
have made their profession in the place of
the Apostolic See, and of the whole of the
holy synod of the God-beloved and most
holy bishops of the West. AVlun'ehn-e let
those things which were defined by the most
holy Coelestine, the God-beloved bishop, be
carried into effect, and the vote cast against
Nestorius the heretic, by the holy Synod,
which met in the metro})olis of Ephesus
be agreed to universally ; for this purpose


let there be added to the already prepared
acts the proceedings of yesterday and to-
day, and let them be shewn to their holiness,
so that by their subscription according to
custom, their canonical agreement with all
of us may be manifest.

Arcadius the most reverend l)ishop and
legate of the Roman Church, said : Accord-
ing to the acts of this holy Synod, we nec-
essarily confirm with our subscriptions
, their doctrines.

The Holy Synod said : Since Ai'cadius
and Projectus the most reverend and most
religioiis bishops and legates and Philip,
j the presbyter and legate of the Apostolic
I See, have said that they are of the same
mind with us. it only remains, that they
redeem their jiromises and confirm the acts
with their signatures, and then let the min-
utes of the acts be shewn to them.
[IVie three then siyned.l


THE CANONS OF THE TWO HUNDRED HOLY AND BLESSED
FATHERS WHO MET AT EPHESUS.^

{Critical Annotations on the text will he fotmd in Dr. Routlis Scriptorum Eccl. Opusc.

Tom. IL [Ed. III.] p. 85.)

The holy and ecumenical Synod, gathered together in Ephesus by the decree of
our most religious Emperors, to the bishojDs, presbyters, deacons, and all the people in
every province and city :

When we had assembled, according to the religious decree [of the Emperors], in the
Metropolis of Ephesus, certain persons, a little more than thirty in number, withdrew
from amongst us, having for the leader of their schism John, Bishop of Antioch. Tlieir
names are as follows : first, the said John of Antioch in Syria, John of Damascus, Alex-
ander of Apamea, Alexander of Hierapolis, Himerius of Nicomedia, Fritilas of Hera-
clea, Helladius of Tarsus, Maximin of Anazarbus, Theodore of Marcianopolis, Peter of
Trajauopolis, Paul of Emissa, Polychronius of Heracleopolis, Euthyrius of Tyana, Mele-
tius of Neocaesarea, Theodoret of Cyrus, Apringius of Chalcedou, Macarius of Laodicea
Magna, Zosys of Esbus, Sallust of Corycus in Cilicia, Hesychius of Castabala in Cili-
cia, Valentine of Mutloblaca, Eustathius of Parnassus, Philip of Theodosia, and Daniel,
and Dexianus, and Julian, and Cyril, and Olympius, and Diogenes, Polius, Theophanes
of Philadelphia, Trajan of Augusta, Aurelius of Irenopolis, Mysseus of Aradus, Hella-
dius of Ptolemais, These men, having no privilege of ecclesiastical communion on the
ground of a priestly authority, by which they could injure or benefit any persons ; since
some of them had already been deposed ; and since from their refusing to join in our
decree against Nestorius, it was manifestly evident to all men that they were all pro-
moting the opinions of Nestorius and Celestius ; the Holy Synod, by one common de-
cree, deposed them from all ecclesiastical communion, and deprived them of all their
priestly power by which they might injure or profit any persons.

CANON I.

Whekeas it is needful that they who were detained from the holy Synod and re-
mained in their own district or city, for any reason, ecclesiastical or personal, should
not be ignorant of the matters which were thereby decreed ; we, therefore, notify your
holiness and charity that if any Metropolitan of a Province, forsaking the holy and
Ecumenical Synod, has joined the assembly of the apostates, or shall join the same
hereafter ; or, if he has adopted, or shall hereafter adopt, the doctrines of Celestius, he
has no power in any way to do anything in opposition to the bishops of the province,
since he is already cast forth from all ecclesiastical communion and made incapable of
exercising his ministry ; but he shall himself be subject in all things to those very
bishops of the province and to the neighbouring orthodox metropolitans, and shall be
degraded from his episcopal rank.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon I. j same is true of this first canon. Ed.'] " Clerics

If a metropoUtan, having deserted his synod, \ 7^^° ''^^^^} ^'^^^ consented to Celestine or Nes-

adheres or shall adhere to Celestine, let Mm be ^^'^^^^ should be deposed," let him not read

"Celestine" with an " n," but "Celestius"
without the "n." For Celestine was the holy
and orthodox Pope of Kome, Celestius was
the heretic.

It is perfectly certain that this was no ac-


cast out.

Nicholas Hydruntinus.

Scholion concerning Celestine and Celes-
tius. Whoso finds at the end of the fourtli
canon of the Holy Synod of Ephesus [and the


' This is the caption in most MSS., but in the Cod. Seguierianus it is quite different. Vide Labbe, Cone, in., 802.


226 KI'HESrS. A.D. 431


cident on the part of Aristeuus, for in his eri(lf,'e well points out that this confusion is

commentary on Canon V., he expressly says all the more remarkable as in the Kalendar of

that "Celestine was Bishop of Rome" and the Saints observed at that very time by the

goes on to affirm that, '"The Holy Synod de- Greeks, on the eighth day of April was kept

creed that they who embraced the opinions the memory of " Celestine, Pope of Rome, as

of Nestorius and Celestine," etc. What per- a Saint and Champion a<i^ainst the Nestorian

haps is equally astonishing is that Nicholas heretics." (Bev., Annot, in C. v.).
Hydruntinus, while correcting the name, still

is of opinion that Celestius was a pope of Simeon the Logothete adds to this epitome

Rome and begins his scholion with the title, the words, Kai to c'^? dStotVr^To? which are nec-
-Trepi KeAecTTiVov kuI KeAeo-rioi;, IlaTraii' Pw/xt^s. Bev- ' essary to make the sense complete.

EXCURSUS ON THE CONCILIABULUM OF JOHN OF ANTIOCH.

The assembly referred to in this canon is one held by John of Antioch who had delayed
his coming so as to hamper the meeting of the synod. John was a friend of Nestorius and
made many fruitless attempts to induce him to accept the orthodox faith. It will be noticed
that the conciliabulum was absolutely silent with respect to Nestorius and his doctrine and
contented itself with attacking St. Cyril and the orthodox Meranon, the bishop of Ephesus.
St. Cyril and his friends did indeed accuse the Antiochenes of being adherents of Nestorius,
and in a negative way they certainly were so, and were in ojien opposition to the defenders
of the orthodox faith ; but, as Tillemont ' has well pointed out, they did not theologically
agree with the heresy of Nestorius, gladly accepted the orthodox watchword " Mother of
God," and subsequently agreed to his deposition.

The fii-st session of the Council of Ephesus had already taken place on June 22, and it
was only on June 26th or 27th, that John of Antioch arrived at last at Ephesus.

(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. III., p. 55 et seqq.)

The Synod immediately sent a deputation to meet him, consisting of several bishops and
clei'ics, to show him proper respect, and at the same time to make him acquainted with the
deposition of Nestorius, so that he might not be drawn into any intercourse with him. The
soldiers who surrounded Archbishop John prevented the deputation from speaking to him
in the street ; consequently they accompanied him to his abode, but were compelled to wait
here for several hours, exposed to the insults of the soldiers, and at last, when they had dis-
charged their commission, were driven home, ill-treated and beaten. Count Irenseus, the
friend of Nestorius, had suggested this treatment, and appx'oved of it. The envoys immedi-
ately informed the Synod of what had happened, and showed the wounds which they had
received, which called forth great indignation against John of Antioch. According to the
representation of Memnon, excommunication was for this reason pronounced against him ;
but we shall see further on that this did not take place until afterwards, and it is clear that
Memnon, in his bi'ief narrative, has passed over an intermediate portion — the threefold invi-
tation of John. In the meantime, Candidian had gone still further in his opposition to the
members of the svnod, causing them to be annoved and insulted by his soldiers, and even
cutting ofif their supply of food, while he j^rovided Nestorius with a regular body-guard of
armed peasants. John of Antioch, immediately after his arrival, while still dusty from the
journey, and at the time when he was allowing the envoys of the synod to wait, held at his
■own residence a Conciliabulum with his adherents, at which, tirst of all Count Candidian
related how Cyril and his friends, in spite of all warnings, and in opposition to the imperial
decrees, had held a session five days before, had contested his (the count's) right to be pres-
ent, had dismissed the bishops sent by Nestorius, and had paid no attention to the letters of

I Tillemont, hUmoires, Tom. xiv.


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 227


others. Before he proceeded further, John of Antioch requested that the Emperor's edict
of convocation should be read, whereupon Candidian went on with his account of what had
taken place, and in answer to a fresh question of John's declared that Nestorius had been
condemned unheard. John found this quite in keeping with the disposition of the synod
since, instead of receiving him and his companions in a friendly manner, they had rushed
upon them tumultuously (it was thus that he described what had happened), lint ihc holy
Synod, which ivas now assembled, would decide what was proper with respect to them. And
this synod, of which John speaks in such grandiloquent terms, numbered only forty-three
members, including himself, while on the other side there were more than two hundred.

John then proposed the question [as to] what was to be decided respecting Cj'ril and his
adherents ; and several who were not particularly pronounced Nestorian bishops came for-
ward to relate how Cyril and Memnon of Ephesus had, from the beginning, maltreated
the Nestorians, had allowed them no church, and even on the festival of Pentecost had per-
mitted them to hold no service. Besides Memnon had sent his clerics into the residences of
the bishops, and had ordered them with threats to take part in his council. And in this
way he and Cyril had confused everything, so that their own heresies might not be exam-
ined. Heresies, such as the Arian, the Apollinarian, and the Eunomian, were certainly
contained in the last letter of Cyril [to Nestorius, along with the anathematisms]. It was
therefore John's duty to see to it that the heads of these heresies (Cyril and Memnon)
should be suitably punished for such grave offences, and that the bishops who had been
misguided by them should be subjected to ecclesiastical penalties.

To these impudent and false accusations John replied with hypocritical meekness " that
he had certainly wished that he should not be compelled to exclude from the Church any
one who had been received into the sacred priesthood, but diseased members must cer-
tainly be cut off in order to save the whole body ; and for this reason Cyril and Memnon
deserved to be deposed, because they had given occasion to disorders, and had acted in
opposition to the commands of the Emperors, and besides, were in the chapters mentioned
[the anathematisms] guilty of heresy. All who had been misled by them were to be ex-
communicated until they confessed their eri'or, anathematized the heretical propositions of
Cyi'il, adhered strictly to the creed of Nice, without any foreign addition, and joined the
synod of John."

The assembly approved of this proposal, and John then announced the sentence in the
following manner : —

" The holy Synod, assembled in Ephesus, by the grace of God and the command of the
pious Emperors, declares : We should indeed have wished to be able to hold a Synod in
peace, but because you held a separate assembly from a heretical, insolent, and obstinate
disposition, although we were already in the neighbourhood, and have filled both the city
and the holy Synod with confusion, in order to prevent the examination of your AjDollina-
rian, Arian, and Eunomian heresies, and have not waited for the arrival of the holy bishops
of all regions, and have also disregai'ded the warnings and admonitions of Candidian, there-
fore shall you, Cyril of Alexandria, and you Memnon of this place, know that you are de-
posed and dismissed from all sacerdotal functions, as the originators of the whole disorder,
etc. You others, who gave your consent, are excommunicated, until you acknowledge your
fault and reform, accept anew the Nicene faith [as if they had surrendered it ! ] without
foreign addition, anathematize the heretical propositions of Cyril, and in all things comply
with the command of the Emperors, who require a peaceful and more accurate considera-
tion of the dogma."

This decree was subscribed by all the forty-three members of the Conciliabulum :

The Conciliabulum then, in very one-sided letters informed the Emperor, the imperial


228


EPHESUS. A.D. i;Ji


ladies (the wife and sister of the Emperor Theodosius II.), the clergy, the senate, and the
people of Constantinople, of all that had taken place, and a little later once more required
the members of the genuine Synod, in writing, no longer to delay the time for repentance
and conversion, and to separate themselves from Cyril and Memnon, etc., otherwise they
would very soon be ft)rced to lament their own folly.

On Saturday evening the Conciliabulum asked Count Candidian to take care that neither
Cyril nor Memnon, nor any one of their (excommunicated) adherents should hold divine
service on Sunday. Candidian now wished that no member of either synodal party should
officiate, but only the ordinary clergy of the city ; but Memnon declared that he would in
no way submit to John and his synod, and Cyril and his adherents held divine service. All
the efforts of John to ai:)point by force another bishop of Ephesus in the place of Memnon
were frustrated by the oj^position of the orthodox inhabitants.


CANON II.

If any provincial bishops were not present at tlie holy Synod and have joined or
attemj^ted to join the apostacj ; or if, after subscribing the deposition of Nestorius, they
went back into the assembly of ai)ostat(is ; these men, according to the decree of the
holy Synod, are to be deposed from the priesthood and degraded from their rank.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II.


If any bis}iop ai<senfs to oi' favours Nestorius,
let him be dificJtarged.

It was not unnatural that when it was seen


their course, the more so as the Conciliabulum
was not either avowedly, nor really, a Nesto-
rian assembly, but one made up of those not
sympathizing with Nestorius's heresy, yet
friendly to the heretic himself, and disapprov-


that the Imperial authority was in favour of j iug of what they looked ujion as the uucalled-
the Antiochene party that some of the clergy for harshness and precipitancy of Cyril's
should have been weak enough to vacillate in j course.


CANON III.

If any of the city or country clergy have been inliibited by Nestorius or his followers
from the exercise of the priesthood, on account of their orthodoxy, we have declared it
just that these should be restored to their proper rank. And in general we forbid all
the clergy who adhere to the Orthodox and Ecumenical Synod in any way to submit to
the bishops who have already apostatized or shall hereafter apostatize.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.


To whom Nc^toriuft f()rbul>> the pi'ii'.^thood, he
is most i(;orlhy ; but uJiom he approics is pro-
fane.

It Avould seem fi'om this canon that any
bishop who had become a member of the Con-
ciliabulum of John, was considered as eo ipso
having lost all jurisdiction. Also it would
seem that the clergy were to disregard the in-
hibition of Nestorian prelates or at least these
iidiibitions wei'e by some one to be removed.
This principle, if generally a])plied, would
seem to be somewhat revolutionary.


LiGHTFOOT.


[Apos. Fath. Ign. Ad Nom. i.. Vol. II..
Sec. I., p. 191.)

The words x'^os ("place"), x^pa ("country"),
and xiDpiov ("district"), may be distinguished
as implying lacalifi/, ertei/sion, and li)))/fali(>n,
respectively. The last word commonly de-
notes either "an estate, a farm," or " a fast-
ness, a stronghold," or (as a mathematical
term) "an area." Here, as not unfrequently
in later writers, it is " a region, a district,"
but the same fundamental idea is presumed.
The relation of x'''P"'» t'> x^'P""' ^^ the same as

that of apyupos, \f)Vfru^ to apyv f)LOV, ^(pvdiov^ the


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 229


former bein^ the metals themselves, the latter
the metals worked up into bullion or coins or


plate or trinkets or images, e.g. Macar. Magn.
Apocr. iii. 42 (p. 147).


CANON IV.

If any of the clergy should fall away, and publicly or privately presume to maintain
the doctrines of Nestorius or Celestius, it is declared just by the holy Synod that these
also should be deposed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.
If any of the clergy shall consent to Celestine^ or Nestorius, let them be deposed.

EXCURSUS ON PELAGIANISM.

The only point which is material to the main object of this volume is that Pelagius and
his fellow heretic Celestius were condemned by the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus for their
heresy. Oa this point there can be no possible doubt. And further than this the Seventh
Council by ratifying the Canons of Trullo received the Canons of the African Code which
include those of the Carthaginian conciliar condemnations of the Pelagian heresy to which
the attention of the reader is particularly drawn. The condemnation of these heretics at
Ephesus is said to have been due chiefly to the energy of St. Augustine, assisted very materi-
ally by a layman living in Constantinople by the name of Marius Mercator.

Pelagius and his heresy have a sad interest to us as he is said to have been born in Britain.
He was a monk and preached at Rome with great applause in the early years of the fifth
century. But in his extreme horror of Manichseism and Gnosticism he fell into the opposite
extreme ; and from the hatred of the doctrine of the inherent evilness of humanity he fell
into the error of denying the necessity of grace.

Pelagius's doctrines may be briefly stated thus. Adam's sin injured only himself, so
that there is no such thing as original sin. Infants therefore are not born in sin and the
childx-en of wrath, but are born innocent, and only need baptism so as to be knit into Christ,
not "for the remission of sins" as is declared in the creed. Further he taught that man
could live without committing any sin at all And for this there was no need of grace ; in-
deed grace was not possible, according to his teaching. The only " grace," which he would
admit the existence of, was what we may call external grace, e.g. the example of Christ, the
teaching of his ministers, and the like. Petavius'-^ indeed thinks that he allowed the activity
of internal grace to illumine the intellect, but this seems quite doubtful.

Pelagius's writings have come down to us in a more or less — generally the latter — pure
form. There are fourteen books on the Epistles of St. Paul, also a letter to Demetrius and
his Libellus Jidei ad Innocentium. In the writings of St. Augustine are found fragments of
Pelagius's writings on free will.

It would be absurd to attempt in the limits possible to this volume to give any, even
the most sketchy, ti'eatment of the doctrine involved in the Pelagian controversy : the reader
must be referred to the great theologians for this and to aid him I append a bibliographi-
cal table on the subject.

St. Augustine.

St. Jerome.

Marius Mercator, Commonitorium super nomine Goelestii.

Vossius, G. J., Histor. de controv. quus Pel. ejusque reliquice moverunt.

' It should read "Celestius" ; see Scholion on Canon I. ^ Petav. De Pelag. et Semi-Pelag. Hcer., Cap. iv.


230 EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


Noris. Hisforia Pdaghina.

Garuier, J. Dis^^-rtut. in Pehuj. iu Opera Mar. Mercator.

Quesnel, Dissert, de cone. A/rieanis in Pebuj. causa celebraiis etc.

Fuclis, G. D., Bibliothek dcr Kirehenversammlungen.

Horu, De sentent. Put. de peecalo orig.

Habert, P. L., Theologice Crrcecorum rafrum vindicatce circa univers. materiam gratice.

Petavius, De PeUig. et Semi-Pelag.^

The English works on the subject are so well known to the English reader as to need no
mention.

As it is impossible to treat the theological question here, so too is it impossible to treat the
historical question. However I may remind the reader that Nestorius and his heresy were
defended by Theodore of Mopsuestia, and that he and Celestius were declared by Pope Zosi-
mus to be innocent in the year 417, a decision which was entirely disregai'ded l)y the rest of
the world, a Carthaginian Synod subsequently anathematizing him. Finally the Pope retract-
ed his former decision, and in 418 anathematized him and his fellow, and gave notice of this
in his " cpistola tractoria " to the bishops. Eighteen Italian bishops, who had followed the
Pope in his former decision of a twelve montli before, refused to change their minds at his bid-
ding now, and were accordingly deposed, among them Julian of Eclauum. After this Pelagius
and Celestius found a fitting harbour of refuge with Nestorius of Constantinople, and so all
three were condemned together by the council of Ephesus, he that denied the incarnation
of the Word, and they twain that denied the necessity of that incarnation and of the grace
purchased thereby.

CANON V.

If any have been condemned for evil practices by the holy Synod, or by their own
bishops ; and if, with his usual lack of discrimination, Nestorius (or his followers) has
attempted, or shall hereafter attempt, uncauonically to restore such persons to com-
munion and to their former rank, we liave declared that they shall not be profited
thereby, but shall remain deposed nevertheless.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon V. not unusual for those disciplined for their

If one condemned by his bishop is received faults in one communion to go to another and
by Nestorius it shall profit him nothing. ^ ^^re be welcomed and restored, to the over-

throw of discipline and to the lowering of the
This canon is interesting as shewing that moral sense of the people to whom they
thus early in the history of the Church, it was minister.

CANON VI.

Likewise, if any should in any way attempt to set aside the orders in each case
made by the holy Synod at E))hesus, the holy Synod decrees that, if they be bishops or
clergymen, they shall absolutely forfeit their oilice; and, if laymen, that they shall be
excommunicated.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VI. | was can only be justly appreciated by those

who are faiiiiliur witli the weight of the im-
If any layman shall resist the Synod, let Jiim perial authority at tliat day in ecclesiastical
be excormminicated. But if it be a cleric let him matters and who will remember that at the
be discharged. very time this canon was passed it was ex-

tremely difficult to say whether the Emperor
How courageous the passing of this canon would support Cyril's or John's synod.

> I am chiefly indebted to Micbuud (or this list. *


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 231


OBSERVATION OF THE ROMAN EDITORS (Ed: 1608).

In the Vatican books and in some others only these six canons are found ; but in certain
texts there is added, under the name of Canon VII., the definition of the same holy Synod
put forth after the Presbyter Charisius had stated his case, and for Canon VIII. another
decree of the synod concerning the bishops of Cyprus.

OBSERVATION OF PHILIP LABBE, S.J. P.

In the Collections of John Zonaras and of Theodore Balsamon, also in the " Code of the
Universal Church " which has John Tilius, Bishop of St. Brieuc and Christopher Justellus
for its editors, are found eight canons of the Ephesiue council, to wit the six which are
appended to the foregoing epistle and two others : but it is altogether a subject of wonder
that in the Codex of Canons, made for the Roman Church by Dionysius Exiguus, none of
these canons are found at all. I suppose that the reason of this is that the Latins saw that
they were not deci-ees affecting the Universal Church, but that the Canons set forth by the
Ephesine fathers dealt merely with the peculiar and private matters of Nestorius and of
his followers.

The Decree of the same holy Synod, prououueed after hearing the Exposition [of
the Faith] by the Three hiiudi-ed and eighteen holy and blessed Fathers in the city of
Nice, and the impious formula composed by Theodore of Mopsuestia, and given to the
same holy Synod at Ephesus by the Presbyter Charisius, of Philadelphia :

CANON VII.

When these things had been read, the holy Synod decreed that it is unlawful for any
man to bring forward, or to write, or to compose a different {krepav) Faitli as a rival to
that established by the holy Fathers assembled with the Holy Ghost in Nicsea.

But those who shall dare to compose a different faith, or to introduce or offer it to
persons desiring to turn to the acknowledgment of the truth, whether from Heathenism
or from Judaism, or from any heresy whatsoever, shall be deposed, if they be bisliojjs
or clergymen ; bishops from the episcopate and clergymen from the clergy ; and if they
be laymen, they shall be anathematized.

And in like manner, if any, Avhether bishops, clergymen, or laymen, should be dis-
covered to hold or teach the doctrines contained in the Exposition introduced by the
Presbyter Charisius concerning the Incarnation of the Only-Begotten Son of God, or the
abominable and profane doctrines of Nestorius, which are subjoined, they shall be sub-
jected to the sentence of this holy and ecumenical Synod. So that, if it he a bishop, he
shall be removed from his bishopric and degraded ; if it be a clergyman, he shall likewise
be stricken from the clergy ; and if it be a layman, he shall be anathematized, as has been
afore said.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII. I Beveridge.

Any hishop who sets forth a faith other than "When these things had been read." Bal-
that of Nice shall be an alien from the Chureh : samon here makes an egregious mistake, for
if a layman do so let him be cast out. it was not after the reading of the decree of

I this council and of the Nicene Creed, that this

The heading is that found in the ordinary canon was set forth, as Balsamon affirms ; but
Greek texts. The canon itself is found verba- after the reading of the libellum of Charisius,
tim in the Acts — Actio VI. (Labbe and Cos- and of the Nestorian Creed, as is abundantly
Bart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 689.) 'evident from what we read in the Acts of the


232 EPIIESUS. A.D. 431

council. From tliis it is clear that Balsamon but as a matter of fact exhibited to the synod

had never seen the Acts of this council, or at his tibellxm written against Nestorius'; in

least had never carefully studied tliem, else he which so far from asserting- that Nestorius

could not have written such a comment. was orthodox, he distinctly calls him KaKoSo^os.

[Withregunl to Churisius, ]3alsaiii(>ii] makes

another mistake. For not only dul tliis pres- Photius has includetl this canon in his No-

byter not follow the evil oj^inions of Nestorius, mocanons, Title I., cajx j.

EXCURSUS OX THE AVORDS -rriaTiv e-rrepav.

It has been held by some and was urged by the Greeks at the Council of Florence,' and
often before and since, as well as by Pojje Leo III., in answer to the and^assadors of Charle-
magne, that the prohibition of the Council of Ephesus to make, hold, or teach any otlier faith
than that of Nice forbade anyone, even a subsequent General Council, to add anything to the
creed. This interpretation seems to be shewn to be incorrect from the following circum-
stances.

1. That the prohibition was passed by the Council immediately after it had heard Chari-
sius read his creed, which it had approved, and on the strength of which it had received its
author, and after the reading of a Nestorian creed which it condemned. From this it seems
clear that irepav must mean "different," "contradictory," and not "another" in the sense of
mere explanatory additions to the already existing creed.

(E. B. Pusey, On the Clause "and the Son," p. 81.)
St. Cyril ought to understand the canon, which he probably himself framed, as presiding
over the Council of Ephesus, as Archljishop of Alexandria and representative of Celestine,
Bishop of Rome. His signature immediately succeeds the Canon. We can hardly think
that we understand it better than he who probably framed it, nay who presided over the
Council which passed it. He, however, explained that what was not againsf the Creed was
not beside it. The Orientals had proposed to him, as terms of communion, that he should
" do away with all he had written in epistles, tomes, or books, and agree with that only faith
which had been defined by our holy Fathers at Nice." But, St Cyril wrote back: "We
all follow that exposition of faith which was defined by the holy fathers in the city of Nice,
sapping absolutely nothing of the things contained in it. For they are all right and unex-
ceptionable ; and anything curious, after it, is not safe. But what I have rightly written
against the blasphemies of Nestorius no words will persuade me to say that they were not
done well :" and against the imputation that he " had received an exposition of faith or new
Creed, as dishonouring that old and venerable Creed," he says :

" Neither have we demanded of any an exposition of faith, nor have we received one newly
framed by others. For Divine Scripture suffices us, and the prudence of the holy fathers,
and the symbol of faith, framed perfectly as to all right doctrine. But since the most holy
Eastern Bishops <liffei-ed from us as to that of Ephesus and were somehow suspected of
being entangled in the meshes of Nestorius, therefore they very wisely made a defence, to
free themselves from Ijlame, and eager to satisfy the lovers of the blameless faith that they
were minded to have no share in his impiety ; and the thing is far from all note of l)lame.
If Nestorius himself, when we all held out to him that he ought to condemn his own dog-
mas and choose the truth instead thereof, had made a written confession thereon, who would
say that he framed for us a new exposition of faith? Why then do they calumniate the
assent of the most holy Bishops of Phoenicia, calling it a new setting forth of the Creed,
whereas they made it for a good and necessary end, to defend themselves and soothe those

> Hefele, Conciliengesch. XLVIII., § 810.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431 233


who thought that they followed the innovations of Nestorius ? For the holy Ecumenical
Synod gathered at Ephesus provided, of necessity, that no other exposition of faith besides
that which existed, which the most blessed fathers, speaking in the Holy Ghost, defined,
should be brought into the Churches of God. But they who at one time, I know not how,
differed from it, and were suspected of not being right-minded, following the Apostolic and
Evangelic doctrines, how should they free themselves from this ill-report? by silence? or
rather by self-defence, and by manifesting the power of the faith which was in them? The
divine disciple wrote, "be ready always to give an answer to every one who asketh you an
account of the hope which is in you." But he who willeth to do this, innovates in nothing,
nor doth he frame any new exposition of faith, but rather maketh plain to those who ask
him, what faith he hath concerning Christ."^

2. The fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, by their practice, are authoritative expo-
nents of the Canon of Ephesus. For they renewed the prohibition of the Council of Ephesus
to " adduce any other faith," but, in " the faith " which is not to be set aside, they included
not only the Creeds of Nice and Constantinople, but the definitions at Ephesus and Chalce-
don itself. The statements of the faith were expanded, because fresh contradictions of the
faith had emerged. After directing that both Creeds should be read, the Council says,
" This wise and saving Symbol of Divine grace would have sufiiced to the full knowledge
and confirmation of the faith ; for it teaches thoroughly the perfect truth of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and presents to those who receive it faithfully the Incarnation of the
Lord." Then, having in detail shewn how both heresies were confuted by it, and having
set forth the true doctrine, they sum up.

" These things being framed by us with all accuracy and cai'e on every side, the holy
and ecumenical Synod defines, that it shall be lawful for no one to produce or compose, or
put together, or hold, or teach others another faith, and those who venture, etc." (as in the
Council of Ephesus).

The Council of Chalcedon enlarged greatly the terms although not the substance of the
faith contained in the Nicene Creed ; and that, in view of the heresies, which had since
arisen ; and yet renewed in terms the prohibition of the Canon of Ejjhesus and the penalties
annexed to its infringement. It shewed, then, in practice, that it did not hold the enlarge-
ment of the things proposed as de fide to be prohibited, but only the producing of things
contradictory to the faith once delivered to the saints. Its prohibition, moreover, to " hold "
another faith shews the more that they meant only to prohibit any contradictory statement
of faith. For if they had prohibited any additional statement not being a contradiction of
its truth, then (as Cardinal Julian acutely argued in the Council of Florence), any one would
fall under its anathema, who held (as all must) anything not expressed in set terms in the
Nicene Creed ; such as that God is eternal or incomprehensible.

It may not be amiss to remember that the argument that ttlcttiv eTepav forbids any addition
to the Creed or any further definition of the faith, was that urged hy the heretics at the
Latrocinium, and the orthodox were there condemned on the ground that they had added to
the faith and laid themselves under the Anathema of Ephesus. How far this interpretation
was from being that of the Council of Chalcedon is evinced by the fact that it immediately de-
clared that St. Flavian and Bishoj) Eusebius had been unjustly deposed, and proceeded to de-
pose those who had deposed them. After stating these facts Dr. Pusey remarks, " Protestants
may reject consistently the authority of all councils ; but on what grounds any who accept
their authority can insist on their own private interpretation of a canon of one council against
the authority of another General Council which rejected that interpretation, I see not."^

> Cyril. Alex., Ep. xxxv., Ad Acae. Melit. » E. B. Pusey, Lib. ciL, p. 86.


234 EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


4. The Fifth Ecumenical Council, the Second of Constantinople, received both the creeds
of Nice and that of Constantinople, as well of the definitions of Epliesus and Chalcedou,
and yet at the end of the fourth Session we find in the acts that the fathers cried out, with
respect to the creed of Theodore of !Mopsuestia: " This creed Satan composed. Anathema
to him that composed this creed ! The First Council of Ephesus anatliematized this creed
and its author. We know only one symbol of faith, that which the holy fathers of Nice set
forth and lianded down. Tliis also the three holy Synods handed down. Into this we were
baptized, and into this we baptize, etc., etc." '

From this it is clearer than day that these fathers looked upon the creed of Constantinople,
with its additions, to be yet the same creed as that of Nice.

(Le Quien, Diss. Dam., n. 37.)

In the Sixth Council also, no one objecting, Peter of Nicomedia, Theodore, and other
bishops, clerks, and monks, who had embraced the Monothelite heresj', openly recited a
Ci*eed longer and fuller than the Nicene.

In the Seventh Synod also, another was read written by Theodore of Jerusalem : and again,
Basil of Ancyra, and the other Bishops, who had embraced tlie errors of the Iconoclasts,
again oliercd another, although the Canon of Ephesus pronounced, that " it should not be
lawful to offer to heretics, who wished to be converted to the Church, any other creed than
the Nicene." In this same Synod, was read another profession of faith, which Tara-
sius had sent to the Patriarchs of the Eastern sees. It contains the Nicene, or Constanti-
nopolitan Creed, variously enlal'ged and interpolated. But of the Holy Sjjirit it has specifi-
cally this : " And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, w^hich proceedeth from the
Father through the Son." But since the Greeks at the Council of Florence said, that these
were individual, not common, formuhe of faith, here are others, which are j^lainly common
and solemn, which are contained in their own rituals. They do not baptize a Hebrew or
a Jew, until he have pronounced a j^rofession of Christian Faith, altogether different from
the Creed of Constantinople, as may be seen in tlie Euchologion. In the consecration of a
Bishop, the Bishop elect is first bidden to recite the Creed of Constantinople ; and then, as
if this did not suffice, a second and a thii'd are demanded of him ; of which the last contains
that aforesaid symbol, intermingled Avith various declarations. Nay, Photius himself is pointed
out to be the author of this interpolated symbol.- I pass by other formuhe, wliich the
Greeks have framed for those who return to the Churcli from divers lieresies or sects, although
the terms of the Canon of Ephesus are, that " it is unlawful to propose any other faith to
those who wish to be converted to the Church, from heathenism, or Judaism, or any heresy
whatever."

The Judgment of the same Holy Synod, pronounced on the petition presented to it
by the Bishops of Cyprus :

CANON VIII.

Oru l)i(ith(r Itisliop lllieginus, the beloved of God, and his fellow beloved of God
bisli()])s, Zeno and Evagrius. of the Province of Cyprns, liave reported to us an innova-
tion which has been inti'oducM'd contrarv to the ecclossiastical constitntioiis and the
Can(ms of the Holy A]K)stl('s, and which touclies the liberties of all. A\ hcrelore, since
injuries affecting all rc'cpiire the more attention, as they cause the greater damage, and
particularly wlicn they are transgressions of an inuicnt custt)ni : and since those excel-
lent men, wlio have petitioned tlic Synod, have told us in willing and by word of nioutli

' Lahbc andC'oHsart, Tom. v., col. 45r>

' In the Codex Cu-sureus, mentioned by Lambecius, Lib. vii., cod 77.


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


235


tliat the Bishop of Antioch has in this way held ordinations in Cyprus ; therefore the
Rulers of the holy churches in Cyprus shall enjoy, without dispute ov injuiy, according
to the Canons of the blessed Fathers and ancient custom, the right of performing for
thehiselves the ordination of their excellent Bishops. The same rule shall be observed
in the other dioceses and ])rovinces everywhere, so that none of the God beloved
Bishops shall assume control of any jDrovince which has not heretofore, from the very
beginning, been under his own hand or that of his predecessors. But if any one has
violently taken and subjected [a Province], he shall give it up; lest the Canons of
the Fathers be transgressed ; or the vanities of worldly honour be brought in under
pretext of sacred office ; or we lose, without knowing it, little by little, the liberty which
Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Deliverer of all men, hath given us by his omu Blood.

Wherefore, this holy and ecumenical Synod has decreed that in every province the
rights which heretofore, from the beginning, have belonged to it, shall be preserved to
it, according to the old prevailing custom, unchanged and uninjured : every Metro-
politan having permission to take, for his own security, a copy of these acts. And if any
one shall bring forward a rule contrary to what is here determined, this holy and ecu-
menical Synod unanimously decrees that it shall be of no effect.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.


Let the rights of each ])rovince he preserved
pure and inviolate. No attempt to introduce
any form contrary to these shall be of any avail.

The caption is the one given in the ordi-
nary Greek texts. The canon is found word
for word in the VII Session of the Council,
with the heading, " A decree of the same
holy Svnod." (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia,
Tom. III., col. 802.)

I have followed in reading " the Canons of
the Holy Apostles " the reading in Balsamon
and Zonaras, and that of Elias Ehingerus
Augustauus (so says Beveridge) in his edition
of the Greek canons, a.d. 1614. But the
Bodleian MS. and John of Antioch in his
collection of the Canons, and the Codex
edited by Christopher Justellus read " of
the Holy Fathers" instead of "of the Holy
Apostles." Beveridge is of opinion that this
is the truer x'eading, for while no doubt the
Ephesine Fathers had in mind the Apostolic
Canons, yet they seem to have more particu-
larly referred in this place to the canons of
Nice. And this seems to be intimated in
the libellum of the Bishops of Cyprus, who
gave rise to this very decree, in which the
condemned practice is said to be " contrary


to the Apostolic Canons and to the defini-
tions of the most holy Council of Nice."

This canon Photius does not recognize, for
in the Preface to his Nomocanon he distinct-
ly writes that there were but seven canons
adopted by the Ephesine Synod, and in the
first chapter of the first title he cites the pre-
ceding canon as the seventh, that is the last.
John of Antioch likewise says that there are
but seven canons of Ephesus, but reckons
this present canon as the seventh, from which
Beveridge concludes that he rejects the Canon
concerning Charisius (vij).

Bevekidge.

Concerning the present canon, of rather
decree, the Bishop of Antioch, who had given
occasion to the six former canons, gave also
occasion for the enacting of this, by arroga-
ting to himself the right of ordaining in the
Island of Cyprus, in violation of former
usage. After the bishops of that island, who

: are mentioned in the canon, had presented
their statements (lihelhini) to the Synod, the
present decree was set forth, in which warn-
ing was given that no innovation should be
tolerated in Ecclesiastical administration,
whether in Cyprus or elsewhere ; but that in
all Dioceses and Provinces their ancient

I rights and privileges should be preserved.


THE LE^ITER OF THE SAME HOLY SYNOD OF EPHESUS, TO
THE SACRED SYNOD IN PAMPHYLIA CONCERNING EUS-
TATIIIUS WHO HAD BEEN THEIR METROPOLITAN.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tome HI., col. 806.)

Forasmuch as the diviuel}- inspired was not reasoiia])le that it should remain in
Scripture says, "Do all thiii<fs witli ad- widowhood, niid that the Saviours sheep
vice,"' it is es])ecially tliL'ir duty wlio liave should pass their tiuie without a shepherd,
had the priestly ministry allotted to them But when he came to us weeping, not con-
to examine with all diligence whatever mat- tending with the aforenamed most religious
ters are to be transacted. For to those who Bishop Theodore for his See or Church, but
will so spend their lives, it comes to ])ass in the meantime seeking only for his rank
both that they are established in [the enjoy- and title as a bishop, we all siiffered with
ment ofj an honest hope concerning what the old man in his grief, and considering
belongs to them, and that they are borne his weeping as our own, we hastened to dis-
along, as by a favouring breeze, in things cover whether the aforenamed [Eust;ithius]


that they desire : so that, in truth, the say-
ing [of the Scripture] has much reason [to
commend it]. But there are times when
bitter and intolerable gri(!f swoo])s down
upon the mind, and has the efiect of cruelly


had been subjected to a legal deposition, or
whether, forsooth, he had been convicted on
any of the absurd charges alleged by certain
parties who had })oured forth idle gossip
against his reputation. And indeed we


beclouding it, so as to carry it away from i learned that nothing of such a kind had

the pursuit of what is needful, and [)ersuade taken place, but rather that his resignation

it to consider that to be of service which is had been counted against the said Eusta-

in its [very] nature mischievous. Some- thius instead of a [regular] indictment,

thing of this kind we have seen endured Wherefore, we did by no means blame your

by that most excellent and most religious holiness for being compelled to ordain into

Bishop Eustathius. For it is in evidence his place the aforenamed most excellent

that he has been ordained cauonically ; but Bishop Theodore. But forasmuch as it was

having been much disturbed, as he declares, not seemly to contend much against the

by certain parties, and having entered upon unpractical character of the man, while it

circumstances lie had not foreseen, tlwrc- was rather necessary to have ])ity on the

fore, though fully able to repel the slanders elder who, at so advanced an age, was now
of his persecutors, he nevertheless, tluxmgh 1 so far away from the city which had given

an extraordinary inexperience of affairs, de- him l)irth, and from the dwelling-places of

clined to ])attle with the difficulties which his fathers, we have judicially ]ironounced

beset him, and in some way that we know and decreed without any 0])position, that he

not set forth an act of resignation. Yet it shall have both the name, and the rank, and

behooved him, when he had been once en- the communion of the episcopate. On this

trusted with the pri(!stly care, to cling to it condition, however, only, that he shall not

with spiritual energy, and, as it were, to ordain, and that he shall not take and min-

strip himself to strive against the trou1)les ister to a Church of his own individual au-

and gladly to endure the sweat for Avhich tliority ; but that |he shall do so only] if

he had bargained. But inasmuch as he taken as an assistant, or when a])])ointed,

proved himself to be deticient in jiractical if it should so chance, by a brother and

capacity, having met with this misfortuia^ fellow-bishop, in accordance with the ordi-

ratlier from incjxperience than from cow- nance and the love which is in Christ. If,

ardice and sloth, your holiness has of neces- however, ye shall determiiu' anytliing more

sity ordained our most excellent and most favourable towards liim, eitlier now or liere-

religious brother and fellow-bishop, Tlieo- after, this also will be pleasing to the Holy

dore, as the overseer of the Church ; for it S}aiod.

' Ecclesiasticas. xxxii., 19— "Do nothing without advice" (itine coruilio nihil facias) : The deutero-canonical Dook of Ecclesiaeli-
ens is here by an Ecumenical Council styled "divinely in8i)ired Scripture."


THE LETTER OF THE SYNOD TO POPE CELESTINE.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. Ill,, col. 659 ; also in Migne, Pat. Lat. [reprinted
from Gallaud., Vett. Pair., Tom. ix.J, Tom. L., Ep. xx., col. 511.)


The Eelation which the Holy Council
OF Ephesus sent to Pope Celestine ;

IN WHICH AEE EXPLAINED WhAT ThINGS

were Done in that Holy and Great
Council.

The Holy Synod which by the grace of
God was assembled at Ephesus the Metro-
polis to the most holy and our fellow-min-
ister Coelestine, health in the Lord.

The zeal of your holiness for piety, and
your care for the right faith, so grateful and
highly pleasing to God the Saviour of us I
all, are worthy of all admiration. For it is
your custom in such great matters to make
trial of all things, and the confirmation of
the Churches you have made your own care.
But since it is right that all things which
have taken place should be brought to the
knowledge of your holiness, we are writing
of necessity [to inform you] that, by the
will of Christ the Saviour of us all, and in
accordance with the orders of the most
pious and Christ-loving Emperors, we as-
sembled together in the Metropolis of the
Ephesians from many and far scattered
regions, being in all over two hundred
bishops. Then, in accordance with the de-
crees of the Christ-loving Emperors by
whom we were assembled, we fixed the date
of the meeting of the holy Synod as the
Feast of the Holy Pentecost, all agreeing
thereto, especially as it was contained in
the letters of the Emperors that if anyone
did not arrive at the appointed time, he
was absent with no good conscience, and
was inexcusable both before God and man.
The most reverend -Tohn bishop of Antioch
stopped behind ; not in singleness of heart,
nor because the length of the journey made
the impediment, but hiding in his mind
his plan and his thought (which was so
dis]ileasing to God,) [a plan and thought]
which he made clear when not long after-
wards he arrived at Ephesus.

Therefore we put off the assembling [of
the council] after the appointed day of the
Holy Pentecost for sixteen whole days ; in


the meanwhile many of the bishops and
clerics were overtaken with illness, and
much burdened by the expense, and some
even died. A great injury was thus being
done to the great Synod, as your holiness
easily perceives. For he used perversely
such long delay that many from much
greater distances arrived before him.

Nevertheless after sixteen days had
passed, certain of the bishops who were
with him, to wit, tAvo Metropolitans, the
one Alexander of Apamea, and the other
Alexander of Hierapolis, arrived before
him. And when we complained of the
tardy coming of the most reverend bishop
John, not once, but often, we were told,
" He gave us command to announce to your
reverence, that if anything should happen
to delay him, not to put off the Synod, but
to do Avhat was right." After having re-
ceived this message, — and as it was mani-
fest, as well from his delay as from the
announcements just made to us, that he re-
fused to attend tlie Council, whether out of
friendship to Nestorius, or because he had
been a cleric of a church under his sway, or
out of regard to petitions made by some in
his favour, — the Holy Council sat in the
great church of Ephesus, which bears the
name of Mary.

But when all with zeal had come together,
Nestorius alone was found missing from the
council, thereupon the holy Synod sent him
admonition in accordance with the canons
by bishops, a first, second, and third time.
But he surrounding his house with soldiers,
set himself up against the ecclesiastical laws,
neither did he shew himself, nor give any
satisfaction for his iniquitous blasphemies.

After this the letters were read wliich
were written to him by the most holy and
most reverend bishop of the Church of
Alexandria, Cyril, wliich the Holy Synod
approved as being orthodox and without
fault (op-5(W9 KoX uXrjirTW'i e^eti^), and in no
point out of agreement either with the di-
vinely inspired Scriptures, or with the faith
handed down and set forth in the great
synod of holy Fathers, which assembled


238


EPHESUS. A. I). 4:J1


sometime ago at Nice iu Bithjiiia, as your
holiness also riffhtlv having exaniiuetl this
has given witness.

On the other hand there was read the
letter of Nestorins, which was written to
the alroadv inciitioncil most holy and icv-
erentl hiothcr of ours and fullow-iuinister,
C3'ril, and the Holy Synod was of opinion
that those things which were taught in it
were wholly alifU from the Apcjstoiic and
Evangelical faith, sick with many and
strange blasphemies.

His most impioTis expositions w^ere like-
wise read, and also the letter written to
him by your holiness, in which he was
pro]ierly condemned as one who had writ-
ten blasphemy and had inserted iiTeligious
views i^com?) in his private exegesis, and
after this a just sentence of de])osition was
pronounced against him ; especially is this
sentence just, because he is so far removed
from being penitent, or from a confession
of the matters in which he blasplien)ed,
while yet he had the (Jhurch of Constanti-
nople, that even in the very metropolis of
the Ephesians, he delivered a sermon to
certain of the Metropolitical bishops, men
who were not ignorant, but learned and
God-fearing, in wiiich he was bold enough
to say, "I do not confess a two or three
months old God," and lie said other things
more outrageous than this.

Tlier(;fore as an impious and most pesti-
lent heresy, which perverts our most pure
religion i^pT^aKeiav) and which overthrows
from the foundation the whole economy of
the mystery [i.e. the Incarnation], we cast
it down, as we have said above. But it was
not possible, as it seemed, that those who
had the sincere love of Christ, and were
zealous in the Lord should not experience
many trials. For we had hoped that the
most reverend John, bisho]> of Antioch
would have ])raised the sedulous care and
piety of the Synod, and that perchance he
would liave blamed the slowness of Nesto-
rius's deposition. But all things turned
out contrary to our ho]ie. For he was
found to be an enemy, and a most warlike
one, to the holy Synod, and even to the
orthodox faith of the churches, as these
things indicate.

For as soon as he was come to Ephesus,
before he had even shaken off the dust of
the journey, or changed his travelling dress,
he assembled those who had sided with


Nestorius and who had uttered blasphemies
against tlu-ir head, and only not derided the
glory of Christ, and gathering as a college
to himself, I suppose, thirty men, having
the name of bishops (some of whom were
without sees, wandering about and having
no di»jceses, others again luul for many
years been dejjosed for serious causes from
their metro[)olises, and with these were Pe-
lagians and the followers of Celestius, and
some of thos(; who were turned (mt of Thes-
saly), he had the ])resumption to commit
a piece of inicpiity no man had ever done
before. For all by himself he drew up a
paper which he called a deposition, and re-
viled and reproached the most holy and rev-
erend Cyril, liishoj) of Alexandria, and the
most reverend ^femnon, bishop of Ephesus,
our brothel', and fellow-minister, none of us
knowing anything ab(mt it, and not even
those who were thus reviling knew what
was being done, nor for what reason they
had presumed to do this. But ignoring
the anger of God for such behaviour, and
unheeding the ecclesiastical canons, and
forgetting that they Avere hastening to de-
struction by such a course of action, under
the name of an excommunication, the>- then
reviled the whole Synod. And placing these
acts of theirs on the public bulletin boards,
they cx])Osed them to hv read by such as
chose to do so, having posted them on the
outside of the theatres, that they might
make a spectacle of their impiety. But not
even was this the limit of their audacity ;
but as if they had done something in ac-
cordance with the canons, they dared to
bring what they had done to the ears of the
most pious and Christ-loving Emjierors.

Things being in this condition, the most
holy and reverend Cyril, bishop of Alexan-
dria and the most reverend Memnon bishop
of the city of Ephesus, offered some books
composed by themselves and accusing the
most reverend J>islioj) John and those who
with him had done this thing, and conjur-
ing our holy Synod that John and those
with him should be summoned according
to the canons, so that they might apologize
for their daring acts, and if they had any
complaints to make they might speak and
])rove them, for in tlunr written deposition,
or rather sheet of abuse, they made this
statement as a pretext, " They are Apolli-
nariahs, and Arians, and Eunomians, and
thcn-eforo they have been deposed by us."


EPIIESUS. A.D. 431


239


When, therefore, those who had endured '
their reviling' were present, Ave a^ain neces-
sarily assembled in the great church, being
more than two hundred bishops, and by a
first, second, and third call on two days, we
summoned John and his companions to the
Synod, in order that they might examine
those who had been reviled, and might
make explanations, and tell the causes
which led them to draw up the sentence
of deposition ; but he ^ did not dare to
come. !

But it was right that he, if he could truly
prove the before-mentioned holy men to be
heretics, both should come and prove the
truth of that which, accepted as a true and
indubitable crime, induced the temerarious
sentence against them. But being con-
demned by his own conscience he did not
come. Now what he had planned was this.
For he thought that when that foundation-
less and most unjust reviling was done
away, the just vote of the Synod which it
cast against the heretic Nestorius would
likewise be dissolved. Being justly vexed,
therefore, we determined to inflict accord-
ing to law the same penalty upon him and
those who were with him, which he contrary
to law had pronounced against those who
had been convicted of no fault. But al-
though most justl}' and in accordance with
law he would have suffered this punishment
yet in the hope that by our patience his
temerity might be conquered, we have re-
served this to the decision of your holiness.
In the meanwhile, we have deprived them
of communion and have taken from them
all priestly power, so that they may not be
able to do any harm by their opinions.
For those who thus ferociously, and cruelly,
and uncanonically are wont to rush to such
frightful and most wicked things, how was
it not necessary that they should be stripped
of the powers which [as a matter of fact]
they did not possess,- of being able to do
harm.

With our brethren and fellow-ministers,
both Cyril the bishop and Memnon, who
had endured reproval at their hands, we are
all in communion, and after the rashness [of
their accusers] we both have and do per-


form the liturgy in common, all together
celebrating the Synaxis, having made of
none effect their play in writing, and hav-
ing thus shewn that it lacked all validity
and effect. For it was mere reviling and
nothing else. For what kind of a synod
could thirty men hold, some of whom were
marked with the stamp of heresy, and some
without sees and ejected [fi"om their dioce-
ses] ? Or what strength could it have in
opposition to a synod gathered from all the
whole world ? For there were sitting with
us the most reverentl bishops Arcadius and
Projectus, and with them the most holy
presbyter Philip, all of whom were sent by
your holiness, who gave to us your presence
and filled the place of the Apost(jlic See
(rr}? airoaToXiKTj'i Kd^iSpa<i). Let then your
holiness be angered at what took place.
But if license Avere granted to such as
wished to pour reproval u])on the greater
sees, and thus unlawfully and uncanonically
to give sentence or rather to utter revilings
against those over whom they have no
power, against those who for religion have
endured such great conflicts, by reason of
which now also piety shines forth through
the prayers of your holiness [if, I say, all
this should be tolerated], the affairs of the
('liurcli would fall into the greatest confu-
sion. But when those who dare to do such
things shall have been chastised aright, all
disturbance will cease, and the reverence
due to the canons Avill be observed by all.

When there had been read in the holy
Synod what had been done touching the de-
position of the most irreligious Pelagians
and Coelestines, of Coelestius, and Pelagius,
and Julian, and Prsesidius, and Florus, and
Marcellian, and Orontius, and those inclined
to like errors, we also deemed it right
{e8iKaidt}aa/x6v) that the determinations of
your holiness concerning them should stand
strong and firm. And we all were of the
same mind, holding them deposed. And
that you may know in full all things that
have been done, we have sent you a copy
of the Acts, and of the subscriptions of the
Synod. We pray that you, dearly beloved
and most longed for, may be strong and
mindful of us in the Lord.^


' Plural in the Greek but singular in the Latin, which the critical
editors consider the correct reading.


2 It seems that exovTas, and not exoi'Tas, is the true reading.
' The Latin adds, ' 'Then all the bishops subscribed their names."


240


EPHESUS. A.D. 431


THE DEFINITION OF THE HOLY AND ECUMENICAL SYNOD OF
EPHESUS AGAINST THE IMPIOUS MESSALIANS WHO ARE ALSO
^ALLED EUCHET^ AND ENTHUSIASTS.

{Found in Latin only. Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 809.)


When the most pions and religious bish-
ops, Valerian and Amphilochius had come
to ns, tliov ])roi)<)sed that we slicMild con-
sider in common the case of the Messalians,
that is the Euchetes or Enthusiasts, who
were nourishing in Pamphjlia, or by what
other name this most contaminating heresy
is called. And when we were considering
the question, the most pious and religions
bisho]) Valerian, presented to us a synod-
ical schedule which had been drawn up
concerning them in the gr(;at city of Con-
stantinople, under Sisinnius of blessed
memory: What Ave read therein was ap-
proved by all, as well composed and as
a due presentation of the case. And it
seemed good to us all, and to the most
pious bishops Valerian and Amphilochius
and to all the most pious bishops of the
provinces of Pam})hylia and Lycaonia, that
all things contained in that Synodical chart
should be confirmed and in no way re-
scinded ; also that the action taken at Alex-
andria might also be made firm, so that all
those who throughout the whole province
are of the Messalian or Enthusiastic heresy,
or suspected of being tainted with that her-
esy, whether clerics or laymen, may come


Furthermore those convicted of this her-
esy are no more to be permitted to have tiie
rul<^ of our monasteries, lest tares be sown
and increase. And we give command that
the most pious bishops Valerian and Am-
philochius, and the rest of the most rev-
ertmd bisho])s of the whole ])i-ovince shall
pay attention that this decree be carried
into efitect. In addition to this it seemed
good that the tilth}' book of this heresy,
which is called the " Asceticon," should be
anathematized, as composed by heretics, a
copy of which the most religious and pi-
ous Valerian brought Avith him. Likewise
anything savouring of their impiety which
may be found among the people, let it be
anathema,

JMoreover when they come together, let
there be commended by them in writing
such things as are useful and necessary
for concord, and connnnnion, and arrange-
ment {disposifionem vel dispensaiionem). But
should any question arise in connexion with
the ])resent business, and if it should prove
to be difficult and ambiguous, what is not
approved by the most pious bishops Va-
lerian and Amphilochius, and the other
bishops throughout the province, they


together ; and if they shall anathematize in ought to discuss all things by reference to

writing, according to the decrees pronounced wdiat is written. And if the most pious

in the aforesaid synod [their errors], if they bishops of the Lycians or of the Lycaoni-

are clergymen they may remain such; and ans shall have been passed over ; neverthe-

if laymen they nuiy be admitted to commun- less let not a Metro])olitan be left out of

ion. But if they refuse to anathematize, wdiatever province he may be. And let

if they were presbyters or deacons or in these things be inserted in the Acts so

any other ecclesiastical grade, let them be that if any have need of them they would

cast out of the clergy and from their grade, find how also to expound these things more

and also from communion ; if they be lay- diligently to others,
men let them be anathematized. I


NOTE ON THE MESSALIANS OR MASSALIAXS.

(Tillemont, 3Iemoire8, Tom. VIIL, Seconde Partie, Condensed.)

St. Epiphanius distinguishes two sorts of persons wlio were called by the name of Messa-
lians, the one and the moi-e ancient were heathen, the other were Christian in name.

The ^lessalians who bore the Christian name liad no beginning, nor end, nor chief, nor
fixed faith. Their first writers were Dadoes, Sabas, Adelphus, Hermes, Simeon and some


EPHESUS. A.D. 431 241


others. Adelplius was neither monk nor clerk, but a layman. Sabas had taken the habit
of an anchorite and was sui'named "the Eunuch," because he had mutilated himself.
Adelphus was of Mesopotamia and was considered their leader, so that they are sometimes
called " Adelphians." They are also called " Eustathians." " Euchites " is the Greek equiva-
lent of " Messalians " in Hebrew. They were also called "Enthusiasts" or "Corentes"
because of the agitation the devils caused them, which they attributed to the Holy Spirit.

St. Epiphanius thought that these heretics sprang up in the time of Constance,
although Theodoret does not put them down until the days of Valentinian. They came
from Mesopotamia, but spread as far as Antioch by the year 37G.

They pretended to renounce the world, and to give up their possessions, and under the
habit of monks they taught Manichsean impieties, and others still more detestable.

Their principal tenet was that everyone inherited from his ancestors a demon, Avho
had possession of his soul from the moment of his birth, and always led it to evil. That
baptism cut away the outside branches of sin, but could not free the soul of this demon,
and that therefore its reception was useless. That only constant prayer could drive out
this demon. That when it was expelled, the Holy Spirit descended and gave visible and
sensible marks of his presence, and delivered the body from all the uprisings of passion,
and the soul from the inclination to evil, so that afterwards there was no need of fasting,
nor of controlling lust by the precepts of the Gospel.

Besides this chief dogma, gross errors, contrary to the first principles of religion, were
attributed to them. That the divinity changed itself in different manners to unite itself to
their souls. They held that the body of Christ was infinite like his divine nature ; they did
not hesitate to say that his body was at first full of devils which were driven out when the
Word took it upon him.' They claimed that they possessed clear knowledge of the state of
souls after death, read the hearts and desires of man, the secrets of the future and saw the
Holy Trinity with their bodily eyes. They affirmed that man could not only attain per-
fection but equal the deity in virtue and knowledge.

They never fasted, slept men and women together, in warm weather in the open streets.
But certain say that before attaining to this liberty of license three years of mortification
were required.

The most well-known point of their discipline is that they forbade all manual labour as
evil, and unworthy of the spiritual.

Harmenopulus in his Basilicce (Tom. I., Lib. ix.) says that they held the Cross in horror,
that they refused to honour the Holy Virgin, or St. John the Baj:)tist, or any of the Saints
unless they were Martyrs ; that they mutilated themselves at will, that they dissolved mar-
riages, that they foreswore and perjured themselves without scruple, that women were
appointed as mistresses of the sect to instruct and govern men, even priests.

Although so opposed to the faith of the Church, yet for all this the Messalians did not
separate themselves from her communion. They did not believe in the Communion as a
mystery which sanctifies us, which must be approached with fear and faith, but only came
to the holy Table to hide themselves and to pass for Catholics, for this was one of their arti-
fices. When asked, they had no hesitation in denying all that they believed, and were willing
to anathematize those who thought with them. And all this they did without fear, because
they were taught they had attained perfection, that is impassibility.

Vide Theodoret, H. E., Lib. iv., cap. xi.

Photius tells us that John of Antioch wrote against these heretics.

St. Maximus the Abbot speaks of this heresy as still existing in the Vllth Century,
and as practising the most abominable infamies. Photius bears witness of its resuscitation

1 They were therefore Nestorians.


242


EPHESUS. A. I). 4;J1


in his days in Capi:)aclocia with its wonted corruptions. Harmenopulus remarks that a
certain Eleutherius of Paphlagonia had added to it new crimes, and that in part it became
the source of the sect of the Bogomiles, so well known in the decadence of the Greek
empire.


DECKEE OF THE SYNOD IN THE MATTER OF EUPREPIUS AND

CYPJL.

{Found in Latin only. Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. III., col. 810.)


The petition of the most pious bishops
Euprepius and Cyril, which is set forth in
the papers they otiered, is honest. There-
fore from the holy canons and the external
laws, which have from ancient custom the
force of law,' let no innovation be made in
the cities of Europa. but according to the


: ancient custom they shall be governed by
the bishops by whom they have been form-
erly governed. For since there never was
a metropolitan who had power otherwise,

j so neither hereafter sliull tliore be any de-
parture from the ancient custom.


NOTE.


Hefele.


{Hist of the Councils, Vol. in., p. 77.)


decree, praying for protection against their
Metropolitan, FritiLas of Heraclea, who had
gone over to the party of John of Antioch,
and at the same time for the confirmation of
Two Thracian bishops, Euprepius of Biza the pre-\dous practice of holding two bishoprics
(Bizya) and Cyril of Coele, gave occasion for a at the same time. The Synod granted both.


" The text, as the side note remarks, " seems to be mutilated and depraved " in this passage, but the meaning is clear enough as
given by Hefele in the note.


THE FOURTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON.


A.D. 451.


Emperors. — Marcian and Pulcheria (in tbe East).
Valentinian III. (in the West).
Pope. — Leo I.


Elenchus

General Introduction.

Extracts from the Acts, Session I.

Sessio7i II.

The Letter of Cyril to John of Antioch.

Extracts from the Acts, Session II., con
tinned.

The Tome of St. Leo.

Extracts from the Acts, Session II., con
tinned.

Session III.

The Sentence of Condemnation of Diosco
rus.

Session IV.

Session V.


The Definition of Faith of the Council,
ivith Notes.

Session VI.

Decree on the Jurisdiction of Jerusalem
and Antioch, ivith Notes. Session VII.

Decree ivith regard to Bp. of Ephesus.
Session XII.

Decree ivith regard to Nicomedia. Ses-
sion XIII.

The Canons ivith the Ancient Epitome and
Notes.

Excursus to Canon XXVIII. , on its later
history.

Extracts from the Acts, Session XVI.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.

I sboiild consider it a piece of impertinence were I to attempt to add anything to what
has been already said with regard to the Council of Chalcedon. The literature upon the
subject is so great and so bitterly polemical that I think I shall do well in laying before my
readers the Acts, practically complete on all disputed points, and to leave them to draw
their own conclusions. I shall not, however, be liable to the charge of unfairness if I quote
at some length the deductions of the Eagle of Meaux, the famous Bossuet, from these acts ;
and since his somewhat isolated position as a Gallican gives him a singular fitness to sei've
in this and similar questions as a mediator between Catholics and Protestants, his remarks
upon tliis Council will, I think, be read with great interest and respect.

(Bossuet. Defensio Dec. Gleri Gallic. Lib. VII., caj). xvij. [Translation by Allies].)

An important point treated in the Council of Chalcedon, that is, the establishing of the
faith, and the approval of Leo's letter, is as follows :. Already almost the whole West, and
most of the Easterns, with Anatolius himself. Bishop of Constantinople, had gone so far as
to confirm by subscription that letter, before the council took place ; and in the council
itself the Fathers had often cried out, " We believe, as Leo : Peter hath spoken by Leo : we
have all subscribed the letter : what has been set forth is sufficient for the Faith : no other
exposition may be made." Things went so far, that they would hardly permit a definition
to be made by the council. But neither subscriptions privately made before the council,
nor these vehement cries of the Fathers in the council, were thought sufficient to tranquil-
lize minds in so unsettled a state of the Church, for fear that a matter so important might
seem determined rather by outcries than by fair and legitimate discussion. And the clergy
of Constantinople exclaimed, " It is a few who cry out, not the whole council which speaks."
So it was determined, that the letter of Leo should be lawfully examined by the council, and
a definition of faith be written by the synod itself. So the acts of foregoing councils being
previously read, the magistrates proposed concei'ning Leo's letter, " As we see the divine
Gospels laid before your Piety, let each one of the assembled bishops declare, whether the
exposition of the 318 Fathers at Nice, and of the 150 \vlio afterwards assembled in the im-
perial city, agrees with the letter of the most reverend Archbishop Leo."

After the question as to examining the letter of Leo was put in this form, it will be worth
while to weigh the sentences and, as they are called, the votes of the Fathers, in order to
understand from the beginning why they approved of the letter ; why they afterwards de-
fended it with so much zeal ; why, finally, it was ratified after so exact an examination of
the council. Anatolius first gives his sentence. "The letter of the most holy and religious
Archbishop Leo agi*ees Avitli the creed of our 818 Fathers at Nice, and of flic l.")!) \vli() after-
wards assembled at Constantinople, and confirmed the same faith, and witli the proceedings
at Ephesus under the most blessed Cyril, who is among the saints, by the Ecumenical and
holy Council, when it condemned Nestorius. I therefore agree to it, and willingly subscribe
to it." These are the words of one plainly deliberating, not blindly subscribing out of obe-
dience. The rest say to the same effect : "It agrees, and I subscribe." Many plainly and
expressly, "It agrees, and I therefore subsci-ibe." Some add, "It agrees, and I subscribe^
as it is correct." Others, "lam sure that it agrees." Others, "As it is concordant, and
has the same aim, we embrace it, and subscribe." Others, "This is the faith we have long
held : this we hold : in this we were baptized : in this we baptize." Others, and a great part,
"As I see, as I feel, as I have proved, as I find that it agrees, I subscribe." Others, "As I
am persuaded, instructed, informed, that all agrees, I subscribe." Many set forth their dif-


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451 245


Acuities, mostly arising from a foreign language ; others from the subject matter, saying,
that they had heard the letter, " and in very many points were assured it was right ; some
few words stood in their way, which seemed to point at a certain division in the person of
Christ." They add, that they had been informed by Paschasinus and the Legates " that
there is no division, but one Chi'ist ; therefore," they say, "we agree and subscribe," Others
after mentioning what Paschasinus and Lucentius had said, thus conclude: " By this we
have been satistied and, considering that it agrees in all things with the holy Fathers, we
agree and subscribe." Where the Illyrian bishops, and others who before that examination
had expressed their acclamations to the letter, again cry out, " We all say the same thing,
and agree with this." So that, indeed, it is evident that, in the council itself, and before it
their agreement is based on this that, after weighing the matter, they considered, they
judged, they were persuaded, that all agreed with the Fathers, and perceived that the com-
mon faith of all and each had been set forth by Leo. This is that examination of Leo's let-
ter, syuodically made at Chalcedon, and placed among the acts.

{GaJHa Orfhocl, LIX.)

Nor did Anatolius and the other bishops receive it, until they had deliberated, and found
that Leo's letter agreed with the preceding councils.

{Gallia Orthod., LX.)

But here a singular discussion arises between the eminent Cardinals Bellarmine and
Baronius. The latter, and with him a large number of our theologians, recognize the letter
of Leo as the Tj/^jc and Rule of faith, by which all Churches were bound : but Bellarmine,
alarmed at the examination which he could not deny, answers thus : " Leo had sent his let-
ter to the council, not as containing his final and definitive sentence, but as an instruction,
assisted by which the bishops might form a better judgment." But, most eminent man,
allow me to say that Leo, upon the appeal of Eutyches, and at the demand of Flavian, com-
posed this letter for a summary of the faith, and sent it to every Church in all parts, when
as yet no one thought about a council. Therefore it was not an instruction to the council
which he provided, but an Apostolic sentence which he put forth. The fact is that out of
this strait there was no other escape : Baronius will not allow that a letter, confirmed by so
great an authority of the Apostolic See, should be attributed to any other power but that
which is supreme and indefectible : Bellarmine will not take that to emanate from the
supreme and indefectible authority, which was subjected to syuodical inquiry, and delibera-
tion. What, then, is the issue of this conflict, unless that it is equally evident that the let-
ter was written with the whole authority of the Apostolic See, and yet subjected, as usual, to
the examination of an Universal Council.

{lb. LXI.)

And in this we follow no other authority than Leo himself, who speaks thus in his letter
to Theodoret : " What God had before decreed by our ministry, he confirmed by the irre-
versible assent of the whole brotherhood, to shew that what was first put forth in form by
the First See of all, and then received by the judgment of the whole Christian world, really
proceeded from himself." Here is a decree, as Baronius says, but not as Bellarmine says,
an insti'uction : here is a judgment of the whole world upon a decree of the Apostolic See.
He proceeds : " For in oi'der that the consent of other sees to that which the Lord of all
appointed to preside over the rest might not appear flattery, nor any other adverse suspicion
creep in, persons were at first found who doubted concerning our judgments." And not
only heretics, but even the Fathers of the council themselves, as the acts bear witness.


246 CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


Here the First See shews a fear of flatteiy, if doubt about its judgments were forbidden.
Moreover, " The truth itself likewise is both more clearly conspicuous, and more strongly
maintained, when after examination confirms what previous faith had taught." Here in i)lain
words he speaks of an examination by the council, dr fide, not by himself, as they wretchedly
object, but of that faith which the decretal letter set forth. And at length that same letter
is issued as the Rule, but confirmed by the assent of the universal holy Council, or as he
had before said, after that it is confirmed by the irreversible assent of the whole Brother-
hood. Out of this expression of that great Pontiff, the Galilean clergy drew theirs, that in
questions of faith the judgment is, what Tertullian calls, "not to be altered;" what Leo
calls, " not to be reconsidered," only when the assent of the Church is added.

{Dcfcns. Dec. Cleri Gall. VII. xvij.)

This certainly no one can be blamed for holding with him and with the Fathers of
Chalcedon. The forma is set forth by the Apostolic See, yet it is to be received with a
judgment, and that free, and each bishop individually is inferior to the First, yet so that all
together pass judgment even on his decree.

They conceived no other way of removing all doubt ; for, after the conclusion of the
synod, the Emperor thus proclaims: "Let then all profane contentions cease, for he is
indeed impious and sacrilegious, who, after the sentence of so many priests, leaves anything
for his own opinion to consider." He then prohibits all discussion concerning religion ; for,
says he, "he does an injury to the judgment of the most religious council, who endeavours
to open afresh, and publicly discuss, what has been once judged, and rightly ordered."
Here in the condemnation of Eutyches is the order of Ecclesiastical judgments in questions
of faith. He is judged by his proper Bishop, Flavian : the cause is reheard, reconsidered
by the Pope St. Leo ; it is decided by a declaration of the Apostolic See : after that declara-
tion follows the examination, inquiry, judgment of the Fathers or bishops, in a General
Council : after the declaration has been approved by the judgment of the Fathers no place
is any longer left for doubt or discussion.


»


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 93.)

Paschasinus, tlie most reverend bishop set forth specifically in what he hath gone
and legate of the Apostolic See, stood up in astray.

the midst with his most reverend colleagues j Lucentius, the venerable bishop and hold-
and said : We received directions at the | ing the place of the Apostolic See, said :
hands of the most blessed and apostolic j We will not suffer so great a wrong to be
bishop of the Roman cit}^, which is the head ' done us and you, as that he who is come to
of all the churches, which directions say j be judged should sit down [as one to give
that Dioscorus is not to be allowed a seat judgment].
in this assembly, but that if he should at-


tempt to take his seat he is to be cast out
This instruction we must carry out ; if now
your holiness so commands let him be ex-
pelled or else we leave.^

The most glorious judges and the full
senate said : AVhat special charge do you
prefer against the most reverend bishop
Dioscorus ?

Paschasinus, the most reverend bishop
and legate of the Apostolic See, said : Since
he has come, it is necessary that objection
be made to him.

The most glorious judges and the whole
senate said : In accordance with what has
been said, let the charge under which he
lies, be specifically made.

Lucentius, the most reverend bishop hav-
ing the place of the Apostolic See, said :
Let him give a reason for his judgment.
For he undertook to give sentence against
one over whom he had no jurisdiction. And
he dared to hold a synod without the
authority of the Apostolic See, a thing


The glorious judges and the whole senate
said : If you hold the office of judge, you
ought not to defend yourseK as if you were
to be judged.

And when Dioscorus the most religious
bishop of Alexandria at the bidding of the
most glorious judges and of the sacred as-
sembly {rrj<i lepai; avyKXrjTov ^) had sat down
in the midst, and the most reverend Roman
bishops also had sat down in their proper
places, and kept silence, Eusebius, the most
reverend bishop of the city of Dorylseum,
stepping into the midst, said :

[He then presented a 'petition, and the Acts
of the Latrocinium ivere read. Also the Acts
of the council of Constantinople under Fla-
vian against Eutyches (col. 175).]

And when they were read, the most
glorious judges and immense assembly
(vTrep^vr)'; av^K\r}To<;) said : What do the
most reverend bishops of the present holy
synod say? When he thus expounded
the faith did Flavian, of holy memory,


which had never taken place nor can take preserve the orthodox and catholic relig-
place." I ion, or did he in any respect err con-

Paschasinus the most reverend bishop, ceruing it ?
holding the place of the Apostolic See, said : '■ Paschasinus the most reverend bishop,
We cannot go counter to the decrees of the representing the Apostolic See, said ;


most blessed and apostolic bishop [" Pope "
for "bishop" in the Latin], who governs
the Apostolic See, nor against the ecclesias-
tical canons nor the patristic traditions.

The most glorious judges and the full
senate, said : It is proper that you should


Flavian of blessed memory hath most holily
and perfectly expounded the faith. His
faith and exposition agrees with the epistle
of the most blessed and apostolic man, the
bishop of Rome.

Anatolius the most reverend archbishop
of Constantinople said ; The blessed Fla-


' This whole paragraph reads with material differences in the
Latin. Moreover while the Greek text is clear and grammatical,
the Latin is most incorrect and haltinsr. Leo is described as
"Pone of the city of Kome,'' instead of "bishop of Rome."

" This statement, so absolutely contr.i'-y to fact, has been a sore
difficulty to the commentators, Arendt (Leo the Great and his
Times, § 270) says that this meant only that " he had, without per-


mission of the Pope, taken the presidency there, and conducted
the proceedinirs. for Leo himself had acknowledged the synod by
the fact that he allowed his legates to be present at it." Almost
the same is the explanation of the Ballerini (Leo M. Opera. Tom.
ii. 400. n 1.5.)

3 The Latin here has the usual form "amplissimus senatus,"

for which the Greek is 7rept(/)a»'eo-TaTot (rvy(cA>)TiKOi.


248


CHALCEDOX. A.I). 451


vian liatli beautifully and ortbodoxly set
forth the faith of our fathers.

Luceutius, the most revereud bishop, aud
legate of the Apostolic See, said ; Siuce the
faith of Flavian of blessed memor}^ agrees
-with tlie A])ostolic See and the tradition of
the fathers it is just that the sentence by
Avhich he was condemned by the heretics
should be tiu'ned back upon them by this
most holy synod.

Maxiinus the most reverend bisho]) of
Antioch in Syria, said : Archbishop Flavian
of blessed memory hath set forth the faith
orthodoxly and in accordance with the most
beloved-of-CTod and most holy Ai'clil)ishop
Leo. And this we all receive with zeal.

Thalassius, the most reverend bishop of
CfBsarea in Cap])adocia said ; Flavian of
blessed memory hatli spoken in accordance
with Cyril of blessed memory.

[Ancl so, one after another, the bishops
expressed their opinions. The reading of the
acts of the Council of Constantinople ivas
then continued.^

And at this point of the reading, Dios-
corus, the most reverend Archbishop of
Alexandria said, I receive " the of
I do not receive {to
hvo, ov 8e')(^ofiat). I am
to be impudent, but the matter
which touches my soul.

[After a few remarks the 7'eading ivas con-
tinued and the 7'est of the acts of the Latro-


"the two"

B€')^0/jiaC ' TO


two ; "
e'/c 8vo
forced
is one


cinium of Ephcsus contphtal. The judges
then j)ostpon(-d to the mor.-oir the sitf'nui forth
a decree on the faitit but iidinialed that Di-
oscorus and his associates should siiff'er the
punisJiment to which the}/ unjustly sentenced
Flavian. This met icith the ajiproval of all
the ItisJiops except those of Ill/jrica icJio said :
" We all have erred, let us cdl be pai-doned."
(col. 323.) 1

The most glorious judges and the whole
senate said ; Let each one of the most
reverend bishops of the present synod,
hasten to set forth how he believes, writing
without any fear, but placing the fear of
(lod before his eyes ; knowing that our
most divine and pioiis lord believes accord-
ing to the ecthesis of the three hundred
and eighteen holy fathers at Nice, and
according to the ectlu;sis of the one hun-
dred and fifty after them, and according to
the Canonical epistles and ectheses of the
holy fathers Gregory, Basil, Athanasius,
Hilary, Ambrose, and according to the two
canonical epistles of Cyril, which were con-
firmed and published in the first Council of
Ephesus, nor does he in any point depart
from the faith of the same. For the most
reverend archbishop of Old liome, Leo,
appears to have sent a letter to Flavian of
blessed memory, with reference to Eutv-
clies's unbelieving doul)t wliicli was spring-
ing up against the Catholic Chui'ch.

End of the first Actio.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION IL


• (L. and C, Concilia,

When all were seated before the rails of
the most holy altar, the most super!) aud
glorious judges and the great (vrrepcfiui)^)
senate said ; At a former met^ting the (pies-
tion was examined of the condemnation of
the most reverend bishop Flavian of blessed
memory and Eusebius, and it was patent
to you all Avith what justice and accuracy
the examination was conducted : and it was
proved that they had been cruelly and im-
properly condemned. What course wc
should pursue in this matter became clear
after yimr deliberations. Now liowc^ver the
question to be enquired into, studied, and


Tom. IV.. col. 338.)

decided, is how the true faith is to be es-
tablished, which is the chief end for which
this Council has been assembled. As we
know that ye are to render to Cod a strict
account not only for your own souls in ])ar-
ticular, but as well for the souls of all of us
who desirt^ rightly to be taught all things
that ])ertain to religion, and that all am-
biguity l)e taken away, by the agreement
and consent of all the holy fathers, and by
theii- united ex]iosition and doctrine; has-
ten therefore without any fear of ]ile;ising
or disj)l(>asing, to set forth (eKSeaSai) the
, pure faith, so that thej who do not sc(Mn to


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


249


believe with all tlie rest, may be brought
to unity through the ackuowledging of the
truth. For we wish you to know that the
most divine and pious lord of the whole
Avorld and ourselves IkjUI the orthodox
faith set forth by the 31S and by the loO
holy fathers, and what also has been taught
by the rest of the most holy and glorious
fathers, and in accordance with this is our
belief.

The most reverend bishops cried ; Any
other setting forth (e/c^eo-ti' aXXrjv) no one
makes, neither will we attempt it, neither
will we dare to set forth [anything new]
(e/c^eo-Sat). For the fathers taught, and in
their Avritings are preserved, what things
Avere set forth by them, and further than
this we can say nothing.

Cecropius, the most reverend bishop of
Sebastopol said : The matters concerning
Eutyches have been examined, and the
most holy archbishop of Rome has given
a form {TVTrov) which we follow and to his
letter we all [i. e. those in his neighbour-'
hood] have subscribed.

The most reverend bishops cried : These
are the opinions of all of us. The exposi-
tions (iKTeSevTo) already made are quite
sufficient : it is not lawful to make any
other.

The most glorious judges and great senate
said, If it pleases youi* reverence, let the
most holy patriai-ch of each province, choos-
ing one or two of his own province and
going into the midst, and together consid-
ering the faith, make known to all what is
agreed upon. So that if, as we desire, all
be of one mind, all ambiguity may be re-
moved : But if some entertain contrary
opinions (which we do not believe to be the
case) w^e may know what their opinions are.

The most reverend bishops cried out, w-e
make no new exposition in writing. This
is the law, [i. e. of the Third Synod] which
teaches that what has been set forth is
sufficient. The law wills that no other ex-
position should be made. Let the sayings
of the Fathers remain fast.

Florentuis, the most reverend bishop of
Sardis, said, since it is not possible for
those who follow the teaching of the holy
Synod of Nice, which was confirmed rightly
and piously at Ephesus, to draw up sud-
denly a declaration of faith in accordance
with the faith of the holy fathers Cyril and
Celestine, and of the letter of the most holy


Leo, we therefore pray your magnificence to
give us time, so that we may be able to
arrive at the truth of the matter with a fit-
ting document, although so far as we are
concerned, who have subscril)ed the letter
of the most holy Leo, nothing further is
needed.

i Cecropius, the most reverend bishop of
; Sebastopol, said. The faith has been well
defined by the 318 holy fathers and con-
firmed by the holy fathers Athanasius, Cyril,
Celestine, Hilary, Basil, Gregory, and now
once again by the most holy Leo : and we
pray that those things which were decreed
by the 318 holy fathers, and by the most
holy Leo be read.

The most glorious judges and great Sen-
ate said : Let there be read the expositions
I {eKTe^^evra) of the 318 fathers gathered to-
' gether at Nice.

j Eunomius, the most reverend bishop of
I Nicomedia read from a book [the Exposi-
j tion of faith of the 318 fathers.']

The Exposition of faith of the Council held
at Nice.

" In the consulate of Paul and Julian "
etc.

" We believe in one God," etc.
" But those who say," etc.
The most reverend bishops cried out ;
This is the orthodox faith ; this we all
believe : into this we were ba]itized ; into
this we baptize : Blessed Cyril so taught :
this is the true faith : this is the holy faith :
this is the everlasting faith : into this we
were baptized : into this we baptize : we
all so believe : so believes Leo, the Pope
(6 TTaTra?) : Cyril thus believed : Pope Leo
so interpreted it.

The most glorious judges and great senate
said, Let there be read what was set forth
by the 150 holy fathers.

Aetius, the reverend deacon of Constanti-
nople read from a book [the creed of the
150 fathers.-]

The holy faith lohich the 150 fathers set
forth as consonant to the holy and great
Synod of Nice.

" We believe in one God," etc.
All the most reverend bishops cried out:
This is the faith of all of us : we all so be-
lieve.

The reverend archdeacon Aetius said,
There remains the letter of Cyril of holy


> Added in the Latin acts.


» Ibid.


250


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


and blessed memory, sometime bishop of
the gi'efit city Aloxaiidria, which he wrote
to Kestorius, which was approved by all the
most holy bisli(>})s assembled in the tirst
Council at E])hesus, called to condemn the
same Nestorins, and which was confirmed
by the subscription of all. There is also
another letter of the same C'vril, of blessed
memory, which he Avrote to John, of blessed
memory, sometime bishop of the great city
of Antioch, which lik<^wise Avas ccmfirmed.
If it be so ordered, I shall read these.

The most glorious judges and great sen-
ate said, Let the letters of Cyril of blessed
memory be read.


Aetius, the Archdeacon of the imperial
city Constantinople read.

To tlii' must TLVcrend and most rch'fjious
fcJloiv-pricst Nestorins, Cyril sends greeting
in the Lord.

[KaTa(f)'X vapovai firjv k. t. \. Lat. Oblo-
qnuntur ijuidem, etc. 7'A/.v Irffcr is found
(iiitontj f he acts of the Couucil (fEphesus.]

Likewise the same Archdeacon Aetius
read [the letter of the same holy Cyril of
blessed memory to John of Antioch, on the
peace] .

[This letter begins, Eixf^paiveSwaav oi ovpa-
vol K. T. X. ; and in the Latin La3tentur
cseli.]


THE LETTEK OF CYRIL TO JOHN OF ANTIOCH.


{Found in Labhe and Cossarf, Concilia, Toin. IV., col. 343 and col. 164 ; and in MignCy
Pat. Grsec, Toui. LXXVII. [Cyrilli Opera, Tom. X.], col. ITS. This is the letter ivhich
is often styled "the Ephesine Creed.")


Cyril to my lord, beloved brother, and
fellow minister John, greeting in the Lord.

" Let the heavens rejoice, and let the
earth be glad" for the middle wall of parti-
tion has been taken away, and grief has
been silenced, and all kind of difference of
opinion has been removed ; Christ the
Saviour of us all having awarded peace to
his churches, through our being called to
this by our most devout and beloved of
God kings, who are the best imitators of the
piety of their ancestors in keeping the right
faith in their souls firm and immovable, for
they chiefly give their mind to the affairs of
the holy Churches, in order that they may
have the noted glory forever and show forth
their most renowned kingdom, to whom
also Christ himself the Lord of powers dis-
tributes good things with plenteous hand,
and gives to prevail over their enemies and
grants them victory. For he does not lie
in saying : " As I live saith the Lord, them
that honour me, I will honour." For when
my lord, my most-beloved-of-God, fellow-
minister and brother Paul, had arrived in
Alexandria, we were filled with gladness,
and most naturally at the coming of such a
man as a mediator, who was ready to work
beyond measure that he might overcome
the envy of the devil and heal our divis-
ions, and who by removing the offences
scattered between us, would crown your
Church and ours with harmony and peace.

Of the reason of the disagreement it is
superfluous to speak. I deem it more
useful both to think and speak of things
suitable to the time of peace. We were
therefore delighted at meeting with that
distinguished and most pious man, who
expected perhaps to have no small struggle,
persuading us that it is necessary to form
an alliance for the peace of the Church, and
to drive away the laughter of the heterodox,
and for this end to blunt the goads of the
stubbornness of the devil. He found us
ready for this, so as absolutely to need no
labour to be bestowed upon us. For we
remembered the Saviour's saying ; " My


peace I give unto you, my peace I leave
with you." We have been taught also to
say in prayers : " O Lord our God give us
peace, for thou hast given us all things."
So that if anyone should be in the partici-
pation of the peace furnished from God, he
is not lacking in any good. That as a mat-
ter of fact, the disagreement of the Churches
happened altogether unnecessarily and in-
opportunely, we now have been fully satis-
fied by the document brought by my lord,
the most pious bishop Paul, which contains
an unimpeachable confession of faith, and
this he asserted to have been pre])ared, by
your holiness and by the God-beloved
Bishops there. The document is as fol-
lows, and is set down verbatim in this
our epistle.

Concerning the Virgin Mother of God,
we thus think and speak ; and of the man-
ner of the Incarnation of the Only Begotten
Son of God, necessarily, not by way of
addition but for the sake of certainty, as we
have received from the beginning from the
divine Scriptures and from the tradition
of the holy fathers, we will speak briefly,
adding nothing whatever to the Faith set
forth by the holy Fathers in Nice. For, as
we said before, it suflices for all knowledge
of piety and the refutation of all false
doctrine of heretics. But we speak, not
presuming on the impossible ; but with the
confession of our own weakness, excluding
those who wish us to cling to those things
which transcend human consideration.

We confess, therefore, our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Only Begotten Son of God, per-
fect God, and perfect Man of a reasonable
soul and flesh consisting ; begotten before
the ages of the Father according to his
Divinity, and in the last days, for us and
for our salvation, of Mary the Virgin accord-
ing to his humanity, of the same substance
with his Father according to his Divinity,
and of the same substance with us accord-
ing to his humanity; for there became a
union of two natures. Wherefore we con-
fess one Christ, one Son, one Lord.

According to this understanding of this


252


ClIALCEDOX. A.D. -iol


unmixed union, we confess the lioly Virgin
to be Motiier of God; because (lod the
Word was incarnate and became Man, and
from this conception he united the temple
taken from her with liimself.

For W(! icnow the thi'ohj^Mans make some
things of the Evangelical and A})ostolic
teaching about the Lord common as pei-
taining to the one person, and otiier
things they divitie as to tiie two natures,
and attribute the Avorthy ones to God on
account of the Divinity of Christ, and the
lowly ones on account of his humanity [to
Lis humanity].

These being your holy voices, and find-
ing ourselves thinking the same with them
("One Lord, One Faith, One l>ai)tism,")
we glorified God the Saviour of all, con-
gratulating one another that our churches
and yours have the Faith which agrees with
the God-inspired Scriptures and the tradi-
tions of our holy Fathers.

Since I learned that certain of those ac-
customed to find fault were humming around
like vicious wasps, and vomiting out wretch-
ed words against me, as that I say the I10I3'
Bcxly of Christ was brought from heaven,
and not of the holy Virgin, I thought it
necessary to say a few words concerning
this to them :

O fools, and only knowing how to mis-
represent, how have ye been led to such a
judgment, how have ye fallen into so fool-
ish a sickness? For it is necessary, it is ;
und<)ul)tedly necessary, to undei'stand that
almost all the opposition to us concerning
the faith, arose from our affirming that the
holy Virgin is Mother of God. But if from
heaven and not from her the holy Body of
the Saviour of all was born, how then is
she understood to be Mother of God ? What
then did she bring forth except it be true
that she brought forth the Emmanuel accoi'd-
ing to the fiesh? They are to l)e laughetl
at who babble such things about me.

For the blessed ])rophet Isaiah does not
lie in saying " Behold the Virgin shall con-
ceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Emmanuel, which Ixnng inttn-pretedis
God with us." Truly also the holy Gabriel
said to the Blessed Virgin : " Fear not,
Mary, for thou hast found favour with God.
And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call
his name Jesus. He shall save his people
from their sins."


For when we say our Lord Jesus Christ
descendtid from ht'aven, and from above, we
do not so say this as if from above and from
heaven was his Holy Flesh taken, but rather
by way of following the divine Paul, Avho
distinctly declares : " The first man is of
the earth, earthy; the Second Man is the
Lord from heaven."

We remember too, the Saviour himself
saying, " And no man hath ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of Man." Although he was
born according to his flesh, as just said,
of the holy Virgin, yet God the Word came
down from above and from heaven. He
" made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant," and was
called the Son of Man, yet remaining what
he was, that is to say God. For he is un-
changing and unchangtiable according to
nature ; considered already as one with his
own Flesh, he is said to have come down
from heaven.

He is also called the Man from heaven,
being i^erfect in his Divinity and perfect in
his Humanity, and considered as in one
Person. For one is the Lord Jesus Christ,
although the difference of his natures is not
unknown, from which we say the ineflable
union was made.

AVill your holiness vouchsafe to silence
those who say that a crasis, or mingling or
mixture took place between the Word of
God and flesh. For it is likel}- that certain
also gossip about me as having thought or
said such things.

But I am far from any such thought as
that, and I also consider them wholly to
rave who thiidc a shadoAV of change could
occur concerning the Nature of the Word
of God. For he remains that which he al-
Avays was, and has not been changed, nor
can he ever be changed, nor is he ca] table of
change. For we all confess in addition to
this, that the Word of God is impassible,
even though when he dispenses most wisely
tliis mystery, he appears to ascribe to him-
self the sufferings endured in his own fiesh.
To the same purpose the all-Avise Peter also
said when he wrote of Christ as having
" sufi'ered in tln^ flesh," and not in the nat-
ure of his ineflable godhead. In order that
he sh(^uld be believed to be the Saviour of
all, by an economic appropriation to him-
self, as just said, he assumed the sufi"eriugs
of his own Flesh.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


253


Like to this is the prophecy through the
Yoice of the prophet, as from him, " I gave
my back to the smiters, aud my cheeks to
them that phickecl off the hair: I hid not
my face from shame and spitting." Let
your holiness be convinced nor let anj^one
else be doubtful that we altogether follow
the teachings of the holy fathers, especially
of our blessed and celebrated Father Athana-
sius, deprecating the least departure from it.

I might have added many quotations
from them also establishing my words, but
that it would have added to the length of
my letter and it might become wearisome.
And we will allow the defined Faith, the
symbol of the Faith set forth by our holy
Fathers who assembled some time ago
at Nice, to be shaken by no one. Nor
would we permit ourselves or others, to
alter a single word of those set forth, or to
add one syllable, remembering the saying :
"Remove not the ancient landmark which
thy fathers have set," for it was not they
who spoke but the Spirit himself of God
and the Father, who proceedeth also from
him, and is not alien from the Son, accord-
ing to his essence. And this the words of
the holy initiators into mysteries confirm to
us. For in the Acts of the Apostles it is


written : " And after they were come to
Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia;
but the Spirit of Jesus suffered them not."
And the divine Paul wrote : " So then they
that are in the flesh cannot please God.
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit,
if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you.
Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his."

When some of those who are accustomed
to turn from the right, twist my speech to
their views, I pray your holiness not to won-
der ; but be well assured that the follow-
ers of every heresy gather the occasions of
their error from the God-inspired Scriptures,
corrupting in their evil minds the things
rightly said through the Holy Spirit, and
dra^ving doAvn upon their own heads the
unquenchable flame.

Since we have learned that certain, after
having corrupted it, have set forth the ortho-
dox epistle of our most distinguished Father
Athanasius to the Blessed Epictetus, so as
thereby to injure many; therefore it ap-
peared to the brethren to be useful and
necessary that we should send to your holi-
ness a copy of it from some correct ancient
transcripts which exist among us. Fare-
well.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION II. (continued).


(L. and C, Cone, Tom. IV., col. 343.)


And when these letters [i.e. Cyril's letter
to Nestorius KaracfiXvapova-t and his letter
to John of Antioch Evcppawea^coaav] had
been read, the most reverend bishops cried
out : "We all so believe : Pope Leo thus be-
lieves : anathema to him who divides and
to him who confounds : this is the faith of
Archbishop Leo : Leo thus believes : Leo
and Anatolius so believe : we all thus be-
lieve. As Cyril so believe we, all of us :
eternal be the memory of Cyril : as the epis-
tles of Cyril teach such is our mind, such
has been our faith : such is our faith : this


is the mind of Archbishop Leo, so he be-
lieves, so he has Avritten.

The most glorious judges and the great
senate said : Let there be read also the
epistle of the most worthy Leo, Archbishop
of Old Rome, the Imperial City.

Beronician, the most devout clerk of the
sacred consistory, read from a book handed
him by Aetius, Archdeacon of the holy
Church of Constantinople, the encyclical or
synodical letter of the most holy Leo, the
Archbishop, written to Flavian, Archbishop
of Constantinople.


THE TOME OF ST. LEO.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 348 ; also Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LIY

[Leo. M. Opera, Tom. I.] col. 75G.) '


Leo [the bishop] to his [most] dear
brother Flavian .

Having read your Affection's letter, the
late arrival of which is matter of sur-
prise to us, and having gone through tlie
record of the proceedings of the bishops,
we have now, at last, gained a clear view
of the scandal which has risen up among
you, against the integrity of the faith ; and
what at first seemed oliscure has now been
elucidated and explained. By this means
Eutyclies, who seemed to be deser"ving of
honour under the title of Presbyter, is now
shown to be exceedingly thoughtless and
sadly inexperienced, so that to him also we
may apply the prophet's words, " He re-
fused to understand in order to act Avell :
he meditated unrighteousness on his bed."
What, indeed, is more unrighteous than to
entertain ungodly thoughts, and not to yield
to persons wiser and more learned ? But
into this folly do they fall who, when hin-
dered by some obscurity from apprehend-
ing the truth, have recourse, not to the
words of the Prophets, not to the letters of
the Apostles, nor to the authority of the
Gospels, but to themselves ; and become
teachers of error, just because they have
not been disciples of the truth. For what
learning has lie received from the sacred
pages of the New and the Old Testament,
who does not so much as understand the
very beginning of the Creed ? And that
which, all the world over, is uttered by the
voices of all ap]ilicants for regeneration, is
still not grasped by the mind of this aged
man. If, then, he knew not what he ought
to think about tlie Incarnation of the Word
of God, and Avas not willing, for the sake of
obtaining the light of intelligence, to make
laborious search through the wliole extent
of the Holy Scriptures, he should at least
have received with heedful attention that
general Confession common to all, whereby
the whole body of the faitlifnl ])r()fess that
they " believe in God tlie Father Almighty,


and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,
who was born of the Holy Ghost and the
Virgin Mary." Bv which three clauses the
engines of almost all heretics are shattered.
For when God is l)elieved to be both " Al-
mighty " and " Father," it is proved that
the Son is everlasting together with him-
self, differing in nothing from the Father,
because he Avas born as " God from God,"
Almighty from Almighty, Coeternal from
Eternal ; not later in time, not infciior in
power, not unlike him in glory, not divided
froni him in essence, but the same Only-
I begotten and Everlasting Son of an Ever-
lasting Parent was " born of the Holy Ghost
and the Virgin Mary." This birth in time
in no way detracted from, in no Avay added
to, that divine and everlasting birth ; but
expended itself A\holly in tlie work of re-
storing man, who had been deceived ; so
that it might both overcome death, and by
its power " destro}- the devil who had the
power of death." For we could not have
overcome the author of sin and of death,
unless he who could neither be contami-
nated by sin, nor detained by death, had
taken upon himself our nature, and made it
his own. For, in fact, he was "conceived
of the Holy Ghost" within the Avomb of a
Virgin Mother, who bore him as she had
conceived him, without loss of virginity.^
But if he (Eutyclies) was not able to obtain
a true conce])tion from this pm'e fountain
of Christian faith because by his own blind-
ness he had darkened for himself the bright-
ness of a truth so clear, he should have
submitted himself to the Evangelists teach-
ing ; and after reading Avhat Matthew says,
" The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the Son of I~)avid, the Son of Abra-
ham," he should also have sought instruc-
tion from the Apostle's preaching ; and
after reading in the Epistle to the Bomans,
" Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called an
Apostle, se])arated imto the go.spel of God,
which he had promised before by the
prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning


' The translation here piven ie that of Rev. Wm liriirlit. I) 1) .
found in hie Select Sermonsof S. Tjfo the Great on tfif Im-'iritati'in -It will be noticed here that the virgin-birth is as distinctly

with his XSVIIIth EpitlU called the " Tome." London, 1886. defined as the virgin-conception.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


255


his Son, who was made unto him of the
seed of David according to the flesh," he
should have bestowed some devout study
on the pages of the Prophets ; and finding
that (rod's promise said to Abraham, "in
thy seed shall all nations be blessed," in
order to avoid all doubt as to the proper
meaning of this " seed," he should have at-
tended to the Apostle's words, " To Abra-
ham and to his seed were the promises
made. He saith not, ' and to seeds,' as in
the case of many, but as in the case of one,
* and to thy seed,' which is Christ." He
should also have apprehended with his in-
ward ear the declaration of Isaiah, " Be-
hold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, and they shall call his name Emman-
uel, which is, being interpreted, God with
us ; " and should have read with faith the
words of the same prophet, " Unto us a
Child has been born, unto us a Son has
been given, whose power is on his shoul-
der ; and they shall call his name Angel of
great counsel. Wonderful, Counsellor, Strong
God, Prince of Peace, Father of the age to
come." And he should not have spoken
idly to the effect that the Word was in such
a sense made flesh, that the Christ who
was brought forth from the Virgin's womb
had the form of a man, and had not a body
really derived from his Mother's body.
Possibly his reason for thinking that our
Lord Jesus Christ was not of our nature
was this — that the Angel who was sent to
the blessed and ever Virgin Mary said,
" The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Highest shall over-
shadow thee, and therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God ; " as if, because the
Virgin's conception was caused by a divine
act, therefore the flesh of him whom she
conceived was not of the nature of her who
conceived him. But we are not to under-
stand that " generation," peerlessly wonder-
ful, and wonderfully peerless, in such a
sense as that the newness of the mode of
production did away with the proper char-
acter of the kind. For it was the Holy
Ghost who gave fecundity to the Virgin,
but it was from a body that a real body
was derived ; and " when Wisdom was
building herself a house," the " Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us," that is,
in that flesh which he assumed from a hu-
man being, and which he animated with


the spirit of rational life. Accordingly,
while the distinctness of both natures and
substances was preserved, and both met
in one Person, lowliness was assumed by
majesty, weakness by power, mortality by
eternity ; and, in order to pay the debt
of our condition, the inviolable nature was
united to the passible, so that as the ap-
propriate remedy for our ills, one and the
same " Mediator between God and man,
the Man Christ Jesus," might from one
element be capable of dying and also from
the other be incapable. Therefore in the
entire and perfect nature of very man was
born very God, whole in what was his,
whole in what was ours. By " ours " we
mean what the Creator formed in us at the
beginning and what he assumed in order
to restore ; for of that which the deceiver
brought in, and man, thus deceived, admit-
ted, there was not a trace in the Saviour ;
and the fact that he took on himself a share
in our infirmities did not make him a par-
taker in our transgressions. He assumed
" the form of a servant " without the defile-
ment of sin, enriching what was human, not
impairing what was divine : because that
" emptying of himself," whereby the Invisi-
ble made himself visible, and the Creator
and Lord of all things willed to be one
among mortals, was a stooping down in
compassion, not a failure of power. Ac-
cordingly, the same who, remaining in the
form of God, made man, was made man in
the form of a servant. For each of the
natures retains its proper character without
defect ; and as the form of God does not
take away the form of a servant, so the form
of a servant does not impair the form of
God. For since the devil was glorying in
the fact that man, deceived by his craft,
was bereft of divine gifts and, being stripped
of his endowment of immortality, had come
under the grievous sentence of death, and
that he himself, amid his miseries, had
found a sort of consolation in having a
transgressor as his companion, and that
God, according to the requirements of the
principle of justice, had changed his own
resolution in regard to man, whom he had
created in so high a position of honour;
there was need of a dispensation of secret
counsel, in order that the unchangeable
God, whose will could not be deprived of
its own benignity, should fulfil by a more
secret mystery his original plan of loving


25G


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


kindness toward us, and that man, who had
been led into fanlt by the wicked subtlety
of the devil, should not ])erish contiaij to
God's })urpose. Accordinj^iy, the Son of
God, descending from his seat in heaven,
and not depaitin<i; from the glory of the
Father, enters this lower worhl, born aft(^r
a new order, by a new mode of birth. After
a new order; because he who in his own
sphere is invisible, became visible in ours ;
He who could not be enclosed in space,
willed to be enclosed ; continuing to be
before times, he began to exist in time ; the
Lord of the universe allowed his infinite
niajestv to l)e overshadowed, and took u])on
hiui the form of a servant ; the impassible
God did not disdain to be passible Man,
and the immortal One to be subjected to
the hiM's of death. And born by a new
mode of birth ; because inviolate virginity,
while ignorant of concupiscence, sup])lied
the matter of his flesh. What was assumed
from the Lord's mother was nature, uc^t
fault ; nor does the wondrousness of the
nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, as born
of a Virgin's womb, imply that his nature
is unlike ours. For the selfsame who is
very God, is also very man ; and there is no
illusion in this union, while the lowliness of
man and the loftiness of Godhead meet to-
gether. For as " God " is not changed by
the com]iassion [exhibited], so "Man" is
not consumed by the dignity [bestowed].
For each " form " does the acts which be-
long to it, in communion with the other ;
the Word, that is, ])erforming what belongs
to the AVord, and the flesh carrying out
what belongs to the flesh; the one of these
shines out in miracles, the other succumbs
to injuries. And as the Word does not
withdraw from equality with tlui Father in
glory, so the flesh does not abandon the
nature of our kind. For, as we must often
be saying, he is one and the same, truly
Son of God, and truly Son of Man. God,
inasmuch as " in the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God." Man, inasmuch as
"the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us." God, inasnnich as "id! tilings
were made by him, and without him noth-
ing was made." Man, inasmuch as he was
"made of a woman, made under tln^ law."
The nativity of the fleyh is a manifestation
of human nature ; the Virgin's child-bear-
ing is an indication of Divine power. The


infancy of the Babe is exhibited by the hu-
miliation of swaddling clothes : the great-
ness of the Highest is declared by the
voices of angels. He whom Herod impi-
ously designs to slay is like humanity in its
beginnings ; but he whom the Magi rejoice
to adore on their knees is Lord of all. Now
when he canu? to the ba})tisni of John his
forerunner, lest the fact that the Godhead
was covered with a veil of flesh should be
concealed, the voice of the Father sjiake in
thunder from heaven, " This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased." Accord-
ingly, he who, as man, is tem])ted by the
devil's subtlety, is the same to whom, as
God, angels pay duteous service. To hun-
ger, to thirst, to be weary, and to sleep, is
evidently human. But to satisfy five thou-
sand men with five loaves, and give to the
Samaritan woman that living water, to draw
Avhicli can secure him that drinks of it
from ever thirsting again ; to walk on the
suif:ic(5 of the sea with feet that sink not,
and by rebuking the storm to bring down
the "uplifted waves," is unquestionably
Divine. As then — to pass by many points
— it does not belong to the same natm'e
to weep with feelings of pity over a dead
friend and, after the mass of stone had been
removed from the grave where he had lain
four days, by a voice of command to raise
him up to life again ; or to hang on the
wood, and to make all the elements tremble
after daylight had been turned into night ;
or to be transfixed with nails, and to open
th(> gates of ])aradisc to the faith of the
robber ; so it does not belong to the same
nature to saj, "I and the Father are one,"
and to say, " the Father is greater than I."
For although in the Lord Jesus Christ
there is one Person of God and man, yet
that whereby contumely attaches to both is
one thing, and that Avhereby glory attaches
to both is another ; for from what belongs
to us ho has that manhood which is inferior
to the Father ; while from the Father he
has equal Godhead with the Father. Ac-
cordingly, on account of this unity of Per-
son which is to be understood as existing in
l)oth the natures, we read, on the one hand,
that " the Son of Man came down from
heaven," inasmuch as the Son of God took
flesh from that Virgin of whom he was
born ; and on the other hand, tlu? Sou of
God is said to have been crucified and bur-
ied, inasmuch as he underwent this, not in


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


257


Lis actual Godhead ; wherein the Only-
begotteu is coeternal and cousubsi)antial
with the Father, but in the weakness of
human nature. Wherefore we all, in the
very Creed, confess that " the only-begotten
Son of God was crucilied and buried," ac-
cording to that saying of the Apostle, " for
if they had known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Majesty." But when
our Lord and Saviour himself was by his
questions instructing the faith of the disci-
ples, he said, "Whom do men say that I the
Son of Man am ? " And when they had
mentioned various opinions held by others,
he said, "But whom say ye that I am? " that
is, " I who am Son of Man, and whom you
see in the form of a servant, and in reality
of flesh, whom say ye that I am ? " Where-
upon the blessed Peter, as inspired by God,
and about to benefit all nations by his con-
fession, said, " Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God." Not undeservedly,
therefore, was he pronounced blessed by
the Lord, and derived from the original
Rock that solidity which belonged both to
his virtue and to his name, who through
revelation from the Father confessed the
selfsame to be both the Son of God and the
Christ ; because one of these truths, ac-
cepted without the other, would not profit
unto salvation, and it was equally danger-
ous to believe the Lord Jesus Christ to be
merely God and not man, or merely man
and not God. But after the resurrection of
the Lord — which was in truth the resurrec-
tion of a real body, for no other person was
raised again than he who had been crucified
and had died — what else was accomyilished
during that interval of forty days than to
make our faith entire and clear of all dark-
ness ? For while he conversed with his dis-
cii^les, and dwelt with them, and ate with
them, and allowed himself to be handled
with careful and inquisitive touch by those
who were under the influence of doubt, for
this end he came in to the disciples when
the doors were shut, and by his breath
gave them the Holy Ghost, and opened the
secrets of Holy Scripture after bestowing
on them the light of intelligence, and again
in his selfsame person showed to them the
wound in the side, the prints of the nails,
and all the fresh tokens of the Passion, say-
ing, " Behold my hands and ni}^ feet, that j
it is I myself ; handle me and see, for a I
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me


have : " that the properties of the Divine
and the human nature might be acknowl-
edged to remain in him without causing a
division, and that we might in such sort
know that the Word is not what the flesh
is, as to confess that the one Son of God is
both Word and flesh. On which mystery
of the faith this Eutyches must be regard-
ed as unhappily having no hold, who does
not recognise our nature to exist in the
Only-begotten Son of God, either by way
of the lowliness of mortality, or of the glory
of resurrection. Nor has he been overawed
by the declaration of the blessed Apostle
and Evangelist John, saying, " Every spirit
that confesseth that Jesus Christ has come
in the flesh is of God ; and every spirit
which dissolveth Jesus is not of God, and
this is Antichrist." Now what is to dis-
solve Jesus, but to separate the human nat-
ure from him, and to make void by shame-
less inventions that mystery by which alone
we have been saved? Moreover, being in
the dark as to the nature of Christ's body,
he must needs be involved in the like sense-
less blindness with regard to his Passion
also. For if he does not think the Lord's
crucifixion to be unreal, and does not doubt
that he really accepted suffering, even unto
death, for the sake of the world's salvation ;
as he believes in his death, let him acknowl-
edge his flesh also, and not doubt that he
whom he recognises as having been capable
of suffering is also Man with a body like
ours ; since to deny his true flesh is also to
deny his bodily sufl'erings. If then he ac-
cepts the Christian faith, and does not turn
away his ear from the preaching of the
Gospel, let him see what nature it was that
was transfixed with nails and hung on the
wood of the cross ; and let him understand
whence it was that, after the side of the
Crucified had been pierced by the soldier's
spear, blood and water flowed out, that the
Church of God might be refreshed l)oth
with a Laver and M'ith a Cu]i. Let him
listen also to the blessed Apostle Peter
when he declares, that " sanctification by
the Spirit " takes place through the " sjirin-
kling of the blood of Christ," and let him
not give a mere cm-sory reading to the
words of the same Apostle, " Knowing that
ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain
way of life received by tradition from your
fathers, but with the precious blood of Jesus


258


CHALCEDOX. A.D. Vol


Christ as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot." Let him also not resist the
testimony of Blessed John the A})Ostle,
" And the blood of Jesus the Son of God |
cleauseth us from all sin." And again,
" This is the victory which overcometh the
world, even our faith ; " and, " who is he that
overcometh the worlil, but he that believeth
that Jesus is the Son of God '? This is he
that came by wati'r and blood, even Jesus
Christ ; not in water only, but in water and
blood ; and it is the Spirit that beareth wit- 1
ness, because the Spirit is truth. For there
are three that bear witness — the Spirit, the
water, and the blood ; and the three are
one." That is, the Spirit of sanctitication,
and the blood of redemption, and the water
of baptism ; which three things are one, and
remain uu<livi(led, and not one of them is
disjoined from connection with the others ;
because the Catholic Chiu-ch lives and ad-
vances by this faith, that in Christ Jesus
we should believe neither manhood to exist
without true Godhead, nor Godhead with-
out true manhood. But when Eutyches,
on being questioned in your examination of '
him, answered, "I confess that our Lord
was of two natures before the union, but
after the union I confess one natui'e ; " I am
astonished that so absurd and perverse a
profession as this of his was not rebuked by
a censure on the part of any of his judges,
and that an utterance extremely foolish and
extremely blasphemous was passed over,
just as if nothing liad been heard which
could give offence : seeing that it is as im-
pious to say that the Only-begotten Son of
God was of two natures before the Incarna-
tion as it is shocking to affirm that, since
the Word became flesh, there lias been in
him one nature only. But lest Eutyches
should think that what he said was correct,
or was tolerable, because it was not confuted
by any assertion of yours, we exhort your
earnest solicitude, dearly beloved brother,
to see that, if by God's mercifid inspiration
the case is brought to a satisfactory issue,
the inconsiderate and inexperienced man be
cleansed also from this pestilent notion of
his ; seeing that, as the record of the pro-
ceedings has clearly shown, he had fairly


begun to abandon his own opinion when
on being driven into a corner by authorita-
tive words of yours, hti professed himself
ready to say what he had not said before,
and to give his adhesi(m to that faith from
which he had [)r<'vii)usly stood aloof. But
when he would not consent to anathematize
the impious dogma you understood, brother,
that he continued in his own misbelief, and
deserved to receive sentence of condenma-
tion. For w hich if he grieves sincerely and
to good purpose, and understands, even
though too late, how properly the Episco-
}ial authority has l)een put in motitm, or if,
in order to make full satisfaction, he shall
condemn viva voce, and under his own hand,
all that he has held amiss, no compassion,
to whatever extent, which can be shown him
when he has been set right, will be worthy
of blame, for our Lord, the true and good
Shepherd, who laid dowm his life for his
sheep, and w'ho came to save men's souls
and not to destroy them, wills us to imi-
tate his own loving kindness ; so that jus-
tice should indeed constrain those who sin,
but mercy should not reject those who are
converted. For then indeed is the true
faith defended with tlie best results, when
a false opinion is condemned even by those
who have followed it. But in order that
the whole matter may be piously and faith-
fully carried out, we have appointed our
brethren, Julius, Bishop, and Beatus, Pres-
byter (of the title of St. Clement) and also
my son Hilarus, Deacon, to represent us;
and with them we have associated Dulci-
tius, our Notary, of whose fidelity we have
had good proof : trusting that the Divine
assistance will be with you, so that he who
has gone astray ma}^ be saved by condemn-
ing his own luisound ojiiuion. May God
keep you in good health, dearly beloved
brother. Given on the Ides of June, in the
Consulate of the illustrious men, Asterius
and Protogenes.


[Next teas read a long catena of quota-
tions from the Fathers sustaining tJie teach-
ing of the Tome. (L. and C, Cone, Tom.
lY., cols. 357-368.)]


EXTKACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION II. (continued).
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 368.)


After the reading of the foregoing epis-
tle, the most reverend bishops cried out :
This is the faith of the fathers, this is the
faith of the Apostles. So we all believe,
thus the orthodox beheve. Anathema to
him who does not thus believe. Peter
has spoken thus through Leo. So taught
the Apostles, Piously and truly did Leo
teach, so taught Cyril. Everlasting be the
memory of Cyril. Leo and Cyril taught
the same thing, anathema to him who does
not so believe. This is the true faith. Those
of us who are orthodox thus believe. This


is the faith of the fathers. Why were not
these things read at Ephesus [i.e. at the
heretical synod held there] ? These are the
things Dioscorus hid away.

[Some explanations ivere asked by the
lUyrian bishops and the cmsivers icere found
satisfactory, but yet a delay of a feiv days
7vas asked for, and somebishops petitioned for
a general pardon of all ivho had been kept
Old. This projjosition made greed confusion,
in the midst of which the session ivas dis-
solved by the judges. (Col. 371.) ]


SESSION IIL


[The im/perial representatives do not seem to have been jpreserd., and after Aetius the
Archdeacon of Constantinople had opened the Session,]

[Next folloios the petition of Eusebius et
post nonnulla/owr ^9e^i7?"o?is each addressed
to "The most holy and beloved-of-God


Paschasinus the bishop of Lilybseum, in
the province of Silicia, and holding the
place of the most holy Leo, archbishop of
the Apostolic see of old Rome, said in


ecumenical archbishop and patriarch of


Latin what being interpreted is as follows : great Rome Leo, and to the holy and
It is well known to this beloved of God ecumenical Synod assembled at Chalcedon,
synod, that divine betters were sent to the etc., etc.;" The first two by deacons of
blessed and apostolic pope Leo, inviting Alexandria, the third by a quondam pres-
him to deign to be present at the holy byter of the diocese, and the fourth by a
synod. But since ancient custom did not layman also of Alexandria. After this
sanction this, nor the general necessity of the Dioscorus was again summoned and, as he
time seemed to permit it, our littleness in did not come, sentence was given against
the place of himself he ra rr\<i arfia'^ avvoSov him, which was com,municated to him in a
eTrirpeyfre, and therefore it is necessary that letter contained in the acts. (L. and C,
whatever things are brought into discussion Cone, Tom IV., col. 418.) The bishops
should be examined by our interference expressed their opinions for the most j^ci^'t
(BtaXaXid'i). [The Latin reads where I have ' owe by 07ie, but the Roman Legates spoke
placed the Greek of the ordinary text, thus, together, and in their speech occurs the fol-
'' commanded our littleness to preside in lowing (Col. 426 :) ]
his place over this holy council."] There-
fore let the book presented by our most Wherefore the most holy and blessed
beloved-of-God brother, and fellow-bishop Leo, archbishop of the great and elder
Eusebius be received, and read by the Rome, through us, and through this pre-
beloved of God archdeacon and primicerius sent most holy synod together with'-' the
of the notaries, Aetius. thrice blessed and all-glorious Peter the
And Aetius, the archdeacon and primi- | Apostle, who is the rock and foundation of


cerius of the notaries, took the book and
read as follows.

' i. e. Imperial.


the Catholic Church, and the foundation of


2 The translation of the English Hefele (iv. 328)
ion with " is most extraordinary.


' m commun-


2G0


CIIALCEDOX. A.D. 451


the orthodox faith, hath stripped him of the
episcopate, and hath aheiuited from liim
all hieratic worthiness. Therefore let this
most holy and ^reat synod sentence the
before mentioned Dioscorus to the canoni-
cal penalties.


\The hiahojys then, one hy one, spoke wi i ^vhich follo\ys


favour of the depositio7i of Dioscorus, hut
usually on the ground of his refusal to
ajypear when thrice summoned.']

And Avhen all the most holy bishops had
spok<'n on the subject, they signed this


THE CONDEMNATION SENT BY THE HOLY

SYNOD TO DIOSCORUS.


AND ECUMENICAL


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col, 459.)


The holy and great and ecumenical
Synod, which by the grace of God accord-
ing to the constitution of our most pious
and beloved of God emperors assembled
together at Chalcedom the city of Bithy-
nia, in the martyry of the most holy and
victorious Martyr Euphemia to Dioscorus.

We do you to wit that on the thirteenth
day of the month of October you were
deposed from the episcopate and made a


stranger to all ecclesiastical order (Beafiov)
by the holy and ecumenical synod, on ac-
count of your disregard of the divine can-
ons, and of your disobedience to this holy
and ecumenical synod and on account of
the other crimes of which you have been
found guilty, for even when called to an-
swer your accusers three times by this holy
and great synod according to the divine
canons you did not come.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION IV.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 469.)


The most magnificent and glorious
judges and the great Senate said :

Let the reverend council now declare
what seems good concerning the faith, since
those things which have already been dis-
posed of have been made manifest. Paseha-
sinus and Lucentius, the most reverend
bishops, and Boniface the most reverend
presbyter, legates of the A])()stolic See,
through tliat most reverend man, bishop
Paschasinus said: As the holy and blessed
and Ecumenical Synod holds fast and fol-
lows the rule of faitli {fdei rcgiiffnti in the
Latin Acts) which was set forth by the
fathers at Nice, it also confirms the faith
set forth by the Synod of 150 fatliei's
gathered at Constantinoj^le at the bidding
of the •'reat Theotlosius of blessed memory.
Moreover the exposition of their faith, of
the illustrious Cyril of blessed memory set
forth at the Council of Ephesus (in which


Nestorius Avas C(mdemned) is received. And
in the third place the writings of that blessed
man, Leo, Archbishop of all the churches,
who condemned the heresy of Nestorius
and Eutyches, shew what the true faith is.
Likewise the holj' Synod holds this faith,
this it follows — nothing further can it add
nor can it take aught away.

Wlien tliis had been translated into Greek
by ]3eronician, the devout secretary of the
divine consistory, the most reverend bish-
ops cried out : So we all believe, so wo
were lia]itized, so we baptize, so Ave have
believed, so Ave now believe.

The most glorious judges and the great
senate said : Since Ave see that the Holy
Gospels haA'e been placed alongside of your
holiness, let each one of the bishops here
assembled declare Avhether the epistle of
most blessed archbishop Leo is in accord-
ance A\ itli the exposition of the 31H fathers


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


261


assembled at Nice and with the decrees of
the 150 fathers afterwards assembled in
the royal city.

[To this question the bishojJS answered one
by one, until 161 separate ojyinions had been
given, when the rest of the bishojjs ivere asked


by the imperial judges to give their votes in a
body {col. SOS). ]

All the most reverend bishops cried out :
We all acquiesce, we all believe thus ; we
are all of the same mind. So are we mind-
ed, so we believe, etc., etc.


SESSION V.
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 555.)


Paschasinus and Lucentius the most j
reverend bishops and Boniface a presbyter,
vicars of the Apostolic See of Rome, said :
If they do not agree to the letter of that
apostolic and blessed man, Pope Leo, give !
directions that we be given our letters of
dismission, and let a synod be held there
[i. e. in the West].

[A long debate then followed as to lohether
the decree drawn up and presented shoidd be
accepted. This seems to have been the 7nind
of most of the bishops. At last the com-
missioners proposed a committee of twenty-
two to meet ivith them and report to the coun-
cil, and the Emperor imposed this ivith the
threat that otherwise they all should be sent
home and a new council called in the West.
Even this did not make them yield (col. 560.)]

The most reverend bishops cried out :
Many years to the Emperor ! Either let
the definition [i.e. the one presented at this
session] stand or we go. Many years to the
Emperor !

Cecropius, the most reverend bishop of
Sebastopol, said : We ask that the defi-
nition be read again and that those who
dissent from it, and will not sign, may go
about their business ; for we give our con-
sent to these things which have been so
beautifully drafted, and make no criticisms.


The most blessed bishops of Illyria said :
Let those who contradict be made manifest.
Those who contradict are Nestorians. Those
who contradict, let them go to Rome.

The most magnificent and most glorious
judges said : Dioscorus acknowledged that
he accepted the expression " of two natures,"
but not that there were two natures. But
the most holy archbishop Leo says that
there are two natures in Christ unchange-
ably, inseparably, unconfusedly united in
the one only-begotten Son our Saviour.
Which would you follow, the most holy Leo
or Dioscorus ?

The most reverend bishops cried out :
We believe as Leo. Those who contra-
dict are Eutychiaus. Leo hath rightly ex-
pounded the faith.

The most magnificent and glorious judges
said : Add then to the definition, accord-
ing to the judgment of our most holy father
Leo, that there are two natures in Christ
united unchangeably, inseparably, uncon-
fusedly.

[The Committee then sat in the oratory of
the most holy martyr Euphemis and after-
wards reported a definition of faith tvhich
tuhile teaching the same doctrine ivas not the
Tome of Leo (col 562).]


THE DEFINITION OF FAITH OF THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 562.)

NOTES.

AnaTOLIUS of CoNSTANTrNOPLE.


The holy, great, uiul ecumenical synod,
assembled by the grace of God and the com-
mand of our most religious and (^hristiau
Emperors, Marcian and Yal<Mitinan, Au-
gusti, at Chalcedon, the metropolis of the
Bithynian Province, in the martyry of the
holy and \'ictorious martyr Euphemia, has
decreed as follows :

Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, when
strengthening the knowledge of the Faith


{Ep. to St. Leo. Migne, Pat. Laf., Tom.
LIV. [Leo. M., 02)era, Tom. I.J col. 978.)

Since after judgment had been delivered
concerning liiui, there was need that all
should agree in the riglit faith (for wljich
pui*pose the most pious emperor had with the

• 1- T -1 i. n 1 ii i. • 'rr iicreatest Trains assembled the holv Svnod) with

in his disci])les, to the end that no one might ^ ^t, , ,. r •• ' ,

T •.] 1 • -11 • Vi praver and tears, vour iiolmess belli f' ])resent

disagree with his neighbour concerning the i^.^^ ^^ ^ spirit and co-operating with us
doctrines of religion, and that the proclama- 1 tia-ough those most God-beloved men whom
tion of the truth might be set forth equally ^.^^ j^.^j ^^nt to us, having as our protector
to all men, said, " My peace I leave with | ti^e most holy and most comely Martyr
you, my peace I give unto you." But, since ^ Euphemia, we gave ourselves up entirely to
the evil one does not desist from sowing this salutary work, all other matters being laid
tares among the seeds of godliness, but ever aside. And when the crisis demanded that
invents some new device against the truth ; I all the most holy bishops gathered together
therefore the Lord, providing, as he ever ' should set forth an unanimous definition
does, for the human race, has raised up {o-vfKJiwvov opov) for the explanation and clearer
this pious, faithful, and zealous Sovereign, understanding of our confession of our Lord
and has called together unto him from all [ Jesus Christ, our Lord God was found ap-
parts the chief rulers of the priesthood ; P^aring to them that sou-ht lum not, and
so that, the grace of Christ our common ^)T^ ^",^1^^'^^' ^^ asked not for Inm. And

Lord ins].iring us, we may cast off every | ^^t^f^^^.^^^"^ ^^"^/.^^ ^^^ ^^f^"^\^r ^^^tenti-

1 e £ ^ 1 1 e i.i i £ \ ouslv made opposition, he sliewed lortli never-

plague of falsehood from the sheep of ^^^^^^ ^^.^ ^/^/^j^ ^^^^^ ^^^ ^^.^ ^^^^,^ ^^^^ ^^^^^

Christ and feed them with the tender leaves ^^^ unanimous and uncontradicted writing

of truth. And this have we done with one ^^^^ published bv us all, which confirmed

unanimous consent, driving away erroneous ^lie souls of the 'stable, and inviting to the

doctrines and renewing the unerring faith ^yay of truth all who ha.l declined therefrom.

of the Fathers, publishing to all men the And when we had subscribed with unanimous

Creed of the Three Hundred and Eighteen, consent the chart, we all Avith one ccuisent,

and to thoir number adding, as their peers, that is our whole synod, entered the martyry

the Fathers who have received the same of the most holy and triumphant martyr

summary of religion. Such are the One Euphemia, and when at the prayer of our

Hundred and Fiftv hoi V Fathers who after- most pious and beloved of Christ Emperor


wards assembled in the great Constantino-
ple and ratified the same faith. Moreover,
observing the order and every form relating
to the faith, which was observed by the holy
synod formerly held in E])hesus, of which


Marcian, and of our most pious and in all
respects faithful Empress, our daughter and
Augusta Pulcheria, with joy, and hilarity we
placed upon the holy altar the decision which
we had written for the confirmation of the
faith of our fathers in accordance with that


Celesine of Konie and Cyril of Alexandria, j^^,^^, j^^^^^. ^.^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^ . .^„,i then handed it
ot holy memory, were Uie leaders, we do ^^ ^heir pietv, that thev mi-ht receive it as
d(!clare that the exi)osition of the right and ^.j^gy i^^^i ^sked for it. 'And when thev had
blameless faith madeby tho Thi(>e Hundred receiv<"d it they a;ave ^dorv with us to Christ
and Eighteen holy and blessed Fathers, as- the Lord, who had driven away the darkness
sembled at Nice in the reign of Constantino of wicked opinion, and had illustrated with
of pious memory, shall be i)re-eminent: and , the greatest unanimity the word of truth,
that those things shall be of force also, ' etc.


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


263


which were decreed by the One Hundred
and Fifty holy Fathers at Constantinople,
for the uprooting of the heresies which had
then sprung up, and for the confirmation of
the same Catholic and Apostolic Faith of
ours.

The Creed of the three hundred and eight-
een Fathers at Nice.

We believe in one God, etc.

Item, the Creed of the one hundred and fifty
holy Fathers ivho ivere assembled at Constan-
tinople.

We believe in one God, etc.

This wise and salutarv formula of divine
grace sufficed for the perfect knowledge and
confirmation of religion ; for it teaches the
perfect [doctrine] concerning Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, and sets forth the Incar-
nation of the Lord to them that faithfully
receive it. But, forasmuch as persons un-
dertaking to make void the preaching of
the truth have through their individual
heresies given rise to empty babblings ;
some of them daring to corrupt the mystery
of the Lord's incarnation for us and refus-
ing [to use] the name Mother of God (Qeo-
ToKO'i) in reference to the Virgin, while
others, bringing in a confusion and mixture,
and idly conceiving that the nature of the
flesh and of the Godhead is all one, main-
taining that the divine Nature of the Only
Begotten is, by mixture, capable of suffer-
ing ; therefore this present holy, great, and
ecumenical synod, desiring to exclude every
device against the Truth, and teaching that
which is unchanged from the beginning, has
at the very outset decreed that the faith of
the Three Hundred and Eighteen Fathers
shall be preserved inviolate. And on ac-
count of them that contend against the Holy
Ghost, it confirms the doctrine afterwards
delivered concerning the substance of the
Spirit by the One Hundred and Fifty holy
Fathers who assembled in the imperial City ;
which doctrine they declared unto all men,
not as though they were introducing any-
thing that had been lacking in their prede-
cessors, but in order to explain through
written documents their faith concerning
the Holy Ghost against those who were
seeking to destroy his sovereignty. And,


From this passage can easily be understood
the very obscure passage in the letter of the
Council to Leo, where it says that the defini-
tion was delivered by St. Euphemia as her
own confession of faith. Vide note of the
Ballerini on this epistle of Anatolius.


Hefele.

{Hist of fJw Councils. Vol. HI., p. 348.)

The present Greek text has ek Svo <J3V(T€wv
while the old Latin translation has, in dim-
bus natitris. After what had been repeatedly
said in this session on the difference between
"in two natures " and " of two natures," and
in opposition to the latter formula, there can
be no doubt whatever that the old Latin
translator had the more accurate text before
him, and that it was originally eV Suo c^vo-ecrtr.
This, however, is not mere supposition, but is
expressly testified by antiquity: (1) by the
famous Abbot Euthymius of Palestine, a con-
temporary of the Council of Chalcedon, of
whose disciples several were present as
bishops at our Council (cf. Baron, ad. ann.
451, n. 152 sq.). We still have a judgment of
his which he gave respecting the decree of
Chalcedon concerning the faith, and in which
he repeats the leading doctrine in the words
of the Synod itself. At our passage he

remarks : ev hvo (fivaecn yvuipitfia^ai 6/xoA:>yet tov
Iva Xptarov k. t. A. The fragment of his writ-
ings on the subject is found in the Vita S.
Euthymii Abbatis, wi'itten by his pupil Cyril
in the Analecta Grceca of the monks of St.
Maur, t. i., p. 57, printed in Mansi, t. vii., p.
774 sq. (2) The second ancient witness is
Severus, from a.d. 513 Monopbysite patri-
arch of Antioch, who represents it as a great
reproach and an unpardonable offence in the
fathers of Chalcedon that they had declared :

ev Bvo ((>v(Te(TLV dStaipe'rot? yvwpt^ecr.'^at rov Xptcrroi'

(see the Senfentice Scvcri in Mansi, t. vii., p.
839). (3) Somewhat more than a hundred
years after the Council of Chalcedon, Eva-
grius copied its decree concerning the faith
in extenso into his Church History (lib. ii., 4),
and, in fact, with the words : ei^ 8uo <^i'ct€o-iv
a<TvyxvTw<i K. T, A., (ed. Mog., p. 294). (4) In
the conference on religion held between the
Severians and the orthodox at Constantino-
ple, A.D. 553, the former reproached the
Synod of Chalcedon with having put in dua-
bus natnris, instead of ex duabus naturis, as
Cyril and the old fathers had taught (Mansi,
t.' viii., p. 892 ; Hardouin, t. ii., p. 1162).
^^5) Leoiitius of Byzantium maintains quite


264


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


on account of those who have taken in hand
to corrupt the mystery of the dispensation
[i.e. the Incarnation] and who shamelessly
pretend that he who was born of the holy
Virgin Mary was a mere man, it receives the
sjTiodical letters of the Blessed Cyril, Pastor
of the Church of Alexandria, addressed to
Nestorius and the Easterns, judging them
suitable, for the refutation of the frenzied
folly of Nestorius, and for the iiistniction
of those who long with holv ardour for a
knowledge of the saving symbol. And, for
the confirmation of the orthodox doctrines,
it has rightly added to these the letter of
the President of the great and old Pome,
the most blessed and holy ^Archbishop Leo,
which was addressed to Archbishop Flavian
of blessed memory, for the removal of the
false doctrines of Eutyches, judging them
to be agreeable to the confession of the gi'eat
Peter, and as it were a common pillar against
misbelievers. For it opposes those who
would rend the mystery of the dispensation
into a Duad of Sons ; it repels from the
sacred assembly those who dare to say that
the Godhead of the Only Begotten is capa-
ble of sutiering ; it resists those who imag-
ine a mixture or confusion of the two nat-
ures of Christ ; it di'ives away those who
fancy his form of a servant is of an heavenly
or some substance other than that which
was taken of us, and it anathematizes those
who fooHshly talk of tAvo natures of our
Lord before the union, conceiving that after
the union there was only one.

Following the holy Fathers we teach with
one voice that the Son [of God] and our
Lord Jesus Christ is to be confessed as one
and the same [Person], that he is perfect
in Godhead and perfect in manhood, very
God and very man, of a reasonable soul and
[human] body consisting, consubstantial
with the Father as touching his Godhead,
and consubstantial with us as touching his
manhood; made in all things like unto us,
sin only excepted ; begotten of his Father
before the worlds according to his Godhead ;
but in these last days for us men and for
our salvation born [into the world] of the
Virgin Mary, the Mother of God according
to his manhood. This one and the same
Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Sou [of
God] must be confessed to be in two nat-
ures,' unconfusedly, immutably, iudi visibly.


distinctly, in the year 610, in his work De
Sectis, that the S}Tiod taught cm XptaTw iv
ovo (f>v<jeaii' a(Tvy^Tu)<; k. tt. A.

It is clear that if any doubt had then existed
as to the correct reading, Leontius oculd not
have opposed the Monophysites with such
certainty. The passage adduced by him is
Actio iv., c. 7., in Gallaud. Bibliothcca PP.,
t. xii., p. 633. Gieseler {Kirchengesch. i., S.
465), and after him Halm {Jiibliofh. der
S//)tibole, S. 118, note 6), cites incorrectly the
fourth instead of the fifth Actio. Perhaps
neither of them had consulted the passage
itself. (6) No less weight is to be attached
to the fact that all the Latin translations, that
of Rusticus and those before him, have in
fhtabus )iat!(ris ; and (7) that the Lateran
Synod, a.d. 649, had the same reading in
their Acts (Hardouin, t. iii., p. 835). (8)
Pope Agatho, also, in his letter to the
Emperor Constans II., which was read in the
sixth Ecumenical Synod, adduced the creed
of Chalcedon with the words in diiabus natirris
(in the Acts of the sixth Ecumenical Council,
Actio iv. ; in Mansi, t. xi., p. 256; Hardouin,
t. iii., p. 1091). In consequence of this, most
scholars of recent times, e. g., Tillemont,
Walch {Bibloth. symbol veter., p. 106), Hahn
(1. c), Gieseler (1. c), Neander (Abthl. ii., 2 of
Bd. iv., S. 988), have declared iv Sio (^vcreo-ti'
to be the original and correct reading.
Neander adds: "The whole pi-ocess of the
transactions of the Council shows this (that
iv Svo is the correct reading). Evidently the
earlier creed, which was more favourable to
the Egyptian doctrine, contained the cV 8vo
(j>v(T€wv and the favour shown to the other
i:)arty came out chiefly in the change of the
eK into iv. The expression €k 8vo <^vo-£(ui'
besides, does not tit the place, the verb
yi'wpi^6fji€vov points rather to the original iv.
The iv 6vo (ftvcrfaiv or €k Svo (f>vae(jiv was the
turning - point of the whole controversy
between Monophysitism and Dyophysitism."
Cf., on the other side. Baur. Trinitiitstehre,
Bd. i., S. 820, and Dorner {Lchre v. der
Per.^on Chrisfi, Thl. ii., S. 129), where it is
maintained that tV is the correct and original
reading, but that it was from the beginning
purposely altered by the Westerns into in ;
moreover, that ix. fits better than iv with
yvtiipit,i)fj.ivi)v, and therefore that it had been
allowed as a concession to the Monophysites.
The meaninier, moreovei", they say, of Ik and ir
is essentially the same, and the one and the
other alike excluded Monophysitism.


> Vide parallel note from Hefele.


CHALCEDON^. A.D. 451


265


inseparably [united], and that without the
distinction of natures being taken away by
such union, but rather the peculiar property
of each nature being preserved and being
united in one Person and subsistence, not
separated or divided into two persons, but
one and the same Son and only-begotten,
God the Word, our Lord Jesus Christ, as
the Prophets of old time have spoken con-
cerning him, and as the Lord Jesus Christ
hath taught us, and as the Creed of the
Fathers hath delivered to us.

These things, therefore, having been ex-
pressed by us with the greatest accuracy
and attention, the holy Ecumenical Sjmod
defines that no one shall be suffered to bring
forward a different faith {erepav Triariv), nor
to write, nor to put together, nor to excog-
itate, nor to teach it to others. But such


as dare either to put together another faith,
or to bring forward or to teach or to deliver
a different Creed {erepov au/jL^oXnv) to such
as wish to be converted to the knowledge
of the truth from the Gentiles, or Jews or
any heresy whatever, if they be Bishops or
clerics let them be deposed, the Bishops
from the Episcopate, and the clerics from
the clergy ; but if they be monks or laics :
let them be anathematized.

After the reading of the definition, all the
most religious Bishops cried out : This is
the faith of the fathers : let the metro-
politans forthwith subscribe it : let them
forthwith, in the presence of the judges,
subscribe it : let that which has been well
defined have no delay : this is the faith of
the Apostles : by this we all stand : thus
we all believe.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION VL


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 611.)


{The Emperor ivas present in person and
addressed the Council and afterivards sug-
gested legislation under three heads, the
drafts for which were read.]

After this reading, the capitulas were
handed by our most sacred and pious prince
to the most beloved of God Anatolius, arch-
bishop of royal Constantinople, which is
New Rome, and all the most God-beloved
bishops cried out : Many years to our Em-
peror and Empress, the pious, the Chris-
tian. May Christ whom thou servest keep
thee. These things are worthy of the faith.
To the Priest, the Emperor. Thou hast
straightened out the churches, victor of
thine enemies, teacher of the faith. Many


years to the pious Empress, the lover of
Christ. Many years to her that is ortho-
dox. May God save your kingdom. Ye

, have put down the heretics, ye have kept
the faith. May hatred be far removed from

j your empire, and may your kingdom endui'e
for ever !

Our most sacred and pious prince said
to the holy synod : To the honour of the
holy martyr Euphemia, and of your holi-
ness, we decree that the city of Chalcedon,
in which the synod of the holy faith has
been held, shall have the honours of a me-
tropolis, in name only giving it this honour,
the proper dignity of the city of Nicomedia
being preserved.

All cried out, etc., etc.


DECREE ON THE JURISDICTION OF JERUSALEM AND

ANTIOCH.

SESSION VII.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 618.)
The most magnificent and glorious judges ' NOTE.


said :


The arrangement arrived


at through the agreenu>nt of the most holy
Maxinius, the bishop of the city of Antioch,
and of the most holy Juvenal, the bishop
of Jerusahjm, as the attestation of each of
them declares, shall remain firm for ever,
through our decri'e and the sentence of the
holy synotl ; to wit, that the most holy
bishop Maximus, or rather the most holy
church of Antioch, shall have under its own
jurisdiction the two Pho^nicias and Arabia ;
but the most holj' Juvenal, bishop of Je-
rusalem, or rather the most holy Church
which is under him, shall have under his
own power the three Palestines, all im-
perial pragmatics and letters and penalties
being done away according to the bidding
of our most sacred and pious prince.


The Ballerini, in their notes to the Works
of St. Leo (Migne, Pat. Lat., LV., eol. 733 et
■'^eqq.), cite fragments of the Acts of this coun-
cil, which if they can be trusted, shew that
this matter of the rights of Antioch and Jeru-
salem was treated of again at a subsequent
session (on Oct. 31) and determined in the
same fashion. These fragments have general-
ly been received as genuine, and have been
inserted by Mansi (Tom. vii., 722 C.) in his
Concilia.

The notes of the Ballerini may also be read
with profit, in the same volume of Migne's
Latin Patrology, col. 737 et seq.


THE DECREE WITH REGARD TO THE BISHOP OF EPHESUS.

SESSION XII.
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 706.)


The most glorious judges said : Since the
proposition of the (lod-beloved archbishop
of royal Constantinople, Anatolius, and of
the most reverend bishop Paschasinus, hold-
ing th(^ place of Leo, the most Ood-beloved
archbislu^j) of old Ilom«!, which orders that
because both of them [i.e., Bassianus and
Ste]dien] acted uncanonically, neither of
them should rule, nor Ix' called bisho]) of the
most holyt-hiirch of Hphcsus, and since the
whole holy synod taught that uncanonically
they had ])erformed these ordinations, and
had agreed with the sj)eeches of the most
reverend bishops ; tln^ most reverend Bas-


nourishmcnt and consolation, they shall re-
ceive each year two hundred gold pieces;
and another bishop shall be ordained ac-
cording to the canons for the most holy
church.'

And the whole holy synod cried out :
This is a just sentence. This is a pious
scheme. These things are fair to look upon.

Themost reverend l)isho}) Bassianus said:
Pray give order that what was stolen from
mo be restored.

The most glorious judges said : If any-
thing belonging to the most reverend bishop
Bassianus personally has been taken from


sianus and the most nn'erend St(>phen will i him, either by the most reverend bishop
be removed from tlu' holy church of Ephe- ' Ste])hen, or by any other persons whatso-


sus ; but they sliall enjoy tlu; e])iscopal
dignity, and from the rev<'nues of the be-
fore-mentioned most In^ly church, for their

> The English translation of Hefele asserts twice (Hist, of tlw i posed." Th's is entirelj- a mistake, he was deprived of his dio-
CounciU, Vol. HI , pp. 173 and 376), that Bassianus was " de- | cesu, but retained his episcopal rank.


ever, this shall be restored, after judicial
]) roof, by them who took it away or caused
it to b(! taken.


DECREE WITH REGARD TO NICOMEDIA.


SESSION XIII.
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 715.)


The most glorious judges said [after the
reading of the imperial letters was finished] :
These divine letters say nothing whatever
with regard to the episcopate, but both re-
fer to honour belonging to metropolitan
cities. But the sacred letters of Valentinian
and Valeus of divine memory, which then
bestowed metropolitan rights upon the city
of Nice, carefully provided that nothing
should be taken away from other cities.
And the canon of the holv fathers decreed
that there should be one metropolis in each
province. What therefore is the pleasure
of the holy synod in this matter ?

The holy s}Tiod cried out : Let the canons
be kept. Let the canons be sufficient.

Atticus the most reverend bishop of old
Nicopolis in Epirus said : The canon thus
defines, that a metropolitan should have
jurisdiction in each province, and he should
constitute all the bishops who are in that
province. And this is the meaning of the
canon. Now the bishop of Nicomedia, since
from the beginning this was a metropolis,
ought to ordain all the bishops who are in
that province.

The holy synod said : This is what we all
wish, this we all pray for, let this every-
where be observed, this is pleasing to all of
us.


John, Constautine, Patrick [Peter] and
the rest of the most reverend bishops of the
Pontic diocese [through John who was one
of them] said : The canons recognize the
one more ancient as the metropolitan. And
it is manifest that the most religious bish-
op of Nicomedia has the right of the or-
dination, and since the laws (as your mag-
nificence has seen) have honoured Nice with
the name onl}^ of metropolis, and so made its
bishop superior to the rest of the bishops
of the province in honour only.

The holy synod said : They have taught
in accordance with the canons, beautifully
have they taught. We all say the same
things.

[Aetius, Ai'chdeacon of Constantinople, the7i
put in a plea to save the rights of the throne
of the royal city.']

The most glorious judges said : The most
reverend the bishop of Nicomedia shall
have the authority of metropolitan over the
churches of the province of Bithynia, and
Nice shall have the honour only of Metro-
political rank, submitting itself according
to the example of the other bishops of the
province of Nicomedia. For such is the
pleasure of the Holy Synod.


THE XXX CANONS OF THE HOLY AND FOURTH SYNODS,

OF CHALCEDON.

CANON I.

We have judged it right that the canons of the Holy Fathers made in every synod
even until now, should remain in force.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I.

The canons of every Synod of the holy Fathers
shall be observed.

Hefele.

Before the holding of the Council of Chal-
cedon, in the Greek Church, the canons of


several synods, which were held previously,
were gathered into one collection and pro-
vided with continuous numbers, and such a
collection of canons, as we have seen, lay be-
fore the Synod of Chalcedon. As, however,
most of the synods whose canons were re-
ceived into the collection, e.g. those of Neo-


268


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


csesarea, Ancyi'a, Gangra, Antioch, were cer-
tainly not Ecumenical Councils, and were
even to some extent of doubtful authority,
such as the Antiochene Synod of 341, the con-
firmation of the Ecumenical Synod was now
given to them, in order to raise them to
the position of universally and uncondi-
tionally valid ecclesiastical rules. It is admi-
rably remarked by the Emperor Justinian,
in his 131st Novel, cap.j.; " "We honour the
doctrinal decrees of the first four Councils


as we do Holy Scripture, but the canons
given or approved by them as we do the laws."

It seems quite impossible to determine just
what councils are included in this list, the
Council in Trullo has entirel}' removed this
ambiguity in its second canon.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
CfOiouici, Gratian's Ikvrctu))i, Pars II., Causa
XXV., Quiest. 1, can. xiv.


CANON II.

If any Bishop should ordain for money, and put to sale a grace which cannot be
sold, and for money ordain a bishop, or chorepiscopus, or presbyters, or deacons, or any
other of those who are counted among the clergy ; or if through lust of gain he should
nominate for UKiney a steward, or advocate, or })rosmonarius, oi'any one whatever who
is on the roll of the Church, let him who is convicted of this forfeit his own rank ; and
let him who is ordained be notldug profited b}^ the purchased ordination or promotion ;
but let him be removed from the dignity or charge he has obtained for money. And if
any one should be found negotiating such shameful and unlawful transactions, let him
also, if he is a clergyman, be deposed from his rank, and if he is a layman or monk, let
him be anathematized.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.

Whoso buys or sells an ordination, down to a
Frosmonarius, shall be in danger of losing his
grade. Sueh shall also be the case ivith go-be-
ticeens, if the// be clerics they shall be cut off from
their rank, if laymen or monks, they shall be
anathematized.

Bright.

A great scandal in the " Asian diocese " had
led to St. Chrysostom's intei*vention. Anto-
ninus, bishop of Ephesus, was charged, with
" making it a rule to sell ordinations of bishops
at rates proportionate to the value of their
sees " (Palladius, Dial, de vita Chrysost, j). 50).
Chrysostom held a synod at Ephesus, at which
six bishops were deposed for having obtained
their sees in this manner. Isidore of Pelasium
repeatedly remonstrated with his bishop Euse-
bius on the heinousness of " selling the gift "
of ordinations {Episf. I., 26. 30, 37) ; and
names Zosimus, a priest, and Maron, a deacon,
as thus ordained (ik 111. 119). A few years
before the council, a court of three bishops
sat at Berytus to hear charges brought
against Ibas. bishop of Edessa, by clerics of
his diocese. Tlie third charge was thus curtly
worded : " Moreover he receives for laying on
hands " (Mansi, vii. 224). 1'he xxvijth Trul-
lan canon repeated this canon of Chalcedon
against persons ordained for money, doubt-
less in view of such a state of things as


Gregory the Great had heard of nearly a cen-
tury earlier, " that in the Eastern Churches
no one comes to holy order except by the pay-
ment of premiums " (Epist. xi. 46, to the
bishop of Jemsalem ; compare Evagrius's as-
sertion that Justin II. oj)enly sold bishoj^rics,
V. 1). It is easy to understand how the scru-
ples of ecclesiastics could be abated b}- the
courtly fashi(m of calling bribes " eulogise "
(Fleury, XXVI. 20), just as the six prelates
above referred to had regarded their payments
as an equivalent for that " making over of
proi)ertv to the Curia," which was required
by a law of 391) (Cod. Theod., xii. 1, 163, see
notes in Transl. of Fleury, i. 163, ij. 16).

The «k8ikos, "defensor," was an official Ad-
vocate or counsel for the Church. The legal
force of the term "defensor" is indicated by
a law of Valentinian I. "Nee idem in eodem
negotio defensor sit et quaesitor " (Cod.
Theod., ii. 10, 2). In the East the oflSce was
held by ecclesiastics ; thus. John, presbyter and
" advocate " was employed, at the Council of
Constantinojile in 448, to summon Eutvches
(Mansi, vii. 697). About 496. Paul the "Ad-
vocate " of Constantinople saved his arch-
bishop from the sword of a murderer at the
cost of his own life (Theodor., Lect. ii. 11).
In the list of the functionaries of St. So]ihia,
given by Goar in his Euchologion (p. 270),
the Protecdicos is discribed as adjudicating,
1 with twelve assessors, in smaller causes, on


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


2G9


which he afterwards reports to the bishop.
In Africa, on the other hand, from a. d. 407
(see Cod. Theod., xvi. 2, 38), the office was held
by barristers, in accordance with a request of
the African bishops (Cod. Afric, 97 ; Mansi,
iii., 802), who, six years earlier, had asked for
" defensores," with special reference to the
oppression of the poor by the rich (Cod. Afric,
75 ; Mansi, iii. 778, 970). The " defensores "
mentioned by Gregory the Great had prima-
rily to take care of the poor (Episf., v. 29), and
of the church property (ib., i. 36), but also to
be advocates of injui-ed clerics {ib., ix. G4) and
act as assessors [ib., x. 1), etc.

The next office is that of the Prosmonarius
or, according to a various reading adopted by
many (e.g. Justellus, Hervetus, Beveridge,
Bingham), theParamonarius. Opinions diifer
as to the functions intended. Isidore gives
simply ''paramonarius : " Dionysius (see Jus-
tellus, Bibliofh.,!., 134) omits the word ; but in
the " interpretatio Dionysii," as given in the
Concilia, freedom has been taken to insert
" vel mansionarium " in a parenthesis (vii.
373 ; see Beveridge, in loc). Mansionarius is a
literal rendering ; but what was the function
of a mansionarius ? In Gregory the Great's
time he was a sacristan who had the duty of
lighting the church (Dial, i. 5) ; and " ostia-
rium " in the Prisca implies the same idea.
Tillemont, without deciding between the two
Greek readings, thinks that the person in-
tended had " some charge of what pertained


to the church itself, perhaj^s like our present
bedells" (xv. 694). So Fleury renders, " con-
1 cierge " (xxviij. 29) ; and Newman, reading
'■ pararaonarion," takes a like view (note in
Transl. of Fleury, voh iii., p. 392). But Jus-
tellus (i. 91) derives " paramonarius "' from
/u.ov^ " mansio," a halting-place, so that the
sense would be a manager of one of the
church's farms, a " villicus," or, as Bingham
expi-esses it, " a bailiff" (iii. 3, 1). Beveridge
agrees with Justellus, except in giving to
[xov-i^ the sense of " monastery " (compare the
use of ixovij in Athan., ApoL c. Avion, 67, where
Valesius understands it as "a station " on a
road, but others as " a monastery," see Histo-
rical Writings of St. Athanasius, Introd., p.
xliv.). Bingham also prefers this interpreta-
tion. Suicer takes it as required by "para-
monarios " which he treats as the true read-
ing: '"prosmonarios" he thinks would have
the sense of " sacristan. "

Hefelk

According to Van Espen, however, who
here supports himself upon Du Cange, by
" j)rosmonarios " or "mansionarius," in the
same way as by "oiconomos," a steward of
church proj)erty was to be understood.

The canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Becretum, Pars II,, Causa
I., Qusest. i., can. viij.


CANON III.

It has come to [the knowledge of] the holy Synod that certain of those who are
enrolled among the clergy have, through lust of gain, become hirers of other men's pos-
sessions, and make contracts pertaining to secular affairs, lightly esteeming the service
of God, and slip into the houses of secular persons, whose property they undertake
through covetousness to manage. Wherefore the great and holy Synod decrees that
henceforth no bishop, clergyman, nor monk shall hire possessions, or engage in busi-
ness, or occupy himself in worldly engagements, unless he shall be called by the law to
the guardianship of minors, from which there is no escape ; or unless the bishop of
the city shall commit to him the care of ecclesiastical business, or of unprovided
orphans or widows and of persons who stand especially in need of the Chui-ch's help,
through the fear of God. And if any one shall hereafter transgress these decrees, he
shall be subjected to ecclesiastical penalties.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.


Hiose v)ho assume the care of secular houses
should be corrected, unless perchance the laiv
called them to the administration of those not yet
come of age, from which there is no exemption.
Unless further their Bishop permits them to take !
care of orphans and widows. ]


Bright.


These two cases excepted, the undertaking
of secular business was made ecclesiastically
penal. Yet this is not to be construed as
forbidding clerics to work at trades either (1)
when the church-funds were insufficient to
maintain them, or (2) in order to have more


270


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


to bestow in alms, or (3) as an example of
industry or humility. Thus, most of the
clerj.;y of Cassarea in ('appadocia practised
sedentary trades for a livelihood (Basil, Epist., ,
cxcviii., 1) ; and some African canons allow,
or even dii'ect, a cleric to live by a trade, pro-
vided that his clerical duties are not neglected
(Mansi, iii., 955). At an earlier time Spyrid-
ion, the famous Cypriot bishop, still one of
the most poi)idar saints in the Levant (Stan-
ley's Eii^l. Church, p. 12(i), retained, out of
humility [aTvcfyLau 7roA.Aj;v, Soc, i. 12), his occu-
pation as a shepherd ; and in the latter part
of the fourth century Zeno, bishop of Maiuma,
wove liuen, partly to supply his own wants,
and partly to obtain means of helping the
poor (Soz., vii. 28). Sidonius mentions a|
" reader "' who maintained himself by com- 1


mercial transactions {Epit<(., vi. 8), and in the
Anglo-Saxon Church, although presbyters
wei-e forbidden to become " negotiorum
sfccularium dispositores " (CI. of Clovesho in
717, ('. 8), or to be "mongers and covetous
merchants " (Elfric's canons, xxx.), yet the
canons of King Edgar s reign ordered every
priest "diligently to karn a handicraft " (No.
11 ; Wilkins, i. 225). In short, it was not the
mere fact of secular employment, but secu-
larity of motive and of tone that was con-
demned.

This canon was the second of these pro-
posed by the Emperor, and is found in the
dorpuH Juris Canoniri, Gratian's Decretum,
Pars I., Dist. Ixxxvi., C. xxvj.


CANON IV.

Let those who truly and sincerely lead the monastic life be counted worthy of
becoming honour ; but, forasmuch as certain persons using the pretext of mouasticism
bring confusion botli upon the churches and into political affairs by going about pro-
miscuously in the cities, and at the same time seeking to ostablisli Monasteries for them-
selves; it is decreed that no one anywhere build or found a monastery or oratory ctm-
trary to the will of the bishoji of the city; and that the monks in every city and district
shall be subject to the bishop, and embrace a quiet course of life, and give themselves
only to fasting and prayer, remaining permanently in the plac(?s in wliicli they More set
apart ; and they shall meddle neither in ecclesiastical nor in secular atlairs, nor leave
their own monasteries to take part in such ; unless, indeed, they should at any time
through urgent necessity be appointed thereto by the bishop of the city. And no slave
shall be received into any monastery to become a monk against the will of his master.
And if any one shall transgress this our judgment, we have decreed that he sliall be
excomnumicated, that the name of God be not blasphemed. But the bishop of the city
must make the needful provision for the monasteries.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IY.


Domestic oratories and monasteries are not
to be erected contrary to the judgment of the
bishop. Every monk must be subject to his
bishop, and must not leave his house except at
his sur/rfpsfion. A slave, however, can uot enter
the monastic life ivithout the consent of his
master.

Hefele.


Eutychians, withdrawn themselves from the
jurisdiction of their l)isho2)s, whom they sus-
pected of Nestorianism.

Bright.

Here observe (1) the dctinite assertion of
episcopal authority over monks, as i^; is re-
peated for greater clearness in the last words
of the canon, which are not found in Mar-


cian's draft, "It is the duty of the bishop of
Like the previous canon, this one was the city to make due provision for the monas-
brought forward by the Emperor Marcian in teries," and compare canons 8, 24. Isidore
the sixth session, and then as nundjer one, says that the bishop must "keep an eye on
and the synod accepted the Emperor's pro- the negligences of moidvs" {Epist., i. 149).
posed canon almost verl)ally. Occasion for The Western Church followed in this track
this canon seems to have been given by monks (see Council of Agde, canon xxvii., that "no
of Eutychian tendencies, and especially by ' new monastery is to be founded without the
the Syriaji Barsumji^, as appears from the bishop's a])proval," and 1st of Orleans, can-
fourth session. He and his monks had, as on xix., "Let abbots be under the bishop's


CIIALCEDON. A.D. 451


power," and also Vth of Paris, canon xij.,
Mausi, viii., 329, 354, 542, etc.), until a re-
action set in against the oppressiveness of
bishops, was encouraged by Gregory the
Great {Epkt., i. 12 ; ii. 41), the'lVth Council of
Toledo (canon li.j, and the English Council of
Hertford (canon iij., Bede, iv. 5, and Bright's
Chapters of Early Engl Ch. Hist., p. 244), and
culminated in the system of monastic exemp-
tions, of which Monte Cassino, St. Martin's of
Tours, Fulda, Westminster, Battle (see Free-
man, Norm. Conquest, iv. 409), and St Alban's
were eminent instances.

This canon, cut up and mutilated, is found


in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Deere-
turn, Pars II., Causa XVI., Quest. I., can. xij.,
and Causa XVIII., Quest. II., Canon X.

I have followed the reading of the Prisca,
and of Dionysius, of Routh, and of Balsamon,
" they were set apart," i.e. (as Balsamon
explains) where they received the monastic
tonsure. This reading substitutes aTrerd^avTo
for £7r«Tafai/To, which would mean " over
which they had been put in authority," or
possibly (as Johnson) "where they are ap-
pointed," or as Hammond, "in which they
have been settled." Isidore reads " ordinati
sunt."


CANON V.

CoNCEENiNG bishops or clergymen who go about from city to city, it is decreed that
the canons enacted by the Holy Fathers shall still retain their force.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.


Those who go from city to city shall he subject
to the canon law on the subject.

Clerical adventurers and brief pastorates
are not the pecuhar characteristics of any one
century.

Bright.

It is supposed by Hefele that the bishops
were thinking of the case of Bassian, who, in
the eleventh session (Oct. 29), pleaded that
he had been violently ejected from the see of
Ephesus. Stephen, the actual bishop, an-
swered that Bassian had not been " ordained "


for that see, but had invaded it and been justly
expelled. Bassian rejoined that his original
consecration for the see of Evasa had been
forcible even to brutality ; that he had never
even visited Evasa, that therefore his appoint-
ment to Ephesus was not a translation. Ul-
timately, the Council cut the knot by order-
ing that a new bishop should be elected,
Bassian and Stephen retaining the episcopal
title and receiving allowances from the rev-
enues of the see (Mansi, vii. 273 et seqq.)

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Becretum, Pars II., Causa
VII., Qusest. I., can. xxij.^


CANON VI.

Neither presbyter, deacon, nor any of the ecclesiastical order shall be ordained at
large, nor unless the person ordained is particularly appointed to a church in a city or
village, or to a martyry, or to a monastery. And if any have been ordained without
a charge, the holy Synod decrees, to the reproach of the ordainer, that such an ordina-
tion shall be inoperative, and that such shall nowhere be suffered to officiate.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


that the synod of Chalcedon held ordinations

In Martyries and Mmiasteries ordinations are °* ^^^ '°^* ^^ ^^ ^^t^^^^T ^^f^* ^''\ ^^^"^ ^^7^^^'
strictly forbidden. Should any one he ordained ''''''*'' ^""^ '''''''■ ^ °^ '^ ^^'^ *° ^^ wondered


therein, his ordination shall he reputed of no ef-
fect.

Van Espen.

The wording of the canon seems to intimate


at, if we take into account the pristine and
ancient discipline of the church and the
opinion of many of the Scholastics (Morinus,
De SS. Ordinat., Parte III., Exercit. V., cap
ix.).


• Not given in Hefele, and incorrectly printed in Van Espen as Causa XII. instead of Vn.


272


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


Hefele.

It is clear that oui- cauon forbids the so-
called absolute ordinations, and retjuires that
every cleric must at the tiuie of his ordination
be designated to a definite church. The only
iitxlus which is here recognizxHl is that which
was later known as (HkIk.s licnrfwli. As vari-
ous kinds of this title we find here (a) the
ai)pointnient to a church in the city ; {b) to a
village church ; (c) that to the chapel of a
martyr ; {d) the ai^pointment as chaplain of a
monastery. For the right understanding of
the last point, it must be remembered that
the earliest monks were in no wise clerics, but
that soon the custom was introduced in every
larger convent, of having at least one monk
ordained presbyter, that he might i)rovide for
divine service in the monastery.

Similar prohibitions of oniinatlones absolutce
were also put forth in after times.

According to existing law, absolute ordina-
tions, as is w'ell known, are still iUicitce, but
yet ralithr, and even the Council of Clialcedon
has not declared them to be properly uiralidw.
but only as without effect (by j^ermanent
suspension). Cf. Kober, Sm^pension, S. 220,
and Hergenrother, Photius, etc., Bd. ii., S.
324.


Bright.

By the word fiapTvpiio (" martyi-j' ") is meant
a chui'ch or cha])el raised over a martyr's
grave. So the Laodiceue Council forl)ids
Churchmen to visit the " max'tyries of here-
tics" (can. ix. ). So Gregory of Nyssa speaks
of " the martyry " of the Holy Martyrs ( O/i. ii.,
212) ; Chrysostom of a "martyry," and Palla-
dius of " niiirtyries " near Antiocli (/// Act.
Apost. Horn., xxxviii., 5 ; JJial., p. 17), and Pal-
ladius of "the martyry of St. John" at Con-
stantinople {Dud., p. 25). See Socrates, iv. 18,
2;i, on the "martyry " of St. Thomas atEdessa,
and that of SS. Peter and Paul at Rome ; and
vi. 6, on the " martyiy " of St. Eujihenia at
Clialcedon in which the Council actually met.
In the distinct sense of a visible testimony,
the word was applied to the church of the
llesurrection at Jenisalem (Eusebius, Vit. Con.,
iii. 40, iv. 40 ; Mansi, vi. 5G4 ; Cyril, Cntcch.,
xiv. 3), and to the Holy Sepulchre itself ( Vit.
Con., iii. 28). Churches raised over martyrs'
tombs were called in the West " nicmorice mar-
/i/n(»i," see Cod. Afric, Ixxxiii. (compare Au-
gustine, De Cura pro Mortuis, VI.).

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
Ixx., can. j.


CANON VII.

We have decreed that tliose who liave once been enrolled among the clergy, or have
been made monks, shall accept neither a military charge nor any secular dignity ; and if
they shall presume to do so and not repent in such wise as to turn again to that which
they had first chosen for the love of God, they shall be anathematized.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.


If any cleric or monk arropanily affects the
military or any other dignity, let him be cursed.

Hefele.
Sometliing similar was ordered by the
Ixxxiii. (Ixxxii. ) Aj)ostolic Canon, only that it
threatens the cleric who takes military service
merely with deposition from his clerical ofiice,
while our canon subjects liim to excommuni-
cation. . . . The Greek commentators,
Balsamon and Zonaras, think that our canon
selects a more severe punishment, that of
excommunication, because it has in view those
clerics who have not merely taken military
sei^vice, etc., but at the same time have laid
aside their clerical dress and put on secular
clothing.


Bright.

By (TTpaTtuw [which I have translated (or,
as Canon Bi'ight thinks, mistranslated) " mili-
tary charge"], "militiam,'" is here meant, not
military employment as such, but the public
service in general. Tliis use of the term is a
relic and token of the military l)asis of the
Roman monarchy. The court of the Impera-
tor was called his camp, oT-paroTrt Sov (Cod.
Theod., tom. ii . p. 22), as in Constantine's
letters to John Archaph and the Council of
Tyre (Athan., Apol. c. Ari., Ixx. SG), and in the
Vllth canon of Sardica, so Atliaiiasius speaks
of the "camp" of Constans [Apol. ad Co)/stant,
iv. ), and of that of Constantius at Milan (Hist.
Ari., xxxvij.) ; so Hosius uses the same pin-ase
in his letter to Constantius (ih. xliv.) ; so the
Semi-Arian bishops, when addressing Jovian


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


273


(Soz., vi. 4) ; so Cbrysostom in the reign of
Theodosius I. {Horn, ad Pop. Antioch, vi. 2).
Similarly, there were officers of the palace
called Castreusiaus (Tertull., De Cor., 12), as
being " milites alius generis — de imperatoria
familia" (Gothofred, Cod. Theod., torn, ii.,
p. 526). So o-rpaTcuW-^at is used for holding a
place at court, as in Soc, iv. 9; Soz., vi. 9, on
Marcian's case, and a very clear passage in
Soc, V. 25, where the verb is applied to an
imperial secretai-y. It occurs in combination
with o-rpareta in a petition of an Alexandrian
deacon named Theodoi*e, which was read in
the third session of Chalcedon : he says,
" 'Eo-TpaTcro-a/xei' for about twenty- two years in


I the Schola of the magistrians " (under the
Magister officionum, or chief magistrate of

I the palace), " but I disregarded arpaTctas
TocTovTov xpo^'f-v in order to enter the ministry "
(Mansi, vi., 1008). See also Theodoret, lielig.

i Hist., xij., on the emperor's letter-carriers.
In the same sense Honorius, by a law of
408, forbids non-Catholics "intra palatium
militare " (Cod. Theod., xvi., 5, 42) ; and the
Vandal king Htinneric speaks of "domus.
nostrse militise " (Vic^ r Vitens, iv. 2).

This canon is foui^d in the Corpus Juris
j Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II.,
Causa XX., Qua;st. iii.. Can. iij.


CANON VIII.

Let the clergy of the poor-houses, monasteries, and mai'tyries remain under the
authority of the bishops in every city according to the tradition of the holy Fathers ;
and let no one arrogantly cast off the rule of his own bishop; and if any shall contravene
this canon in any way whatever, and will not be subject to their own bishop, if they be
clergy, let them be subjected to canonical censure, and if they be monks or laymen, let
them be excommunicated.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.


Any clergyman in an almshouse or monastery
must submit himself to the authority of the
bishop of tlie city. Bat he who rebels against
this let him pay the p)enalty.

Van Espen.

From this canon we learn that the synod of
Chalcedon willed that all who were in charge
of such pious institutions should be subject
to the bishop, and in making this decree the
synod only followed the tradition of the
Fathers and Canons. Although in its first
part the canon only mentions "clergymen,"
yet in the second part monks are named, and,
as Balsamon and Zonoras point out, both are
included.

Bright,

What a TrTw^eioi' was may be seen from
what Gibbon calls the " noble and charitable
foundation, almost a new city " (iii. 252),
established by St. Basil at a little distance
from Csesarea, and called in consequence the
Basiliad. Gregory Nazianzen describes it as \
a large set of buildings with rooms for the
sick, especially for lepers, and also for house- ,
less travellers ; " a storehouse of piety, where j
disease was borne philosophically, and sympa- 1
thy was tested" {Oral., xliii., 63, compare'
Basil himself, Epist., xciv., on its staff of


nurses and physicians and cL, 3). Sozomen
calls it " a most celebrated resting-place for
the poor," and names Prapidius as having
been its warden while acting as "bishop over
many villages" (vi. 34, see on Nic, viij.).
Another TrTtDxoTpoipilov is mentioned by Basil
(EjJi-^t., cxliij.) as governed by a chorepiscopus.
St. Chrysostom, on coming to the see of Con-
stantinople, ordered the excess of episcopal
expenditure to be transferred to the hospital
for the sick (voo-oKo/xeior), and "founded other
such hospitals, setting over them two pious
presbyters, with physicians and cooks. . . .
so that foreigners arriving in the city, on
being attacked b}^ disease, might receive aid,
both because it was a good Avork in itself, and
for the glory of the Saviour" (Palladius, Z)«a^.,
p. 19). At Ephesus Bassian founded a
TTTw^ctTov with seventy pallets for the sick
(Mansi, vii., 277), and there were several such
houses in Egypt [ib., vi., 1013; in the next
centviry there was a hospital for the sick at
Daphne near Antioch (Evagr., iv., 35). " The
tradition of the holy fathers " is here cited as
barring any claim on the part of clerics offici-
ating in these institutions, or in monasteries
or martyries, to be exempt from the juris-
diction of the ordinary. They are to "abide
under it," and not to indulge selfwill by
" turning restive " against their bishop's au-
thority " (iic'5r;i'taCoj is literally to get the bit
between th teeth, and is used by Aetius for


274


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


"not choosing to obey," Mansi, vii., 72). ^ sion to laics points to laymen as founders or

Those who dare to violate this clearly defined benefactors of such institutions.

rule (SnxTVTTuxTiy, conip. twtto? in Nic, xix.), and

to refuse subjection to their own bishop, are, This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

if clerics, to incur canonical censure, if monks Canon ici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa

or laics, to be excommunicated. The allu- XVIII., Q. II., canon x., § 3.


CANON IX.

If any Clergyman have a matter against another clergyman, he shall not forsake his
bishop and run to secular courts ; but let him first lay open the matter before his own
Bishop, or let the matter be submitted to any person whom each of the parties may, with
the Bish()]i's consent, select. And if any one shall contravene these decrees, let him be
subjected to canonical ])enalties. And if a clergyman have a complaint against his own
or any other bishop, let it be decided by the synod of the province. And if a bishop
or clergyman should have a difference with the metropolitan of the province, let him
have recourse to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the throne of the Imj^erial City of
Constantinople, and there let it be tried.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.


Litigious clerics shall he punished according
to canon, if thoj despise the episcopal and resort
to the secular tribu)ial. When a cleric has a
contention with a bishop let him wait till the
synod sits, and if a bishop have a contention
with his metropolitan let him carry the case to
Constantinople.

Johnson.

Let the reader obsei-ve that here is a greater
privilege given by a General Council to the
see of Constantinople than ever was given by
any council, even that of Sardica, to the bishop
of Rome, viz., that any bishop or clergyman
might at the first instance bring his cause be-
fore the l)ishop of Constantinople if the de-
fendant were a metroj)olitan.

Hefele.

That our canon would refer not merelv the
ecclesiastical, l)ut the civil diifcrences of the
clergy, in the first case, to the bishop, is beyond
a doubt. And it comes out as clearly from
the word TT^oorepov (= at first) that it does not
absolutely exclude a reference to the secular
judges, but regards it as allowable only when
the first attempt at an adjustment of the con-
troversy by the bishop has miscarried. This
was (|uite clearly recognized by Justinian in
his 123d Novel, c. 21 : " If any one has a
case against a cleric, or a monk, or a dea-
coness, or a nun, or an ascetic, he shall first
make application to the bishop of his oppo-
nent, and he shall decide. If both parties
are satisfied with his decision, it shall then be


carried into effect by the imperial judge of the
locality. If, however, one of the contending
parties lodges an appeal against the bishop's
judgment within ten days, then the imperial
judge of the locality shall decide the mat-
ter. There is no doubt that the ex])ression
" Exarch " emj^loyed in our canon, and also
in canon 17, means, in the first place, those
superior metropolitans who have several
ecclesiastical provinces under them, Whether,
however, the great patriarchs, properly so
called, are to be included under it, may be
d(jubted. The Emperor Justinian, in c. 22
of his Novel just quoted (/. c.) in our text has,
without further ex})lanation, substituted the
expression I'atriarcJt for Exarch, and in the
same way the commentator Aristenus has de-
clared both terms to be identical, adding that
only the Patriarch of Constantinople has the
privilege of having a metropolitan tried be-
fore him who does not belong to his patri-
archate, but is subject to another patriarch.
In the same way our canon was understood
b}' Beveridge. Van Espen, on the contrary,
thinks that the Synod had here in view only
the exarchs in the narrower sense (of Ephesus,
Caisarea), but not the Patriarchs, pro2)erly so
called, of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem, as it would be too great a violation
of the ancient canons, particularly of the fith
of Nictca, to have set aside tlie proper patri-
arch and have allowed an appeal to the Bishop
of Constantino])le (with this Zonaras also
agrees in his explanation of canon 17). Least
of all, however, would the S^-nod have made
such a rule for the West, i.e., have allowed
that any one should set aside the Patriarch of


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


275


Home and appeal to the Patriarch of Constan-
tinople, since they themselves, in canon 28,
assigned the first place in rank to Rome.

It appears to me that neither Bevei'idge, etc.,
nor Van Espen are fully in the right, while
each is partially so. With Van Espen we
must assume that our Synod, in drawing uj)
this canon, had in view only the Greek Church,
and not the Latin as well, particularly as
neither the papal legates nor any Latin bishop
whatever was present at the drawing up of
these canons. On the other hand, Beveridge
is also right in maintaining that the Synod
made no distinction between the patriarchs
proper and the exarchs (such a distinction
must otherwise have been indicated in the
text), and allowed that quarrels which should
arise among the bishops of other patriarchates
might be tried at Constantinople. Only that
Beveridge ought to have excepted the West
and Rome.

The strange part of our canon may be ex- '


plained in the following manner. There were
always many bisliops at Constantinople from
the most different places, who came there to
lay their contentions and the like before the
Emperor. The latter frequently referred the
decision to the bishoj) of Constantinople, who
then, in union with the then present bishops
from the most different provinces, held a
" Home Synod " and gave the sentence re-
quired at this. Thus gradually the practice
was formed of controversies being decided by
bishops of other patriarchates or exarchates
at Constantinople, to the setting aside of the
proper superior metrojDolitan, an example of
which we have seen in that famous Synod
of Constantinople, a.d. 448, at which the case
of Eutyches was the first time brought for-
ward.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Ca7io)nci, Gratian's Decretum, Pars IL, Causa
XI., Q. L, canon xlvj.


CANON X.

It shall not be lawful for a clergyman to be at the same time enrolled in the churches
of two cities, that is, in the church in which lie was at first ordained, and in another to
which, because it is greater, he has removed from lust of empt}- honour. And those
who do so shall be returned to their own church in which they were originally ordained,
and there only shall they minister. But if any one has heretofore been removed from
one church to another, he shall not intermeddle with the affairs of his former church, nor
with the martyries, almshouses, and hostels belonging to it. And if, after the decree of
this great and ecumenical Synod, any shall dare to do any of these things now forbid-
den, the synod decrees that lie shall be degraded from his rank.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


No cleric shall he recorded on the clergy-list of
the churches of two cities. But if lie shall have
strayed forth, let him be returned to his former
place. But if he has been transferred, let him
have no share in the affairs of his former church.

Van Espen, following Christian Lupus, re-
marks that this canon is opposed to pluralities.
For if a clergyman has by presentation and
institution obtained two churches, he is en-
rolled in two churches at the same time, con-
trary to this canon ; but surely that this be .
the case, the two churches must needs be in j
two cities, and that, in the days of Chalcedon,
meant in two dioceses.

Bright.

Here a new institution comes into view, of
which there were many instances. Julian had


directed Pagan hospices (^cvoSo^tta) to be es-
tablished on the Christian model {Epist. xlix.).
The Basiliad at Csesarea was a ^evoSoxelov as

well as a irrijiX'^lov ; it contained Karaywyia Tots
^eVots, as well as for wayfayers, and those who
needed assistance on account of illness, and
Basil distinguished various classes of persons
engaged in charitable ministrations, including
those who escorted the traveller on his way
{tov<; TrapaTre/xTroj/ra?, Epist. xciv. ) . Jerome writes
to Paramachius: "I hear that you have made
a ' xenodochion ' in the port of Rome," and
adds that he himself had built a " diverso-
rium " for pilgrims to Bethlehem [Epist. xvi.,
11, 14). Chrysostom reminds his auditors at
Constantinople that "there is a common
dwelling set apart by the Church," and "called
axenon"(//? Act. Hom., xlv. 4). His friend
Olympias was munificent to " xenotrophia "
{Hist. Lausiac, 144). There was a xenodochion
near the church of the monastic settlement at


276


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


Nitria {ih., 7). Ischyrion, in his memorial reail
in the 3d session of Chalcedon, complains of
his patriarch Dioscorus for havinp;' misapplied
funds bequeathed by a charitable lady rot?
$€v€w(TL Kul TrrwxeioL^ in Egypt, and says that he
himself had been contined by Dioscorus in a
"xenon" for lejiers (Mansi, vi. 1013, 1017).
Justinian mentions xenodochia in Cod., i. 3,
49, and their wardens in Novell., 134, 16.
Gregory the Great orders that the accounts
of xenodochia should be audited by the bishop
{Ejjist. iv., 27). Charles the Great provides


for the restoration of decayed "senodochia"
(Capitul. of 803 ; Pertz, Leg., i. 110) ; and
Alcuin exhorts his jnipil, archbishop Ean-
bald, to think where in the diocese of York
he could establish "xenodochia, id est, hos-
pital ia " {Epiat. L.).


This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
CtiKoiiici, Gratian's Becrefuni, Pars II., Causa
XXI., Q. I., canon ij., and again Causa XXI.,
Q. II., canon iij.


CANON XI.

We have decreed that the poor and tliose needing assistance shall travel, after exam-
ination, with letters merely })ucitical from the church, and not with letters commendatory,
inasmuch as letters commendatory ought to be given only to persons who are open to
suspicion.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI,

Let the j)Oor ivJio stand in need of help make
their journci/ a-ith tetters pacificatory and not
commendatory : For letters commendatory should
only be given to those wJw are open to suspicion.

Aristenus.

. . The poor who need help should
journey with letters pacificatoi'y from the
bishop, so that those who have the ability to
helj) them may be moved with pity. These
need no letters commendatory, such letters
should be shown, however, by presbj'ters and
deacons, and by the rest of the clergy.

See notes on canons vij., viij., and xj. of An-
tioch ; and on canon xlij. of Laodicea.

Hefele.

The medieval commentators, Balsamon,
Zonaras, and Aristenus, understand this canon
to mean that letters of commendation, onjora-
TiKul, commendfdifia; litterce were given to
those laymen and clerics who were previously
subject to ecclesiastical censure, and therefore
were suspected by other bishops, and for this
reason needed a special recommendation, in


ox'der to be received in another church into
the number of the faithful. The letters of
peace {dp-qviKai) on the contrary, were given
to those who were in undisturbed communion
with their bishop, and had not the least evil
reputation abroad.

Our canon was understood quite differently
by the old Latin writers, Dionysius Exiguus
and Isidore, who translate the words Iv vvo-
X-qipet hy personw honoratiores and clariores, and
the learned Bishop Gabriel Aubespine of Or-
leans has endeavored to prove, in his notes to
our canon, that the liflcire pacifica^ were given
to ordinary believers, and the commendatitice
[avcFTaTiKai) on the contrary, only to clerics
and to distinguished laymen ; and in favour
of this view is the xiii. canon of Chalcedon.

With regard to this much-vexed point, au-
thorities are so divided that no absolute judg-
ment can be arrived at. The interpretation I
have followed is that of the Greeks and of
Hervetus, which seems to be supported by
Apostolic Canon XIII., and was that adojjted
by Johnson and Hammond. On the other
hand are the Prisca, Dionysius, Isidore, Tille-
mont, Routli, and to these Briglit seems to
unite himself by saying that this " sense is the
more natural."


CANON XII.

It has come to our knowledge that certain persons, contrary to the laws of the Church,
having had recourse to secular powers, have bj means of imperial rescripts divided one
Province into two, so that there are consequently two metropolitans in one province;
therefore the holy Synod has decreed that for the future no sucli thing shall be at-


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


277


tempted by a bishop, since he who shall undertake it shall be degraded from his rank.
But the cities which have already been honoured by means of imperial letters with the
name of metropolis, and the bishops in charge of them, shall take the bare title, all
metropolitan rights being preserved to the true Metropolis.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.


One jiromnce shall not be cut into two.
Whoever shall do this shall be cast out of the
episcopate. Such cities as are cut of by im-
perial rescript shall enjoy only the honour of
hnving a bishop settled in them : but all the
rights jjertaining to the true metropolis shall be
preserved.

Bright.

We learn from this canon, there were cases
in which an ambitious j)relate, " by making
application to the government" ("secular
powers ") had obtained what are called " prag-
matic letters," and employed them for the
purpose of "dividing one province into two,"
and exalting himself as a metropolitan. The
name of a "pragmatic sanction" is more
familiar in regard to mediaeval and modern
history ; it recalls the name of St. Louis, and,
still more, that of the Emperor Charles VI.
the father of Maria Theresa. Properly a
"pragmatic" was a deliberate order promul-
gated by the Emperor after full hearing
of advice, on some public affair. We find
"pragmatic! nostri statuta" in a law of a. n.
431. (Cod. Theod., xi. 1, 36) ; and pragmatici
prioris," " sub hac pragmatica jussioue," in
ordinances in Append, to Cod. Theod.,
pp. 95, 162 ; and the empress Pulcheria,
about a year before the Council, had in-
formed Leo that her husband Marcian had re-
called some exiled orthodox bishops " robore
pragmatici sui" (Leon., Ejyist. Ixxvij.). Jus-
tinian speaks of " pragmaticas nostras formas"
and " pragmaticum typum "(Novel., 7, 9, etc.).
The phrase was adopted from his legislation
by Louis the Pious and his colleague - son
Lothar (compare Novel. 7, 2 with Pertz, Mon.
Germ, Hist. Leg., i., 254), and hence it came
to be used both by later German emperors (see,
e.g., Bryce's Holy Roman Empire, p. 212), and
by the French kings (Kitchin, Hist. France,
i. 343, 544). Augustine explains it by
"prseceptum imperatoris " {Brev. C'ollat. cum
Donatist. iii., 2), and Balsamon in his comment
uses an equivalent phrase ; and so in the
record of the fourth session of Chalcedon we
have Sela ypdfXfxaTa ("divine" being practically
equivalent to "imperial") explained by irpay-
fjiaTLKovs TwVous (Mansi, vii., 89). We must ob-


serve that the imperial order, in the cases con-
templated by the canon, had only conferred
the title of " metropolis " on the city, and had
not professed to divide the province for civil,
much less for ecclesiastical, purposes. Valens,
indeed, had divided the province of Cappa-
docia, when in 371 he made Tyana a metropo-
lis : and therefore Anthimus, bishop of Tyana,
when he claimed the position of a metropoli-
tan, with authority over suffragans, was mak-
ing a not unnatural inference in regard to
ecclesiastical limits from political rearrange-
ments of territory, as Gregory of Nazianzus
says {Oral, xliii., 58), whereas Basil "held to
the old custom," i.e., to the traditional unity
of his provincial church, although after a
while he submitted to what he could not hin-
der (see Tillemont, ix., 175, 182, 670). But in
the case of Eustathius of Berytus, which was
clearly in the Council's mind, the Phoenician
province had not been divided ; it was in
reliance on a mere title bestowed upon his
city, and also on an alleged synodical ordi-
nance which issued in fact from the so-called
" Home Synod " that he declared himself in-
dependent of his metropolitan, Photius of
Tyre, and brought six l^ishoprics under his
assumed jurisdiction. Thus while the prov-
ince remained politicall}^ one, he had de facto
divided it ecclesiastically into two. Photius
petitioned Marcian, who referred the case to
the Council of Chalcedon, and it was taken
up in the fourth session. The imperial com-
missioners announced that it was to be settled
not according to "pragmatic forms," but ac-
cording to those which had been enacted by
the Fathers (Mansi, vii., 89). This encouraged
the Council to say, " A pragmatic can have no
force against the canons." The commission-
ers asked whether it was lawful for bishops,
on the ground of a pragmatic, to steal away
the rights of other churches? The answer
was explicit : " No, it is against the canon."
The Council proceeded to cancel the resolu-
tion of the Home Synod in favour of the eleva-
tion of Berytus, ordered the 4th Nicene canon
to be read, and upheld the metropolitical
rights of Tyre. The commissioners also pro-
nounced against Eustathius. Cecropius, bish-
op of Sebastopolis, requested them to put an
end to the issue of pragmatics made to the
detriment of the oanons ; the Council echoed


278


CIIALCEDOX. A.D. 451


this request ; and the commissiouers granted
it by declaring that the canons slioukl every-
where stand good (Mansi, vii., 8U-97). We
may connect with this incident a law of Mer-
cian dated in 454, by which "all pragmatic
sanctions, obtained by moans of favour or
ambition in opposition to the canon of the
Church, are declared to be deprived of effect "
(Cod. Justin, i., 2, 12).

To this decision the present canon looks
back, when it forbids any bishop, on pain of
deposition, to presume to do as Eustathius
had done, since it decrees that "he who at-
tempts to do so shall fall from his own i-ank
(fiuSfxoi) in the Church. And cities which have
already ol)tained the honorary title of a me-
tropolis from the emperor are to enjoy the
honour only, and their bishops to be but hon-
orary metropolitans, so that all the rights of
the real metropolis are to be reserved to it."
So, at the end of the 6th session the emperor
had announced that Chalccdon was to be a
titular metropolis, saving all the rights of Nico-
media ; and the Council had expressed its as-
sent (Mansi, xii., 177; cf. Le (^uien, i., 602).
Another case was discussed in the 13th ses-
sion of the Council. Anastasius of Nicsea had
claimed to be independent of his metrojjolitan


Eunomius of Xicomedia, on the ground of an
ordinance of Valens, recognising the city of
Nicfca as by old custom a " metrt.pulis. " Eu-
nomius, who complained of Anastasius's en-
croachments, appealed to a later ordinance,
guaranteeing to the capital of Bitliynia its
rights as imaffected by the honour conferred
on Nicsea : the Council expressed its mind in
favour of Eunomius, and the dispute was set-
tled by a decision "that the bishoj) of Nico-
media should have metropolitical authority
over the Bithynian churches, while the bishop
of Nicaja should have merely the honour of a
metropolitan, being subjected, like the other
comprovincials, to the bishop of Nicomedia
(Mansi, vii., 818). Zonaras says that this canon
was in his time no longer observed ; and Bal-
samon says that when the primates of Heraclea
and Ancyra cited it as ui)holding their claim
to perform the consecration of two "hono-
rary metropolitans," they were overruled by a
decree of Alexius Comnenus, "in presence
and with consent" of a sjmod (on Trullan,
canon xxxviij.).

The first part of this canon is found in the
Corpus Juris Cdttonici, Graf Decretum,

Pars I., Dist. ci., canon j.


CANON XIII.

Strange and unknown clergymen without letters commendatory from their own
Bishop, are absolutely prohibited from ofHciatiug in another city.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

No cleric shall he received to communion in
another city without a letter commendatory.

"Unknown clergymen." I have here fol-
lowed the reading of the Greek commenta-
tors. But the ti'anslators of the Prisca, and


Dionysius, and Isidore must have all read
dvayi'o'jo-Tus (i.e.. Readers) instead of dytoioTov?.
Justellus, Hervetus, and Beveridge, as also
Johnson and Hammond, follow the reading of
the text. Hefele suggests that if " Readers "
is the correct reading j^ex-haps it means, " all
clergymen even readers."


CANON XIV.

Since in certain provinces it is permitted to the readers and singers to marry, the
holy Synod has decreed that it shall not be lawful for any of them to take a wife that is
heterodox, But those Avho liavo already bt^gotten children of such n marriage, if they
have already had their children baptized among the heretics, must bring them into the
communion of the Catholic Church ; but if they have not had them baptized, they may
not hereafter ba])tize them among heretics, nor give them in marriage to a heretic, or a
Jew, or a heathen, unless the person marrying the orthodox child sliall promise to come
over to the orthodox faith. And if any one shall transgress this decree of the holy
synod, let him be subjected to canonical ceusiu'e.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


279


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.


Bright.


A Cantor or Lector alien to the sound faith,
if being then married, he shall have btgotten
children let him bring them to communion, if
theij had there been baptized. But if they had
not yet been baptized they shall not be baptized
afterwards by the heretics.

Aristenus.

The tenth and thirty-first canons of the
Synod of Laodicea and the second of the
Sixth Synod in Trullo, and this present canon
forbid one of the orthodox to be joined in
marriage with a woman who is a heretic, or
vice versa. But if any of the Cantors or Lec-
tors had taken a wife of another sect before
these canons were set forth, and had had
children by her, and had had them baptized
while yet he remained among the heretics,
these he should bring to the communion of
the Catholic Church. But if they had not
yet been baptized, he must not turn back
and have them bajDtized among heretics.
But departing thence let him lead them to
the Catholic Church and enrich them with
divine baptism.

Hefele.

According to the Latin translation of
Dionysius Exiguus, who speaks only of the
daughters of the lectors, etc., the meaning
may be understood, with Christian Lujdus, as
being that only their daughters must not be
married to heretics or Jews or heathen, but
that the sons of readers may take wives who
are heretics, etc., because that men are less
easily led to fall away from the faith than
women. But the Greek text makes here no
distinction between sons and daughters.


It is to Victor that we owe the most strik-
ing of all anecdotes about readers. During
the former persecution under Genseric (or
Gaiseric), the Arians attacked a Catholic con-
gregation on Easter Sunday ; and while a
reader was standing alone in the pulpit, and
chanting the "Alleluia melody" {cf. Ham-
mond, Liturgies, p. 95), an arrow pierced his
throat, the " codex " droj^ped from his hands,
and he fell down dead {De Persec. Vand., i.,
13). Five years before the Council, a boy of
eight named Epiphanius was made a reader in
the church of Pavia, and in process of time
became famous as its bishop. Justinian for-
bade readers to be appointed under eighteen
(Novel., 134, 13). The office is described in
the Greek Euchologion as "the first step to
the priesthood," and is conferred with delivery
of the book containing the Epistles. Isidore
of Seville, in the seventh century, tells us
that the bishop ordained a reader bydeliver-
ing to him " coram plebe," the " codex " of
Scripture : and after giving precise directions
as to pronunciation and accentuation, says
that the readers were of old called "heralds"
{De Led. Offic, ii., 11). (b) The Singers are
placed by the xliijrd. Apostolic canon between
subdeacons and readers, but they rank below
readers in Laodic, c. 23, in the Liturgy of St.
Mark (Hammond, p. 173), and in the canons
wrongly ascribed to a IVth Council of Car-
thage, which permit a presbyter to appoint a
"psalmist" without the bishop's knowledge,
and rank him even below the doorkeepers
(Mansi, iii., 952). The chief passage respect-
ing the ancient " singers" is Laodic, xv.

The first part of this canon is found in the
Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum,
Pars I., Dist. xxxii., c. xv.


CANON XV.

A WOMAN shall not receive the laying on of hands as a deaconess under forty years of
age, and then only after searching examination. And if, after she has had hands laid
on her and has continued for a time to minister, she shall despise the grace of God and
give herself in marriage, she shall be anathematized and the man united to her.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.


No person shall be ordained deaconess except
she be forty years of age. If she shall dishon-
our her ministry by contracting a marriage, let
her be anathema.


This canon should be read carefully in con-
nexion with what is said in the Excursus on
deaconesses to canon xix. of Nice.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
XXVII , Quffist. I., Canon xxiij.


280


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


CANON XVI.

It is not lawful for a virgin who has dedicated herself to the Lord God, nor for
monks, to man-y ; and if they are found to have done this, let them be excommunicated,
I>ut we decree that in every place the bishop shall have the power of indulgence towards
them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.

Monks or nuns shall not contract marriage,
and if they do so let them be excommunicated.

Van Espen.

Since this cauon says nothing at all of sepa-
ration in connexion with a marriage made
contrary to a vow, but only orders separation
from communion, it seems veiy likely that
vows of this kind at the time of the synod
were not considered diriment but only impe-
dient impediments from which the bishop of
the diocese could dispense at least as far as
the canonical punishment was concerned.

Hefele.

The last part of the canon gives the bishop
authority in certain circumstances not to in-
flict the excommunication which is threatened


in the first part, or again to remove it. Thus
all the old Latin translators understood our
text ; but Dionysius Exiguus and the Prisca
added cunfitcntibuH, meaning, " if such a virgin
or monk confess and repent their fault, then
the bishop may be kind to them." That the
marriage of a monk is invalid, as was ruled bv
later ecclesiastical law, our canon does not
say ; on the contrary, it assumes its validity,
as also the marriages contracted by priests
until the beginning of the twelfth century
virere regarded as valid.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Derrctam, Pars II., Causa
xxvii., Quaest. I., canon xxii., from Isidore's
version ; it is also found in Dionysius's ver-
sion as canon xij. of the same Qua?stio, Causa,
and Part, where it is said to be taken " ex
Concilio Triburiensi."


CANON XVII.

Outlying or rural parishes shall in every })rovince remain subject to tlie l)isho]>s who
now have jurisdiction over them, particularly if the bishops have peaceably and continu-
ously governed them for the space of thirty years. But if within thirty years there has
been, or is, any dispute concerning them, it is lawful for those who hold themselves
aggrieved to bring their cause before the synod of the province. And if any one be
■wronged by his metropolitan, let the matter be decided by the exarch of the diocese or
by the throne of Constantinople, as aforesaid. And if any city has been, or shall here-
after be newly erected by imperial authority, let the order of the ecclesiastical parishes
follow the political and municipal example.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.


Village and rural parishes if they have been
2)ossessed for thirty years Jhey shall so continue.
But if within that time, the matter shall hr sub-
ject to adjudication. But if by tlie command of
the Emperor a city be reneuml, the order of ec-
clesiastical parishes shdl follow the civil and
2)ublic forms.

Bright.

The adjective ey^wpcous is probably synony-
mous with dypoiKiKu? ("rustieas," Prisca), al-
thougli Dionysius and Isidorian take in as
•' situated on estates," cf. Kouth, Scr. Opusc,


ii., 109. It was conceivable that some such
outlying districts might form, ecclesiastically,
a border-laud, it might not be easy to assign
them definitively to this or that bishopric. In
such a case, says the Council, if the bishop
w^ho is now' in possession of these rural
churches can show a prescription of thirty
years in favour of his see, let them remain
undisturbed in his obedience. (Here d/Stdo-rwi;
may be illustrated from /3iacrdfji£io<; in Ej)!). viij.
and for the use of olKorofxelv see I. Const., ij.)
But the border-land might be the " debate-
able " land : the two neighbour bishops might
disinite as to the right to tend these " slieep
in the wilderness ; " as we read in Cod. Afric,


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


281


117, "multse controversise postea inter episco-
pos cle (lioecesibus ortse sunt, et orinntur "
(see on I. Const., ij.) ; as archbishop Thomas
of York, and Remioius of Dorchester, were at
issue for j-ears " with reference to Lindse}' "
(Raine, Fasii Eborac, i. 150). Accordingly,
the canon provides that if such a contest liad
arisen within the thirty years, or shoidd there-
after arise, the prelate who considered him-
self wronged might appeal to the provincial
synod. If he should be aggrieved at the de-
cision of his metropolitan in synod, he might


apply for redress to the eparch (or prefect, a
substitute for exarch) of the " diocese," or to
the see of Constantinople (in the manner pro-
vided by canon ix.). It is curious "that in
Russia all the sees are divided into eparchies
of the first, second, and third class " (Neale,
Essays on Liturgiology, p. 302)^

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
XVI., Queest. iii., can. j., in Isidore Mercator's
version. ^


CANON XVIII.

The crime of conspiracy or banding together is utterly prohibited even by the secu-
lar law, and much more ought it to be forbidden in the Church of God. Therefore, if
any, whether clergymen or monks, should be detected in conspiring or banding together,
or hatching plots against their bishops or fellow-clergy, they shall by all means be de-
posed from their own rank.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.

Clerics and Monks, if they shall have dared to
hold conventicles and to conspire against the
bishop, shall be cast out of their rank.

Bright.

In order to appreciate this canon, we must
consider the case of Ibas bishop of Edessa.
He had been attached to the Nestorians, but
after the reunion between CjtII and John of
Antioch had re-entered into communion with
Cyril on the ground that Cyril had explained
his anathemas (Mansi, vii., 240), or, as he
wrote to Maris (in a letter famous as one of
the "Three Chapters") that God had "soft-
ened the Egyptian's heart" {ib., 248). Four
of his priests (Samuel, Cyrus, Maras, and Eu-
legius), stimulated, says Fleury (xxvij. 19) by
Uranius bishop of Himeria, accused Ibas of
Nestorianism before his patriarch Domnus of
Antioch, who held a synod, but, as Samuel and
CjTus failed to appear, pronounced them de-
faulters and set aside the case (Mansi, vii., 217).
They went up to Constantinople, and per-
suaded Theodosius and archbishop Flavian
to appoint a commission for inquiring into
the matter. Two sessions, so to speak, were
held by the three pi^elates thus appointed, one
at Berytus the other at Tyre. At Berytus,
according to the extant minutes (Mansi, vii.,
212 ff.), five new accusers joined the original


four, and charges were brought which affected
the moral character of Ibas as well as his or-
thodoxy. The charge of having used a "blas-
phemous " speech implying that Christ was
but a man deified, was rebutted by a state-
ment signed by some sixty clerics of Edessa,
who according to the accusers, had been
present when Ibas uttered it. At Tyre the
episcopal judges succeeded in making peace,
and accusers and accused partook of the com-
munion together {ib., vii., 209). The sequence
of these proceedings cannot be thoroughly
ascertained, but Hefele (sect. 169) agrees with
Tillemont (xv., 474 et seqq.) in dating the trial
at Berytus slightly earlier than that at Tyre,
and assigning both to the February of 448 or
449. Fleury inverts this order, and thinks
that, "notwithstanding the reconciliation " at
Tyre, the four accusers renewed their prose-
cution of Ibas (xxvij. 20) ; but he has to sup-
pose two applications on their part to Theo-
dosius and Flavian, which seems improbable.
" The Council is believed," saj-s Tillemont
(xv., 698), " to have had this case in mind when
drawing up the present canon : " and one can
hardly help thinking that, on a si)ot within
sight of Constantinoj^le, they must have re-
called the protracted sufferings which malig-
nant plotters had inflicted on St. Chrysostom.

This canon is found in part in the Corpus
Juris Canon ici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II.,
Causa XL, Qusest. I., canons xxj. and xxiij.


• Hefele does not give this reference, and Van Espen gives it incorrectly as causa xis. instead of xvi.


282


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


CANON XIX.

Whereas it luis come to our ears that in the provinces the Canouical Syuotls of
Bishops are not hold, and that on tliis account many ecclesiastical matters which need
reformation are neglected ; therefore, according to the canons of the holy Fathers, the
holy Synod decrees that the ])isho])sof every ])rovince shall twice in tli»> year assemble
together where the bishoj) of the Metropolis shall approve, and shall then settle Avhat-
ever matters may have arisen. And bishops, who do not attend, but remain in their
own cities, though they are in good health and free from any unavoidable and necessary
business, shall receive a brotherly admonition.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX .
Ttvice each year the Synod shall he held ivhere-
ever the bishop of the Metropolis shall designate,
and all matters of j^ressing interest shall be de-
termined.

See notes on Canon V. of Nice, and on
Canon XX. of Antioch, and compare canon
YIII. of the council in Trullo.

Bright.
Hilary of Aries and his suffragans, assem-


bled at Riez, had already, in 439 qualified the
provision for two by adding signiticantly " if
the times are quiet" (Mansi, v., 1194). The
words were written at the close of ten years'
war, during which the Visigoths of Sej^timania
"were endeavouring to take Aries and Nar-
bonne " (Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, ii.,
121).

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canon ici, Gratian's Lecretum, Pars I., Dist.
XYIII., canon vj.


CANON XX.

It shall not be lawful, as we have already decreed, for clergymen officiating in one
church to be appointed to the church of another city, but they shall cleave to that in
which they were first thought worthy to minister ; those, however, being excepted, who
have been driven by necessity from their own country, and have therefore removed to
another church. And if, after this decree, any bishop shall receive a clergyman belong-
ing to an(jtlier bishop, it is decreed that both the received and the receiver shall be
excommunicated until such time as the clergyman who has removed shall have returned
to his own church.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

A elergyman of one city shall not be given
a cure in another. But if he has been driven
from his native place and shall go into another
he shall be loithoid blame. If any bishoj) receives
clergymen from ivilhouf his diocese he shall be
excommunicated as iccll as the cleric he receives.

It is quite doubtful as to what " excommu-
nication " means in this canon, probably not
anatheraatism (so tliink the commentators)
but separation from the communion of the
other bishops, and snsjionsion from the per-
formance of clerical functions.

Bright.

This canon is the third of those which were
originally proposed l)y Marcian in tlie eixl of


synodical sanction was desirable (see above
Canons iij. and iv.). It was after they had
been delivered by the EmjDeror's own hand to
Anatolius of Constantinople that the Council
broke out into plaudits, one of which is suffi-
ciently startling, tw Upel, tw (SaaLkel (IMansi,
vii., 177). The imperial draft is in this case
very slightly altered. A reference is made
to a previous determination {i.e., canon x. )
against clerical pluralities, and it is ordered
that "clerics registered as belonging to one
church shall not be ranked as belonging to
the church of another city, but must be con-
tent with tlie one in whicli they were origi-
nally admitted to niinistor, excepting those
who, having lost their own country, have been
compelled to migrate to another church," —
an exception intelligible enough at such a
period. Eleven vears before, the Vandal


the sixth session, as certain articles for which Gaiseric had expelled the Catliolic bishops


CITALCEDON. A.D. 451


283


and priests of Western Africa from their
churches: Quodvultdeus, bishop of Carthage
with many of his clergy, had been " placed on
board some unseaworthy vessels," and yet,
"by the Divine mercy, had been carried safe
to Naples" (Vict. Vitens., Be Persec. Vandal., I
i., 5 : he mentions other bishops as driven into
exile). Somewhat later, the surge of the
Hunnish invasion had frightened the bishop
of Sii-mium into sending his church vessels
to Attila's Gaulish secretary and had swept
onward in 447 to within a short distance of
the "New Rome" (Hodgkin, Italy and her
Invaders, ii., 54-56). And the very year of
the Council was the most momentous in the


whole history of the " Barbaric " movement.
The bishops who assend)led in October at
Chalcedon must have heard by that time of
the massacre of the Metz clergy on Easter
Eve, of a bishop of Rheims slain at his own
altar, of the deliverance of Orleans at the
2:)rayer of St. Anianus, of " the supreme bat-
tle " in the plain of Chalons, which turned
back Attila and rescued Christian Gaul
(Hodgkin, ii., 129-152 ; Kitchin, Hist. France,
i. 61).

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
Ixxi., c. iv.


CANON XXI.

Clergymen and laymen bringing charges against bishops or clergymen are not to
be received loosely and without examination, as accusers, but their own character shall
first be investigated.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.

A cleric or layman making charges rashly
against his bishop shall not be received.


Compare with this canon the Vlth Canon


of those credited to the First Synod at Con-
stantinople, the second ecumenical.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
II., Quest. VII., canon xlix., in Isidore's
first vei'sion.


CANON XXII.

It is not lawful for clergymen, after the death of their bishop, to seize what belongs
to him, as has been forbidden also by the ancient canons ; and those who do so shall
be in danger of degradation from their own rank.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.

Whoever seizes the goods of his deceased
bishop shall be cast forth from his rank.

It is curious that the Greek text which
Zonaras and Balsamon produce, and which
Hervetus translated, had instead of tois vaXai

Kavoai, TOL<; TrapaXafjifSavovaLv. Vail EspeU thinks

that the Greek commentators have tried with-
out success to attach any meaning to these


words, accepting the arguments of Bp. Bev-
eridge (which see). The reading adopted in
the text does not lack MS. authority, and is
the one printed by Justellus in his " Codex
of the Canons of the Universal Church."

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
XII., Quest. II., canon xliii., in Isidore's ver-
sion.


CANON XXIII.

It has come to the hearing of the holy Sjniod that certain clergymen and monks,
having no authority from their own bishop, and sometimes, indeed, while under sentence
of excommunication by him, betake themselves to the imperial Constantinople, and
remain there for a long time, raising disturbances and troubling the ecclesiastical state,


284


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


and turninj:; men's houses Tipsido clown. Therefore the holy Synod lias determined that
such persons be first notified bv the Advocate of the most holy Church of Constanti-
nople to depart from file imperial city; and if they shall shamelessly continue in the
same practices, that they shall be expelled by the same Advocate even against their
will, and return to their own places.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII. I This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

Clerics or monks who spend much time at Canonici, Gratian's Dmrtum, Pars II., Causa
Constantwople contranj to the will of //jg/r XVI., Quajst. I., canon xvij., but with the last


bishop, and stir ujy seditions, shall be cast out
of the city}


part epitomized, as the Roman correctors
point out.


CANON XXIV.

Monasteries, Avhieh have once been consecrated with the consent of the bishop, shall
remain monasteries for ever, and the propert}^ belonging to them shall be preserved,
and they shall never again become secular dwellings. And they who shall permit this
to be done shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.


A monastery erected with the consent of the
bishop shall be immovable. And ivhafever per-
tains to it shall not be alienated. Whoever shall
take upon Mm to do otherwise, shall not be held
guiltless.

Joseph .3Egyptius, in turning this into
Arabic, reads: " And whoever shall turn any
monaster)' into a dwelling house for himself
. . . let him be cursed and anathema."
The curious reader is referred on this whole
subject to Sir Henry Spelman's History and
Fate of Sacrilege, or to the more handy book
on the subject by James Wayland Joyce, 27<e
Doom of Sacrilege.'^

Bright.

The secularization of monasteries was an
evil which grew with their wealth and influ-
ence. At a Council held by the patriarch
Photius in the Ai)ostles' church at Constanti-
nople, it is complained that some persons at-
tach the name of " monastery " to property of
their own, and while professing to dedicate it
to God, write themselves tlowu as lords of


what has been thus consecrated, and are not
ashamed to claim after such consecration the
same power over it which they had before.
In the West, we find this abuse attracting the
attention of Gregory the Great, who writes to
a bishop that " rationalis ordo " would not
allow a layman to pervert a monastic founda-
tion at will to his own uses (Episf. viii., 31).
In ancient Scotland, the occasional dispersion
of religious communities, and, still more, the
clan-principle which assigned chieftain-rights
over monasteries to the descendants of the
founder, left at Dunkeld, Brechin, Abernethy,
and elsewhere, " nothing but the mere name
of abbacy applied to the lands, and of abbot
borne by the secular lord for the time "
(Skene's Celtic Scotland, ii., 365 ; c/". Anderson's
Scotland in Early Christian Times, p. 235).
So, after the }^reat Irish monastery of Bangor
in Down was destroyed by the Northmen,
" non defuit," says St. Bernard, "qui illud
teneret cum possessionibus suis ; nam et con-
stituebantur per electionem etiam, et abbates
appellabantur, servantes nomine, etsi non re,
quod olim exstiterat " (De Vita S. MalachicB,
vj.). So in 1188 Girahbis Cambrensis found
a lay abbot in possession of the venerable
church of Llanbadai-n Vawr ; a "bad custom,"


• " The City." that is to say Constantinople.

"^TXv reader may lil<e to sec the vow on this subject taken by
Kint; Chnrles I. of En<rl(ind, and which was made public by Arch-
bishop Sheldon after the Hestoration. The vow is as follows :

"I do here promise and solemnly vow. in the presence and ser-
vice of Almighty (iod. that if it shall please the Divine Majesty of
his infinite goodness to restore me to my just kintrly riirhts. and
to re-establish me in my throne. I will wholly frive back to his
C'hurch all those impropriations which are now held liy the Crown;
and vhat lands soever 1 do now or should enjoy, which have been


taken away either from any epii^copal see or any cathedral or
collegiate church, from any abbey or other religious house, I
likewise promise for hereafter to hold them from the Church un-
der such reasonable fines and rents as shall be set down by some
conscientious persons, whom I pro|)ose to choose with all up-
rightness of heart to direct nie in this particular And I humbly
beseech (Jod to accept of this my vow. and to bless me in the de-
sign I have now in hand through Jesus Christ our Lord.

"Chakles R.
" Oxford, April 13, 1646."


CIIALCEDON. A.D. 451


285


he says, "bad grown up, whereby powerful
laymen, at first chosen by the clergy to l^e
"ceconomi" or " patroni et defensores," had
usurped " totum jus," ai:)pro])riated the lands,
and left to the clergy uotliing but the altars,
with tithes and offerings [It'm. Camb., ii., 4).
This abuse must be distinguished from the
corrupt device whereby, in Bede's later years,
Northumbrian nobles contrived to gain for
their estates the immunities of abbey-lands


by professing to found monasteries, which
they filled with disorderly monks, who lived
there in contempt of all rule (Bede, Ep. to Eg-
bert, vij.). In the year of his birth, the first
English synod had forbidden bishops to de-
spoil consecrated monasteries (Bede, iv., 5).

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cavonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars ll.. Causa
XIX., Qusest. III., canon iv.


CANON XXV.

FoKASMUCH as certain of the metropolitans, as we have heard, neglect the flocks com-
mitted to them, and delay the ordinations of bishops the holy Synod has decided that
the ordinations of bishops shall take place within three months, unless an inevitable
necessity should some time require the term of delay to be prolonged. And if he shall
not do this, he shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties, and the income of the widowed
church shall be kept safe by the steward of the same Church.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.


Let the ordination of bishops be ivithin three
months : necessity however may make the time
longer. But if anyone shall ordain counter to
this decree, he shall be liable to punishment. The
revenue shall remain ivith the ceconomus.

Bright.

The " Steward of the Church " was to " take
care of the revenues of the church widowed "
by the death of its bishop, who was regarded
as representing Him to whom the whole
Church was espoused (see Eph. v. 23 ff.). So
in the "order of the holy and great church"
of St. Sophia, the " Great Steward is described
as " taking the oversight of the widowed
church " (Goar, Eucholog., p. 269) ; so Hincmar
says : "Si fuerit defunctus episeopus, ego


. . . visitatorem ipsi viduatse designabo
ecclesise ; " and the phrase, " viduata per
mortem N. nviper episcopi " became common
in the West (F. G. Lee, Validity of English Or-
ders, p. 373). The episcopal ring was a symbol
of the same idea. So at St. Chrysostom's resto-
ration Eudoxia claimed to Lave " given back
the bridegroom " {Serm. post redit., iv.). So
Bishop Wilson told Queen Caroline that he
"would not leave his wife in his old age because
she was poor" (Keble's Life of Wilson, ii., 767) ;
and Peter Mongus, having invaded the Alex-
andrian see while its legitimate occupant,
Timothy Salophaciolus, was alive, was expelled
as an "adulterer" (Liberatus, Breviar., xviij.).

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
LXXV., C. ij.'


CANON XXVI.

FoRASMTJCH as we have heard that in certain churches the bishops managed the church-
business without stewards, it has seemed good that every church having a bishop shall
have also a steward from among its own clergy, who shall manage the church business
under the sanction of his own bishop ; that so the administration of the church may not
be without a witness; and that thus the goods of the church may not be squandered, nor
reproach be brought upon the priesthood; and if he [i.e., the Bishop] will not do this,
he shall be subjected to the divine canons.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.
The (Economusin all churches must be chosen
from the clergy. A7id the bishop who neglects
to do this is not without blame.


Bright.
As the stream of offerings became fuller,
the work of dispensing them became more
complex, until the archdeacons could no


> I think this is the first time I have ever noticed Van Espen to have omitted giving the reference.


286


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


longer find time for it, and it was committed '
to a special otficer called " ceconoiniis " or
steward (Bin<4"liani, iii., 12, 1 ; Transl.ot' Fleury,
iii., 120). So the Council of Gangra, in the
middle of the fourth century, forbids the
church offerings to be disposed of without
consent of the bishop or of tlie person aj)-
pointed, eis oiKovo^t'ai' fvTToda<; (canon viij.) ; and
St ]5asil mentions the oiconomi of his own
church (Kpisf.. xxiij. 1), and the "ru/xtai of the
sacred goods " of his brother's at Nyssa (ib.,
22o). And although Gregory Nazianzen took
credit to himself for declining to apj:)oint a
" stranger" to make an estimate of the j)roperty j
which of right belonged to the church of Con-
stantinople, and in fact, Avith a strange confu-
sion between personal and official obligations, '
gave the go-by to the whole question {Carm. I
de Vita sua, 1479 ff.), his successor, Nectarius,
being a man of business, to(jk care to appoint i
a " church-steward " ; and Chrysostom, on '
coming to the see, examined his accounts, and
found much si:perfluous expenditure (Palla-
dius, J)in!, p. 19). Theophilus of Alexandria
compelled two of the Tall Brothers to under-
take the (HKovofxia of the Alexandrian chur(;h
(Soc, vi., 7) ; and in one of his extant directions
obsen'es that the clergy of Lyco wash for an-
other "oeconomus," and that the bishop has
consented, in order that the church-funds
may be properly spent (Mansi, iii., 1257). At
HijDpo St. Augustine had a " propositus i
domus " who acted as Church-steward (Possi-
dius, FiV. August., xxiv.). Isidore of Pelusium
denounces Martiniauus as a fraudulent "ceco-
nomus," and requests Cyril to ajipoint an up-
right one (Episf. ii., 127), an<l in another letter
urges him to put a stop to the dishonest greed
of those who acted as stewards of the same
church (//>., V. 79). The recoi'ds of the Council
of Ephesus mention the " oeconomus " of Con-
stantinople, the "cBcouomus" of Ephesus
(Mansi, iv., 1228 1398), and, the "oeconomus "
of Phil idelphia. According to an extant letter
of Cyril, the " oeconomi " of Perrha in Syria
wei'e mistrusted by the clergy, who wished to
get rid of them "and ap])oint others by their
own authority " {ilj., vii., 321). Ibas of iRdessa
had been complained of for his administra-
tion of church property ; he was accused, e.g., !
of secreting a jewelled chalice, and bestowing
the church revenues, and gold and silver
crosses, on his brother and cousins ; he ulti-
mately undertook to ai)point " ceconomi "
after the model of Antioch (Mansi, vii., 201).
Proterius, afterwards patriarch of Alexandria
and a martyr for Chalcedonian orthodoxy, was
" ceconomus " under Dioscoiiis {ili., iv., 1017),
as Avas John Talaia, a man accused of briberv,
under his successor (Evag., iii., 12). There


may have been many cases in which there was
no " frcononius,"or in which the management
was in the hands of private agents of the
bishop, in whom the Church could put no
confidence ; and the Council, having alluded
to theotfice of "oeconomus" in canons ij. and
XXV., now obsei-ves that some bishops had
been managing their church property with-
out "oecononii," and thereupon resolves "that
every churcli which has a bishop shall also
have an oeconomus " from among its own
clergy, to administer the property of the
church under the direction of its own bishop ;
so that the administration of tlie church
property' may not be unattested, and thereby
waste ensue, and the episcopate incur re-
proach." Any bisho}) who should neglect to
appoint such an officer should be jiunishable
under "the divine" (or sacred) "canons."

Nearly three years after the Council, Leo
saw reason for requesting Marcian not to
allow civil judges, "novo exemplo," to audit
the accounts of " the ceconomi of the church
of Constantinople," which ought, " secundum
traditum morem," to be examined bv the
bishoj) alone (Epist. cxxxvij. 2). In after days
the " great steward " of St. Sophia was always
a deacon ; he was a conspicuovis figure at the
Patriarch's celebrations, standing on the
right of the altar, vested in alb and stole, and
holding the sacred fan (/'httiSioi') ; his duty was
to enter all incomings and outgoings of the
church's revenue in a charterlavy, and exhibit
it quarterly, or half yearly, to the i)atriarchs ;
and he governed tlie church tluriug a vacancy
of the see (Eucholog., pp. 2G8, 275). In the
West, Isidore of Seville describes the duties
of the "cecouonuis " ; he has to see to the re-
pair and building of churches, the care of
church lands, the cultivation of vineyards, the
payment of clerical stipends, of doles to the
widows and the poor, and of food and clothing
to church servants, and even the carrying on of
church law suits, — all "cum jussu et arbitrio
sui episcopi" {Eji. to Le>i(lc/n</, Op. ii., 520) ;
and before Isidore's death the TVth Council
of Toledo refers to this canon, and orders the
bishops to appoint "from their own dergj'
thos(! whom the Greeks call ceconomi, lioc est,
qui vici episcopomm res ecclesiasticas tractant
(canon xlviij., Mansi, x., 031 1. There was an of-
ficer named "ueconomus'" in the old Irish mon-
asteries ; see Reeves' edition of Adamnau,p. 47.

This Canon is found twice in the Corpus
Juris Cfuumici, Gratian's Dccrctum, Pars II.,
Causa XYI.. Q. YTI . Canon xxi., and again
in Pars I., Dist. LXXXIX., c. iv.>

' It is curiona thnt both the French and English translations of
Hefele trive this n'fcrcnco incorrectly, and each makes the same
e ror, giving Dist. IxxLx. instead of Ixxxix.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


287


CANON XXVII.

The holy Synod has decreed that those who forcibly carry oflf women under pretence
of marriage, and the aiders or abettors of such ravishers, shall be degraded if clergy-
men, and if laymen be anathematized.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVII.

If a clergyman elope with a woman, let him
be expelled from the Chwch. If a layman, let
him be anathema. The same shall be the lot of
any that assist him.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
XXXVI., Q. II., canon J.


In many old collections this is the last
canon of this Council, e.g., Dionysius Ex-
iguus, Isidore, the Frisca, the Greek by John
of Antioch, and the Arabic by Joseph ^^yp-
tius. The reader familiar with the subject
will have but little difficulty in explaining
to his own satisfaction the omission of canon
xxviij. in these instances.


CANON XXVIII.

Following in all things the decisions of the holy Fathers, and acknowledging the
canon, which has been just read, of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops beloved-of-
God (who assembled in the imperial city of Constantinople, which is New Eome, in the
time of the Emperor Theodosius of happy memory), we also do enact and decree the
same things concerning the privileges of the most holy Church of Constantinople, which
is New Eome. For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of old Koine,
because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops,
actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges (('era irpea/Sela) to the most
holy throne of New Eome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the
Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Eome,
should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is, and rank next after her; so
that, in the Pontic, the Asian, and the Thracian dioceses, the metropolitans only and
such bishops also of the Dioceses aforesaid as are among the barbarians, should be
ordained by the aforesaid most holy throne of the most holy Church of Constantinople;
every metropolitan of the aforesaid dioceses, together with the bishops of his province,
ordaining his own provincial bishops, as has been declared by the divine canons ; but
that, as has been above said, the metropolitans of the aforesaid Dioceses should be
ordained by the archbishop of Constantinople, after the proper elections have been
held according to custom and have been reported to him.


NOTE.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVIII.


TJie bishop of New Bome shall enjoy the .same
honour as the bishop of Old Rome, on account
of the removal of the Empire. For this reason
the \}netropolitans^ of Pontus, of Asia, and of
Thrace, as ivell as the Barbarian bishops shall
be ordained by the bishop of Constantinople.

Van Espen.

It is certain that this canon was expressly
renewed by canon xxxvi. of the Council of
Trullo and from that time has been num-
bered by the Greeks among the canons ; and
at last it was acknowledged by some Latin
collectors also, and was placed by Gratian in


his Decretum, although clearly with a different
sense. (Pars I., Dist. xxii., C. vj.)

Bright.

Here is a great addition to the canon of
381, so ingeniously linked on to it as to seem
at first sight a part of it. The words /cat wo-tc
are meant to suggest that what follows is in
fact involved in what has preceded : whei'eas
a new point of departure is here taken, and
instead of a mere " honorary pre-eminence "
the bishop of Constantinople acquires a vast
jurisdiction, the independent authority of
three exarchs being annulled in order to
make him patriarch. Previously he had
TrpoeSpi'a now he gains Trpoarao-ia. As we have


288


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


seen, a series of aggrauJizements in fact bad
prepared for this a'^f^raiulizemeiit in law ;
aud various metropolitans of Asia Minor
expressed their contentment at seeing it
effected. ''It is, indeed, more than i)rol)al)le
that the self-assertion of Home excited the
jealousy of her rival of the East," and thus
"Eastern bishops secretly felt that the cause
of Constantinople was theirs " (Gore's Leo
the Great, p. 120) ; but the gratitication of
Constantinople ambition was not the less, in
a canonical sense, a novelty, and the attempt
to enfold it in the authority of the Council of
381 was rather astute than candid. The true
plea, whatever might be its value, was that
the Council had to deal with a fait accompli,
which it was wise at once to legalize and to
regulate ; that the " boundaries of the re-
spective exarchates . . . were ecclesias-
tical ari'angements made with a view to the
general good and peace of the Church, and
liable to vary with the dispensations to which
the Church was providentially subjected,"' so
that "by coutirming the «< ttoAAou Kparyjaav
(.So<i " in regard to the ordination of certain
metropolitans (see Ep. ot Council to Aco, Leon.
Epist. xcviij., 4), "they were acting in the
spirit, while violating the letter, of the ever-
famous rule of Niciioa, to, apy^tla ISri Kpareiro
(cp. Newman, Transl. of Fleury, lii., 407). It
is observable that Aristeuus' and Symeon
Logothetes reckon this decree as a XXIXth
canon (Justellus, ii., G94, 720).

After the renewal of this canon by the
Council of Trullo, Gratian adds "The Vlllth
Synod held under Pope Hadrian II., canon
xxj." {Decretiun, Pars I., Dist. xxij., C. vij.)
" We define that no secular power shall here-
after dishonour anyone of these who rule our
patriarclial sees, or attempt to move them
from their proper throne, but shall judge
them worthy of all reverence and honour ;


chiefly the most holy Pope of Old Rome, and
then till' Patriarcli of Constantinople, and
then tliose of Alexandria, and Antioch, and
Jerusalem."


the


following


Some Greek codices have
heading to this canon.

" Decree of the same holy Synod published
on account of the privileges of the throne of
the most holy Church of Constantinople."

TiLLEMONT.

This canon seems to recognise no particu-
lar authority in the Church of Rome, save
what the Fathers had granted it, as the seat
of the empire. And it attributes in plain
words as much to Constantinople as to Rome,
with the exception of the first j^lace. Never-
theless I do not observe that the Po2)es took
up a thing so injurious to their dignity, and
of so dangerous a consequence to the whole
Church. For what Lupus ipiotes of St. Leo's
Ixxviij. (civ) letter, refers rather to Alex-
andria and to Antioch, than to Rome.
St. Leo is contented to destroy the founda-
tion on which they built the elevation of
Constantinople, maintaining that a thing so
entirely ecclesiastical as the episcopate ought
not to be regulated by the temporal dignity
of cities, which, nevertheless, has been almost
always followed in the establishment of the
metropolis, according to the Council of Nicea.

St. Leo also complains that the Covmcil of
Chalcedou broke tlie decrees of the Council
of Nice, the practice of auti([uity. and the
rights of Metropolitans. Certainly it was an
odious innovation to see a Bishoj) made the
chief, not of one department but of thi'ee ; for
which no example could be fouid save in the
authority which the Popes took over Illyri-
cum, Avhere, however, they did not claim the
power to ordain any Bishop.


EXCURSUS ON THE LATER HISTORY OF CANON XXYIII.


Among the bishops who gave their answers at the last session to the question whether
their subscription to the canons was voluntary or forced was Eusebius, bishop of Dorylocum,
an Asiatic bishop who said that he had read the Constantinopolitan canon to " the holy pope
of Rome in presence of clerics of Constantinople, and that he had accepted it " (L. and C,
Conc.,i\. 815). But quite possibly this evidence is of little value. But what is more to the
point is that the Papal legates most probably had alread}' at this very council recognized the
right of Constantinople to rank immediately after Rome. For at the very first session when the
Acts of the Latrocinium were read, it was found that to Flavian, the Archbishop of Constan-
tinople, was given only the fifth place. Against this the bishop protested and asked, "AVhy

' Such is not the case in Aristenus as found in Beveridge, Tom. I., p. 147.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451 289


did not Flavian receive his position?" and the papal legate Paschasinus answered: "We
will, please God, recognize the present bishop Anatolius of Constantinople as the first [i.e.
after us], but Dioscorus made Flavian the fifth." It would seem to be in vain to attempt to
escape the force of these words by comparing with them the statement made in the last ses-
sion, in a moment of heat and indignation, by Lucentius the papal legate, that the canons of
Constantinople were not found among those of the Roman Code. It may well be that this
statement was true, and yet it does not in any way lessen the importance of the fact that at
the first session (a very different thing from the sixteenth) Paschasinus had admitted that
Constantinople enjoyed the second place. It would seem that Quesnel has proved his pointy
notwithstanding the attempts of the Ballerini to counteract and overthrow his arguments.

It would be the height of absurdity for any one to attempt to deny that the canon of
Constantinople was entirely in force and practical execution, as far of those most interested
were concerned, long before the meeting of the council of Chalcedon, and in 394, only thir-
teen years after the adoption of the canon, we find the bishojD of Constantinople presiding
at a synod at which both the bishop of Alexandria and the bishop of Antioch were present.

St. Leo made, in connexion with this matter, some statements which perhaps need not be
commented upon, but should certainly not be forgotten. In his epistle to Anatolius (no. cvi.)
in speaking of the third canon of Constantinople he sa,js : " That document of certain bish-
ops has never been brought by your predecessors to the knowledge of the Apostolic See."
And in writing to the Empress {Ep. cv,, ad Pulch.) he makes the following statement, strangely
contrary to what she at least knew to be the fact, "To this concession a long course of years
has given no effect ! "

We need not stop to consider the question why Leo rejected the xxviijth canon of Chal-
cedon. It is certain that he rejected it and those who wish to see the motive of this rejec-
tion considered at length are referi'ed to Quesnel and to the Ballerini ; the former affirm -
ing that it was because of its encroachments upon the prerogatives of his ovra see, the
latter urging that it was only out of his zeal for the keeping in full force of the Nicene decree.

Leo can never be charged with weakness. His rejection of the canon was absolute and
unequivocal. In writing to the Emperor he says that Anatolius only got the See of Constan-
tinople by his consent, that he should behave himself modestly, and that there is no way he
can make of Constantinople "an Apostolic See," and adds that " only from love of peace and
for the restoration of the unity of the faith " he has " abstained from annulling this ordina-
tion" (Ep. civ.).

To the Empress he wrote with still greater violence : " As for the resolution of the bish-
ops which is contrary to the Nicene decree, in union with your faithful piety, I declare it to
be invalid and annul it by the authority of the holy Apostle Peter" (Ep. cv.).

The papal annulling does not appear to have been of much foi'ce, for Leo himself con-
fesses, in a letter written about a year later to the Empress Pulcheria (Ep. cxvi.), that the
Illyiian bishops had since the council subscribed the xxviiith canon.

The pope had taken occasion in his letter in which he announced his acceptance of the
doctrinal decrees of Chalcedon to go on further and express his rejection of the canons.
This part of the letter was left unread throughout the Greek empire, and Leo complains of
it to Julian of Cos {Ep. cxxvij.).

Leo never gave over his opposition, although the breach was made up between him and
Anatolius by an apparently insincere letter on the part of the latter (Ep. cxxxii.). Leo's suc-
cessors followed his example in rejecting the canons, both the Illd of Constantinople and the
XXVIIIth of Chalcedon, but as M. I'abbe Duchesne so admii'ably says : " Mais leur voix fut
peu ecoutee ; on leur accorda sans doute des satisfactions, mais de pure ceremonie." * But


' Duchesne, Origitves du Culte ChrStien, p. 24.


290 CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


Justinian acknowledged the Constantinopolitan and Chalcedonian rank of Constantinople
in bis CXXXIst Novel, (cap. j.), and the Synod in Trullo in canon xxxvj. renewed exactly
canon xxviij. of Chalcedon. Moreover the Seventh Ecumenical with the approval of the
Pai)al Lojjfates gave a general sanction to all the canons accepted by the Trullan Synod. And
finally in 1215 the Fourth Council of the Lateran in its Vth Canon acknowledged Constanti-
nople's rank as immediately after Rome, but this was while Constantinople was in the hands
of the Latins ! Subsequently at Florence the second rank, in accordance with the canons of
I. Constantinople and of Chalcedon (which had been annulled l)y Leo) was given to the Greek
Patriarch of Constantinoi^le, and so the opposition of Rome gave way after seven centuries
and a half, and the Nicene Canon which Leo declaimed to be "inspired by the Holy Ghost"
and "valid to the end of time" {Ep. cvi.), was set at nought by Leo's successor in the Apos-
tolic See.


From the Acts of the same Holy Synod concerning Photius, Bishop of Tyre, and
Eustathius, Bishop of Berytiis.

The most magnificent and glorious judges said :

What is determined by the Holy Sj'nod [in the matter of the Bishops ordained by
the most religious Bishop Pliotius, but removed by the most religious Bishop Eusta-
thius and ordered to be Presbyters after (having held) the Episcopate ] ?

The most religious Bishops Paschasinus and Lucentius, and the Priest Boniface,
representatives of the Church ' of Rome, said :

CAKON XXIX.

It is sacrilege to degrade a bishop to the rank of a presbyter ; but, if they are for
just cause removed from episcopal functions, neitlier ought they to have the position of
a Presbyter ; and if they have been displaced without any charge, they shall be restored
to their episcopal dignity.

And Auatolius, the most reverend Archbishop of Constantinople, said : If those who
are alleged to have been removed from the episcopal dignit}' to the order of presbyter,
have ind<'(Kl been condemned for any sufficient causes, clearly they are not worthy of
the honour of a presbyter. But if tlu\y have been forced down into the lower rank
without just cause, they are worthy, if the}' appear guiltless, to receive again both the
dignity and priesthood of the Episcopate.

And all the most reverend Bishops cried out:

The judgment of the Fathers is right. We all say the same. The Fathers have
righteously decided. Let the sentence of the Archljishops prevail.

And the most magnificent and glorious judges said :

Let the pleasure of the Holy Synod be established for all time.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.
He is sacrilegious who rlerp'ades a bishop to
the rank of a presbyter. For hr that is f/ailf>/
of crime is nmoorthy of the prirsfhond. But he
that u-as deposed without cause, let him be [still]
bishop.

"What precedes and follows the so-called


canon is abbreviated from the IVth Session
of the Council (L. and C, Cone, Tom. IV.,
col. 550). I have followed a usual Greek
method of printing it.

Hefele.
This so-called canon is nothing but a ver-
bal copy of a jiassage from the minutes of the


'Apostolic Chair of Rome" in the Greek of the acts.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


291


fourth session in the matter of Photius of
Tyre and Eustathius of Berytiis. Moreover,
it does not possess the peculiar form which
■we find in all the genuine canons of Chalce-
don, and in almost all ecclesiastical canons in
general ; on the contrary, there adheres to it
a portion of the debate, of which it is a frag-
ment, in which Anatolius is introduced as
speaking. Besides it is wanting in all the old
Greek, as well as in the Latin collections of
canons, and in those of John of Autioch and


of Photius, and has only heen appended to
the twenty-eight genuine canons of Chalce-
don from the fact that a later transcriber
thought fit to add to the genuine canons the
general and important principle contained in
the place in question of the fourth session.
Accordingly, this so-called canon is certainly
an ecclesiastical rule declared at Chalcedon,
and in so far a Kavuyv, but it was not added as
a canon proper to the other twenty-eight by
the Synod.


From the Fourth Session of the same Holy Synod, having reference to the matter of
the Egyptian Bishops.

The most magnificent and glorious judges, and the whole Senate, said :

CANON XXX.

Since the most religious bishops of Egypt have postponed for the present their sub-
scription to the letter of the most holy Archbishop Leo, not because the}- oppose the
Catholic Faith, but because they declare that it is the custom in the Egy23tian diocese
to do no such thing without the consent and order of their Archbishop, and ask to be
excused until the ordination of the new bishop of the metropolis of Alexandria, it has
seemed to us reasonable and kind that this concession should be made to them, they
remaining in their official habit in the imperial city until the Archbishop of the Metropo-
lis of Alexandria shall have been ordained.


And the most religious Bishop Paschasinus, representative of the Apostolic throne
[of Rome^], said :

If your authority suggests and commands that any indulgence be shewn to them, let
them give securities that they will not depart from this city until the city of Alexan-
dria receives a Bishop.

And the most magnificent and glorious judges, and the whole Senate, said :

Let the sentence of the most holy Paschasinus be confirmed.

And therefore let them [i.e., the most religious Bishops of the Egyptians] remain in
their official habit, either giving securities, if they can, or being bound by the obliga-
tion of an oath.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.

It is the custom of the Egyptians that none
subscribe - without the permission of their Arch-
bishop. Wlierefore they are not to be blamed
loho did not subscribe the Epistle of the holy Leo
until an Archbishop had been appointed for them.

As in the ease of the last so-called " canon "
I have followed a usual Greek method, the
wording departs but little from that of the
acts {Vide L. and C, Cone, Tom. IV., col.
517).

Hefele.

This paragraph, like the previous one, is not


a proper canon, but a verbal repetition of a
proposal made in the fourth session by the
imperial commissioners, improved by the leg-
ate Paschasinus, and approved by the Synod.
Moreover, this so-called canon is not found in
the ancient collections, and was probably
added to the twenty-eight canons in the same
manner and for the same reasons as the pre-


ceding.


Bright.


The council could insist with all plainness
on the duty of hearing before condemning
(see on Canon XXIX.) ; yet on this occasion


> These words do not occur In the Acts.


*i.e., a conciliar decree.


292


CHALCEDOX. A.D. 451


bishop after bishop gave vent to harsh un- they were so eager to terrify or crush, had
feeling absolutisTu, the only excuse for which actually supported Dioscoinis on the tragical
consists in the fact that the outrages of the August 8, 449. It was not in human nature
Latrocinium were fresh in their minds, and i to forget this ; but the result is a blot on the
that three of the Egyptian sujjplicants, whom | history of the Council of Chalcedon.


EXT11ACT8 FROM IIIE ACTS.


SESSION XYI.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. TO-I.)


Pascliasiuus and Lucentius, the most
reverend bishops, holding the place of the
Apostolic See, said : If your magnificence
so orders, we have something to lay before

The most glorious judges, said : Say
what you wisli. The most holy Paschasi-
nus the bishop, holding the place of Home,
said : The rulers of the world, taking care
of the holy Catholic faith, by which their
kingdom and glory is increased, have
deigned to define this, in order that unity
through a holy peace may be preserved
through all the churches. But with still
greater care their clemency has vouchsafed
to provide for the future, so that no con-
tention may spring up again between God's
bishops, nor any schisms, nor any scandal.
But yesterday after your excellencies and
our humility had left, it is said that certain
decrees were made, which we esteem to
have been done contrary to the canons,
and contrary to ecclesiastical discipline.
We request that your magnificence order
these tilings to be read, that all the breth-
ren may know Avhether the things done are
just or unjust.

The most glorious judges said : If any-
thing was done after our leaving let it be
read.

And before the reading, Aetius, the Arch-
deacon of the Church of Constantinople
said : It is certain that the matters touch-
ing the faith received a suitable form. But
it is customary at synods, after those things
w^hicli are chief(!st of all shall have been
defined, that other things also which are
necessary should be examined and put
into shape. We have, I mean the most holy
Church of Constantinopk; h.is, manifestly
things to be attended to. AV(; asked the
lord bishops {KvpioL'i Toa iinaKuTroi'i) from


Piome, to join with us in these matters, but
they declined, saying they had received no
instructions on the subject. We referred
the matter to your magnificence and you
bid the holy Synod to consider this very
point. And when your magnificence had
gone forth, as the affair was one of com-
mon interest, the most holy bishops, stand-
ing up, prayed that this thing might be
done. And they were present here, and
this Avas done in no hidden nor secret fash-
ion, but in due course and in accordance
with the canons.

The most glorious judges said : Let the
acts be read.

[The canon {number XXATIL), loas then
read, and the signatures, in all 192, inclu-
Wling the hishojps of Antioch, Jerusalem, and
\ Heraclea, hut not Thalassius of Coesarea
j who afferioards assented. Oidy a week he-
\fore 350 had signed the Definition of faith.
I When the last 7iame teas read a delate arose
asfolloivs. (Col. 810.).] *

Lucentius, the most reverend bishop and
legate of the Apostolic See, said : In the
first place let your excellency notice that
it was brought to pass by circumventing
the holy bishops so that they were forced
to sign the as yet unwritten canons, of
which they made mention. [The Greek
reads a little (/ijf'erentlt/ {I Iiave folloiced the
Latin as it is supposed htj the critics to he

i more pure than the Greek ive noio have) :
Your excellency has perceived how many
things were done in the presence of the
bishops, in order that no one might be

I forced to sign the afore-mentioned canons ;
defining by necessity. ]

I The most reverend bishops cried out :
No one was forced.


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


293


Lucentius the most reverend bishop and
legate of the Apostolic See, said : It is
manifest that the decrees of the 318 have
been put aside, and that mention only has
been made of those of the 150, which are
not found to have any place in the synodi-
cal canons, and which were made as they
acknowledge eighty years ago. If there-
fore they enjoyed this privilege during these
years, what do they seek for now? If
they never used it, why seek it? [Tke
Greek reads : "It is manifest that the pres-
ent decrees have been added to the decrees
of the 318 and to those of the 150 after
them, decrees not received into the synodi-
cal canons, these things they pretend to be
defined. If therefore in these times they
used this benefit what now do they seek
which according to the canons they had
not used ?]


Aetius, the archdeacon of the most holy
Church of Constantinople, said : If on this
subject they had received any commands,
let them be brought forward.

Bonifacius, a presbyter and vicar of the
Apostolic See, said : The most blessed and
Apostolic Pope, among other things, gave
us this commandment. And he read from
the chart, "The rulings of the holy fath-
ers shall with no rashness be violated or
diminished. Let the dignity of our per-
son in all ways be guarded by you. And
if any, influenced by the power of his
own city, should undertake to make usur-
pations, withstand this with suitable firm-
ness."

The most glorious judges said : Let each
party quote the canons.


Paschasinus, the most reverend bishop
and representative, read : Canon Six of the
318 holy fathers, " The Eoman Chm-chhath
always had the primacy. Let Egypt there-
fore so hold itself that the bishop of Alex-
andria have the authority over all, for this
is also the custom as regards the bishop of
Rome. So too at Antioch and in the other
provinces let the churches of the larger
cities have the primacy, [/w the Greek "let
the primacy be kept to the churches ; " a
sentence ivhich I do not understand, unless it
means that for the advantage of the churches
the primatial rights of Antioch must he
upheld. But such a sentiment one luould
expect to find rather in the Latin than in the
Greek.'] And one thing is abundantly clear,
that if any one shall have been ordained
bishop contrary to the will of the metropol-
itan, this great synod has decreed that such
an one ought not to be bishop. If however
the judgment of all his own [fellows] is
reasonable and according to the canons,
and if two or three dissent through their
own obstinacy, then let the vote of the
majority prevail. For a custom has pre-
vailed, and it is an ancient tradition, that the
bishop of Jerusalem be honoured, let him
have his consequent honour, but the rights
of his own metropolis must be preserved."

Constantine, the secretary, read from a
book handed him by Aetius, the archdeacon ;
Canon Six of the 318 holy Fathers. " Let
the ancient customs prevail, those of Egypt,


NOTES.

An attempt has been made to shew that
this statement of the acts is a mere blunder.
That no correct copy of the Nicene canons
was read, and that the council accepted the
version produced by the Roman legate as
genuine. The proposition appears to me in
itself ridiculous, and taken in connexion with
the fact that the acts shew that the true canon
of Nice was read immediately afterwards I
cannot think the hypothesis really worthy of
serious consideration. But it is most ably
defended by the Balleriui in their edition of
St. Leo's works (Tom. iii., p. xxxvij. et seqq ).
and Hefele seems to have accepted their con-
clusions (Vol. III., p. 435). Bright, however,
I think, takes a most just view of the case,
whom 1 therefore quote.

Bright.

If we place ourselves for a moment in the
position of the ecclesiastics of Constantinople
when they heard Paschasinus read his " ver-
sion," which the Ballerini gently describe as
" differing a little " from the Greek text, we
shall see that it was simply impossible for
them not to quote that text as it was pre-
served in their archives, and had been correctly
translated by Philo and Evarestus in their
version beginning "Antiqui mores obti-
neant." No comment on the difference be-
tween it and the Roman " version " is record-
ed to have been made : and, in truth, none
was necessary. Simply to confront the two,
and pass on to the next point, was to confute


294


CllALCEDOX. A.D. 4Ji


so that the bishop of Alexaudria shall have
jurisdiction over all, since this also is the
custom at lionie. Likewise at Antioch and
in the rest of the provinces, let the rank
{irpea-^ela) be preserved to the churches.
For this is absolutely clear that if anyone
contrary to the will of the metropolitan be
ordained bishop, such an one the ^a-eat
synod decreed should not be a bislioj).
If however by the common vote of all,
founded upon rt\as()n, and accordin<jj to the
canons, two or three moved by their own
obstinacy, make opposition, let the vote of
the majority stand."

The same secretary read from the same
codex the determination of the Second
Synod. " These things the bishops decreed
who assembled by the grace of God in Con-
stantinople from far separated provinces,
. . . and bishops are not to go to churches
which are outside the bounds of their dio-
ceses, nor to confound the churches, but
according to the canons the bishop of Alex-
audria shall take the charge of the aliairs
of Egypt only, and the bishops of Orient
shall govern the Oriental diocese only, the
honours due to the Church of Antioch
being guarded according to the Nicene
canons, and the Asiatic bishojis shall care
for the diocese of Asia only, and those of
Pontus the affairs of Pontus only, and
thos(! of Thrace the affairs of Thrace only.
But bishops shall not enter uncalled another
diocese for ordination, or any other eccle-
siastical function. And the aforesaid canon
concerning dioceses being observed, it is
evident that the synod of every province
will administer the affairs of that particular
province as was decreed at Nice. ]jut the
churches of God in heathen nations must
be governed according to the custom which
has prevailed from the times of the Fathers.
The bishop of Constantinople however shall
have the prerogative of honour next after
the bishop of Pome, because Constantino-
ple is new Pome."


Pascliasinus at once most respectfully and
most expressively.

It should be added that the Ballerini
ground tlioir theory chiefly upon the author-
ity of a Latin MS., the ('adcj- JuIudius, now
called l'arisicn.<;is, in which this reading of the
true text of the canon of Nice is not contained,
as Baluzius was the first to point out.


i


The most glorious judges said : Let the
most holy Asiatic and Pontic bishops who
have signed the tome just read say whether
they gave their signatures of their own judg-
ment or compelled by any necessity. And


signed of my own judgment, [And so on,
one after the other.]

The rest cried out : We signed willing-

The most glorious judges said : As it is


when these were come into the midst, the manifest that the subscription of each one
most reverend Diogenes, the bislio]) of Cy- ' of the bishops was given without any
zicum, said : I call God to witness that I , necessity but of his own will, let the most


CHALCEDON. A.D. 451


295


holy bishops who have not signed say some-
thing.

Eusebius, the bishop of Ancyra, said : I
am about to speak but for myself alone.

l^His speech is a personal exp)lanation of
his own action with regard to consecrating
a bishop for Gangra.^

The most glorious judges said : From
what has been done and brought forward on
each side, we perceive that the primacy of
all {'Trpo irdvrwv ra Trpcorela) and the chief
honour {ttjv e^alperov Tifxrjv) according to
the canons, is to be kej)t for the most God-
beloved archbishop of Old Rome, but that i
the most reverend archbishop of the royal \
city Constantinople, which is new Rome, is i
to enjoy the honour of the same primacy,
and to have the power to ordain the metro-
politans in the Asiatic, Pontic, and Thra-
cian dioceses, in this manner : that there be
elected by the clergy, and substantial (kttj-
ropcov) and most distinguished men of each
metropolis and moreover by all the most
reverend bishops of the province, or a ma-
jority of them, and that he be elected whom
those afore mentioned shall deem Avorthy of
the metropolitan episcopate and that he
should be presented by all those who had
elected him to the most holy archbishop
of royal Constantinople, that he might be
asked whether he [i.e., the Patriarch of Con-
stantinople] willed that he should there be
ordained, or by his commission in the prov-
ince where he received the vote to the
episcopate. The most reverend bishops of
the ordinary towns should be ordained by
all the most reverend bishops of the prov-
ince or by a majority of them, the metro-


politan having his power according to the
established canon of the fathers, and mak-
ing with regard to such ordinations no com-
munications to the most holy archbishop of
royal Constantinople. Thus the matter ap-
pears to us to stand. Let the holy Synod
vouchsafe to teach its view of the case.

The most reverend bishops cried out :
This is a just sentence. So we all say.
These things please us all. This is a just
determination. Establish the projaosed
form of decree. This is a just vote. All
has been decreed as should be. We beg
you to let us go. By the safety of the Em-
peror let us go. We all wall remain in this
opinion, we all say the same things,

Lucentius, the bishop, said: The Apostolic
See gave orders that all things should be
done in our presence [This sentence reads in
the Latin : The Apostolic See ought not to
be humiliated in our presence. / do not
hioiv u'hy Canon Bright in his notes on
Canon XX VIII. has followed thisreading\,
and therefore whatever yesterday Avas done
to the prejudice of the canons during our
absence, we beseech your highness to com-
mand to be rescinded. But if not, let our
opposition be placed in the minutes, and
pray let us know clearly {hat. that we may
know] what we are to report to that most
apostolic bishop who is the ruler of the
whole church, so that he may be able to
take action with regard to the indignity
done to his See and to the setting at naught
of the canons,

[John, the most reverend bishop of Se-
baste, said : We all will remain of the opin-
ion expressed by your magnificence.']

The most glorious judges said : The whole
synod has aj)proved what we proposed.


NOTES.


Hefele,
(Hist Counc, Vol. III., p. 428.)
That is, the prerogative assigned to the
Church of Constantinople is, in spite of the
opposition of the Roman legate decreed by
the Synod. Thus ended the Council of Chal-
cedon after it had lasted three weeks.

How it is possible after reading the fore-
going proceedings to imagine for an instant
that the bishops of this Council considered
the rights they were discussing to be of
Divine origin, and that the occupant of the


See of Rome was, jure divino, supreme over
all pontiffs I cannot understand. It is quite
possible, of course, to affirm, as some have
done, that the acts, as we have them, have
been mutilated, but the contention involves
not only many difficvilties but also no few ab-
surdities ; and yet I cannot but think that
even this extreme hypothesis is to be pre-
ferred to any attempt to reconcile the acts as
we now have them with the acceptance on the
part of the members of the council of the
doctrine of a jure divino Papal Supremacy as
it is now held by the Latin Church.


1 These words are found only in the Latin.


THE FIFTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE SECOND COL^NCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


A.D. 553.


Emperor. — Justinian I.
Poxje. — ViGiLius.

Elenchus.


Historical Itiiroduction.

Excursus on the genuineness of the Acts
of the Council.

The Emperor's Letter.

Ectr acts from the Acts, Session VIZ.

The Sentence of the Synod.

The Capitula of the Council.

Excursus on the XV. Anathematisms
against Ori/pen.


The Anathemas against Origen jparal-
leled with the Anathematisms of the Em-
peror Justinian.

Historical Note to the Decretal Letter of
Pope Vigilius.

The Decretal Letter of the Pope, with Ln-
troductory Note.

Historical Excursus on the after-history
of the Council.


t


4


HISTOKICAL INTRODUCTION.

(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol, IV., p. 289.)

In accordance with the imiierial command, but without the assent of the Pope, the synod
was opened on the 5th of May a.d. 553, in the Secretarium of the Cathedral Church at Con-
stantinople. Among those present were the Patriarchs, Eutychius of Constantinojjle, who
presided, Apollinaris of Alexandria, Domninus of Antioch, three bishops as repi*esentatives
of the Patriarch Eustochius of Jerusalem, and 145 other metropolitans and bishops, of whom
many came also in the place of absent colleagues.

(Bossuet, Def. Gleri Gall., Lib. vij., cap. xix. Abridged. Translation by Allies.)
The three chapters were the point in question ; that is, respecting Theodore of Mopsues-
tia, Theodoret's writings against Cyril, and the letter of Ibas of Edessa to Maris the Persian,
They examined whether that letter had been approved in the Council of Chalcedon. So
much was admitted that it had been read there, and that Ibas, after anathematizing Nesto-
rius, had been received by the holy Council. Some contended that his person only was
spared ; others that his letter also was approved. Thus inquiry was made at the fifth Coun-
cil how the writings on the Faith were wont to be approved in former Councils. The Acts
of the third and fourth Council, those which we have mentioned above respecting the letter
of St. Cyril and of St. Leo, were set forth. Then the holy Council declared : " It is plain,
from what has been recited, in what manner the holy Councils are wont to approve what is
brought before them. For great as was the dignity of those holy men who wrote the letters
recited, yet they did not approve their letters simply or without inquiry, nor without taking
cognizance that they were in all things agreeable to the exposition and doctrine of the holy
Fathers, with which they were compared," But the Acts proved that this course was not
pursued in the case of the letter of Ibas ; they inferred, therefore, most justly, that that let-
ter had not been approved. So, then, it is certain from the third and fourth Councils, the
fifth so declaring and understanding it, that letters approved by the Apostolic See, such as
was that of Cyril, or even proceeding from it, as that of Leo, were received by the holy Coun-
cils not simi:)ly, nor without inquiry. The holy Fathers proceed to do what the Bishops at
Chalcedon would have done, had they undertaken the examination of Ibas's letter. They
compare the letter with the Acts of Ephesus and Chalcedon, Which done, the holy Council
declared — " The comparison made proves, beyond a doubt, that the letter which Ibas is said
to have written is, in all respects, opposed to the definition of the right Faith, which the
Council of Chalcedon set forth." All the Bishops cried out, " We all say this ; the letter is
heretical." Thus, therefore, is it proved by the fifth Council, that our holy Fathers in
Ecumenical Councils pronounce the letters read, Avhether of Catholics or heretics, or even
of Roman Pontiffs, and that on matter of Faith, to be orthodox or heretical, according to the
same procedure, after legitimate cognizance, the truth being inquired into, and then cleared
up ; and upon these premises judgment given.

What ! you will say, with no distinction, and with minds equally inclined to both parties?
Indeed, we have said, and shall often repeat, that there was a presumption in favour of the
decrees of orthodox Pontiffs ; but in Ecumenical Councils, where judgment is to be passed
in matter of Faith, that they were bound no longer to act upon presumption, but on the
truth clearly and thoroughly ascertained.

Such were the Acts of the fifth Council. This it learnt from the third and fourth Coun-
cils, and approved ; and in this argument we have brought at once in favour of our opinion
the decrees of three Ecumenical Councils, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, and the second Con-


300 II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A. I). 553


stantinopolitan. Tlie Emperor Justinian desired that the question concerning the above-
mentioned Three Chapters should be considered in the Church. He therefore sent for Pope
Vigilius to Constantinople. Tliere he not long after assembled a council. He and the
Orientals thought it of great moment that these Chapters should be condemned, against the
Nestorians, who were raising their heads to defend them ; Vigilius, with the Occidentals,
feared let this occasion should be taken to destroy the authority of the Council of Chalcedou :
because it was admitted that Theodoret and Ibas had been received in that Council, whilst
Theodore, though named, was let go withoiit any mark of censure. Though then both })ar-
ties easily agreed as to the substance of the Faith, yet the question had entirely respect to
the Faith, it being feared by the one pai-ty lest the Nestoriau, by the other lest the Euty-
chian, enemies of the Council of Chalcedon should prevail. Vigilius on the 11th of April,
548, issues his " Judicatum " against the Three Chapters, saving the authority of the Council
of Chalcedon. Thereupon the Bishops of Africa, Illyria, and Dalmatia, with two of his own
confidential Deacons, withdraw from his communion. In the year 550 the African Bishops,
under Rcparatus of Carthage, not only reject the Judicatum, but anathematize Vigilius him-
self, and sever him from Catholic Communion, resei-ving to him a place for repentance. At
length the Pope pu])licly withdraws his " Judicatum." While the Council is sitting at Con-
stantinople he publishes his " Constitutum," in which he condemns certain propositions of
Theodore, but spares his person ; the same respecting Theodoret ; but with respect to Ibas,
he declares that his letter was pronounced orthodox by the Council of Chalcedon. However
this may be, so much is clear, that Vigilius, though invited, declined being present at the
council : that nevertheless the council was held without him ; that he published a " Consti-
tutum," in which he disapproved of what Theodore, Theodoret, and Ibas were said to have
Mritten against the Faith ; but decreed that their names should be spared because they were
considered to have been received by the fourth Council, or to have died in the communion
of the Church, and to be reserved to the judgment of God. Concerning the letter of Ibas,
he published the following, that, " understood in the best and most pious sense," it was
blameless ; and concerning the three Chapters generally, he ordered that after his present
declaration ecclesiastics should move no further question.

Such was the decree of Vigilius, issued upon the authority with which he was invested.
But the council, after his Constitution, both raised a question about the Three Chapters,
and decided that question was properly raised concerning the dead, and that the letter of
Ibas was manifestly heretical and Nestorian, and contrary in all things to the Faith of Chal-
cedon, and that they were altogether accursed, who defended the impious Theodore of Mop-
suestia, or the writings of Theodoret against Cyril, or the impious letter of Ibas defending
the tenets of Nestorius : and all such as did not anathematize it, but said it was correct.

In these latter words they seemed not even to spare Vigilius, although they did not men-
tion his name. And it is certain their decree was confirmed by Pelagius the Second, Gregory
the Great, and other Roman Pontiffs. . . . These things prove, that in a matter of the
utmost importance, disturbing the whole Church, and seeming to belong to the Faith, the
decrees of sacred councils prevail over the decrees of Pontiffs, and that the letter of Ibas,
though defended by a judgment of the Roman Pontiff, could nevertheless be proscribed as
heretical.


EXCUESUS ON THE GENUINENESS OF" THE ACTS OF THE FIFTH COUNCIL.

Some suspicion has arisen with regard to how far the acts of the Fifth Ecumenical Coun-
cil may be relied upon. Between the Eoman Manuscript printed by Labbe and the Paris
manuscript found in Mansi there are considerable variations and, strange to say, some of
the most injurious things to the memory of Pope Vigilius are found only in the Paris manu-
script. Moreover we know that the manuscript kept in the patriarchal archives at Con-
stantinople had been tampered with during the century that elapsed before the next
Ecumenical Synod, for at that council the forgeries and interpolations were exposed by the
Papal Legates.

At the XlVth Session of that synod the examination of the genuineness of the acts of the
Second Council of Constantinople was resumed. It had been begun at the Xllth Session.
Up to this time only two MSS. had been used, now the librarian of the jDatriarchate presented
a third MS. which he had found in the archives, and swore that neither himself nor any
other so far as he knew had made any change in these MSS. These were then compared and
it was found that the two first agreed in containing the pretended letter of Mennas to Pope
Vigilius, and the two writings addressed by Vigilius to Justinian and Theodora ; but that
none of these were found in the third MS. It was further found that the documents in dis-
pute were in a different hand from the rest of the MS., and that in the first book of the
parchment MS., three quarternions had been inserted, and in the second book between
quarternions 15 and 16, four unpaged leaves had been placed. So too the second MS. had
been tampered with. The council inserted these particulars in a decree, and ordered that
"these additions must be quashed in both MSS., and marked with an obelus, and the falsi-
fiers must be smitten with anathema. " Finally the council cried out, " Anathema to the
pretended letters of Mennas and Vigilius ! Anathema to the forger of Acts ! Anathema to
all who teach, etc."

From all this it would seem that the substantial accuracy of the rest of the acts have
been established by the authority of the Sixth Synod, and Hefele and all recent scholars fol-
low Mansi's Paris MS.

It may be well here to add that a most thorough-going attack upon the acts has been
made in late years by Professor Vincenzi, in defence of Pope Vigilius and of Origen. The
reader is referred to his writings on the subject : In Sancti Gregorii Nysseni et Originis
scripta et doctrinam nova defensio; Vigil., Orig., Justin, triumph., in Synod V. (Komae, 1865.)
The Catholic Dictionary frankly says that this is "an attempt to deny the most patent facts,
and treat some of the chief documents as forgeries," and " unworthy of serious notice." ^


' Addie and Arnold. A Catholic Dictionary. Sixth Ed. with imprimat'V.r signed by Cards. Manning and McCloskey, s.v. Three
Chapters.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. V., col. 410.)


[ J7ie Emperor^ s Letter which tvas read to
the Fathers.]

In the Name of our Lord God Jesus
Christ. The Emperor Fhivius Justinian,
German, Gothic, etc., and always Augustus,
to the most blessed liisliops and patrinrelis,
Eutychius of Constantinople, A])ollinarius
of Alexandria, Domninus of Theopolis,
Stephen, George, and Damian, the most re-
ligious bishops taking the place of that man
of singular blessedness, Eustochius, the
Archbishop and Patriarch of Jerusalem, and
the other most religious bishops stopping in
this royal city from the ditferent provinces.

[TJie foUowing is the letter condensed, in-
cludinq Hcfeles digest. History of the
Councils, Vol. IV., 21. 298.]

The effort of my predecessors, the ortho-
dox Emperors, ever aimed at the settling of
controversies which had arisen respecting
the faith by the calling of Synods, For
this cause Coustantine assembled 318
Fathers at Nice, and was himself present
at the Council, and assisted those who con-
fessed the Son to bo consubstantial with
the Father. Theodosius, 150 at Constan-
tinople, Theodosius the younger, the Synod
of Epliesus, the Emperor Marcian, the
bishops at Chalcedon. As, however, after
Mai'cian's death, controversies respecting
the Synod of Chalcedon had broken out in
several })laces, the Emperor Leo wrote to
all bishops of all places, in order that every-
one might declare; his ojiinion in writing
with regard to this holy Council. Soon
afterwards, however, had arisen again the
adherents of Nestoiius and Eiityches, and
caused great divisions, so that many
Clnirches had broken otl" commiinion with
one another. AVhen, now, the grace of God
raised us to the throne, we regarded it as
our chief business to unite the Churches
again, and to bring the Synod of Chak-edon,
together with the three earlier, to universal


acceptance. We have won many who pre-
viously ojiposed that Synod ; others, who
persevered in their opposition, we banished,
and so restored the unity of the Church
! again. But the Nestorians want to ini])ose
j their heresy upon the Church ; and, as they
could not use Nestoi'ius for that ])urpose,
they made haste to introduce their errors
through Theodore of Mopsuestia, the
teacher of Nestorius, who taught still more
grievous blasphemies than his. He main-
tained, e.g., that God the Word was one,
and Christ another. For the same purpose
they made use of those impious writings of
Tlieodoret which Avere directed against the
first Synod of Ephesus, against Cyril and
his Twelve Chaj^ters, and also the shameful
letter which Ibas is said to have written.
They maintain that this letter was accepted
by the Synod of Chalcedon, and so would
free from condenmation Nestorius and Theo-
dore who were commended in the letter.
If they were to succeed, the Logos could
no longer be said to be "made man," nor
Mary called the Mother (gcnefrix) of God.
AVe, therefore, following the holy Fathei'S,
have first asked you in writing to give your
judgment on the three impious chapters
named, and you have answered, and have
joyfully confessed the true faith. Because,
however, after the condenmation proceed-
ing from you, there are still some who de-
fend the Three Chapters, therefore we have
summoned you to the capital, that you may
here, in common assembly, place again
your view in the light of day. When, for
example, Yigilius, Pope of Old Rome, came
hither, he, in answer to our questicms, re-
peatedly anathematised in writing tin; Three
Chapters, and confirmed his steadfastness
in this view b^' much, even by the condem-
nation of his deacons, Busticus and Sebas-
tian. We possess still his declarations in
his own hand. Then he issued his Judi-
rntiim, in which he anathematised the Three
Chai)ters, with the words, Et quoniam, etc.
You know that he not only deposed Rusti-


11. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


303


cus and Sebastian because they defended
the Three Chapters, but also wrote to Valen-
tinian, bishop of Scythia, and Aurelian,
bishop of Aries, that nothing might be un-
dertaken against the Judicatum. When
you afterwards came hither at my invita-
tion, letters were exchanged between you
and Vigilius in order to a common assem-
bly.^ I3ut now he had altered his view,
would no longer have a synod, but required
that only the three patriarchs and one
other bishop (in communion with the Pope
and the three bishops about him) should
decide the matter. In vain we sent several
commands to him to take part in the
synod. He rejected also our two pro-
posals, either to call a tribunal for decision,
or to hold a smaller assembly, at which, be-
sides him and his three bishops, every other
patriarch should have place and voice, with
from three to five bishops of his diocese.'*
We further declare that we hold fast to the
decrees of the four Councils, and in every
way follow the holy Fathers, Athanasius,
Hilary, Basil, Gregory the Theologian,
Gregory of Nyssa, Ambrose, Theophilus,
John (Chrysostom) of Constantinople, Cy-
ril, Augvistine, Proclus, Leo and their writ-
ings on the true faith. As, however, the
heretics are resolved to defend Theodore of
Mopsuestia and Nestorius with their impi-
eties, and maintain that that letter of Ibas
was received by the Synod of Chalcedon,
so do we exhort you to direct your atten-
tion to the impious writings of Theodore,
and especially to his Jewish Creed which
was brought forward at Ephesus and Chal-
cedon, and anathematized by each synod
with those who had so held or did so hold ;
and we further exhort you to consider what
the holy Fathers have written concerning
him and his blasphemies, as well as what
our predecessors have promulgated, as also
what the Church historians have set forth


concerning hira.^ You will thence see that
he and his heresies have since been con-
demned and that tlierefore his name has
long since been struck from the diptychs
of the Church of Mopsuestia. Consider the
absurd assertion that heretics ought not to
be anathematized after their deaths ; and
Ave exhort you further to follow in this mat-
ter the doctrine of the holy Fathers, who
condemned not only living heretics but also
anathematized after their death those who
had died in their iniquity, just as those
who had been unjustly condemned they
restored after their death and wrote their
names in the sacred diptychs ; which took
place in the case of John and of Flavian of
pious memory, both of them bishops of
Constantinople.^ Moreover we exhort you
to examine the writing of Theodoret and the
supposed letter of Ibas, in which the incar-
nation of the Word is denied, the expres-
sion " Mother of God " and the holy Synod
of Ephesus rejected, Cyril called a heretic,
and Theodore and Nestorius defended and
praised. And as they say that the Council
of Chalcedon has received this letter, you
must compare the declarations of this Coun-
cil relating to the faith with the contents of
the impious letter. Finally, we entreat you
to accelerate the matter. For he who when
asked concerning the right faith, puts off
his answer for a long while, does nothing
else but deny the right faith. For in ques-
tioning and answering on things which are
of faith, it is not he who is found first or
second, but he Avho is the more ready with
a right confession, that is acceptable to
God. May God keep you, most holy and
religious fathers, for many years. Given
IV. Nones of May, at Constantinople, in
the xxviith year of the reign of the imperial
lord Justinian, the perpetual Augustus, and
in the xiith year after the consulate of the
most illustrious Basil.


1 Prom here to the next asterisk, the text varies. Hefele saye
he follows the Paris codex with " abridgments."

2 The emperor could say that the letter was condemned at
Chalcedon, because the Acts of Ephesus were read in the first


session of Chalcedon. Gamier is in error with regard to this, as
Hefele points out.

3 This I have given in full.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION VII.


{From the Paris manuscript found in Hardouiu Concilia, Tom. III., 171 et seqq.;
jNIansi, Tom. ix., 346 et seqq. This speech is not found in full in any other MS.
The Ballerini\Hefele notesA^ raise objections to the genuineness of the additions [in Noris.
0pp., Tom. IV., 1037], hut Hefele does not consider the ohjections of serious nioruent.
[/list, of the Councils, Vol. IV., p. 323, note 2.] All the MSS. agree that The most
glorious quaestor of the sacred palace, Constantine, was sent by the most pious Em-
peror, and when he had entered the Council spake as follows : " Certum est vestrae beati-
tudini, quantum, etc." Tlie rest of the speech dljfers in the different manuscripts. I
follow that of Paris.)


You know how much care the most in-
vincible Emperor has always had that the
contention raised up by certain persons
with regard to the Three Chapters should
have a termination. . . . For this in-
tent he has required the most religious
Vigilius to assemble with you and draw
up a decree on this matter in accordance
with the Orthodox faith. Although there-
fore, Vigihus has already frequently con-
demned the Three Chapters in writing, and
has done this also by word of mouth in
the presence of the Emperor, and of the
most glorious judges and of many members
of this sjTiod, and has always been ready
to smite with anathema the defenders of
Theodore of Mopsuestia, and the letter
which was attributed to Ibas, and the writ-
ings of Theodoret which he set forth against
the orthodox faith and against the twelve
capitula of the holy Cyril : ^ yet he has re-
fused to do this in communion with you
and your synod.

Yesterday Vigilius sent Servus Dei, a
most reverend Sul)deacon of the Iioman
Church, and invited BcJisarius,'^ Cethegus,
as also Justinus and Constantine the most
glorious consuls, as well as bishops Theo-
dore. Ascidas, Beiiignus,and Phocas,tocome
to him as he wished to give through them an
answer to the Emperor. They came, bi;t
speedily retm'ned and informed the most
pious lord, that w(^ had visited Vigilius, the
most religious bisho]), and tliat he had said
to us : "We have called you for this reason,
that you may know what things have been
done in the past days. To this end I have
written a document about the disputed


' Thus far the MSS. agrree almoBt word for word,
gence for the rest is most marked.


The diver-


Three Chapters, addressed to the most
pious Emperor,^ pniy be good enough to
read it, and to carry it to his Serenity."
But when we had heard this and had seen
the document written to your serenity, we
said to him that we could not by any means
receive any document written to the most
pious Emperor without his bidding. " But
you have deacons for running with messa-
ges, b}' whom you can send it." He, how-
ever, said to us : " You now know that I
have made the document." But we, bishops,
answered him : "If vour blessedness is
willing to meet together with us and the
most holy Patriarchs, and the most religious
bishops, and to treat of the Three Chapters
and to give, in unison with us all, a suitable
form of the orthodox faith, as the Holy
Apostles and the holy Fathers and the four
Councils have done, we will hold thee as
our head, as a father and priniate. But if
your holiness has drawn up a document
for the Emperor, you have errand-runners,
as we have said; send it by them." And
when he had heard these things from us, he
sent Servus Dei the Subdeacon, who now
awaits the answer of your serenity. And
when his Piet}^ had heard this, he com-
manded through the aforesaid most relig-
ious and glorious men, the before-named
subdeacon to cam' back this message to the
most religious Vigilius : " We invited him
(//o//) to meet together with the most blessed
patriarchs and other religious bishops, and
with tlumi in common to examine and judge
the Three Cha]iters. But since you have
refused to do this, and you say that you
.iloTHi have written by yourself somewhat on

'^ There ip pome doubt about this name,
i 'Tliie was the "Coiistitutuin."


II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


305


the Three Chapters ; if you have condemned
them, ill ;icc()rdance with those things which
you did before, we have ah-eady many such
statements and need no more ; but if you
have Avritten now something contrary to
these things which were done by you before,
you have condemned yom-self by youi- own
writing, since jon have departed from
orthodox doctrine and have defended im-
piety. And how can you expect us to re-
ceive such a document from you ? "

And when this answer was given by the
most pious Emperor, he did not send
through the same deacon any document in
writing from himself. And all this was
done without writing as also to your blessed-
ness.

[He then, according to all the MSS., jpi'e-
sented certain documents to he read, in the
MS. printed hj Labhe and Cossart, Tom.
v., col. 549 et seqq. These are fewer than
in the Paris MS., ivhlch last also contains
the following just after the reading of the
documents and after the Council had de-
clared that they i)roved the Emperor''s zeal
for the faith. ~\

Constantine, the most glorious Quaestor,
said : While I am still present at your holy
council by reason of the reading of the docu-
ments which have been presented to you,
I would say that the most pious Emperor
has sent a minute [forniam), to your Holy
Synod, concerning the name of Yigilius,
that it be no more inserted in the holy dip-
tychs of the Church, on account of the im-
piety which he defended. Neither let it be
recited by you, nor retained, either in the
church of the royal city, or in other churches
which are intrusted to you and to the other
bishops in the State committed by God to


his rule. And when you hear this minute,
again you will perceive by it how much the
most serene Emperor cares for the unity
of the holy churches and for the purity of
the holy mysteries.

[The letter was then read.]

The holy Synod said : AVhat has seemed
good to the most pious Emperor is congru-
ous to the labours which he bears for the
unity of the churches. Let us preserve
unity to (ad) the Apostolic See of the most
holy Church of ancient Eome, carrying out
all things according to the tenor of what has
been read. De proposita vero qusestione
quod jam promisimus procedat.

NOTES.

Hefele understands that the Council heard
and approved this letter of the Emperor's, but
that the " Emperor did not mean entirely to
break off communion with the Ai^ostolic see,
neither did he wish the Synod to do so"
{Hist. Councils, Vol. IV., p. 32G), as indeed he
says in his letter.

The Ballerini consider this letter of the
Emperor's to be spurious, but (says Hefele)
" on insufficient grounds " (/. c, p. 326, note 3).
The expressions used by the Emperor may
uot unnaturally be somewhat startling to those
holding the theological position of the Bal-
lerini : " We will not endure to receive the
spotless communion from him nor from any
one else who does not condemn this impiety

. . lest we be found thus communicating
with the impiety of Nestorius and Theodore."

It is noteworthy that the Fifth Ecumenical
Council should strike the name of the reign-
ing Pope from the diptychs as a father of
heresy ; and that the Sixth Ecumenical Synod
should anathematize another Pope as a here-
tic !


THE SENTENCE OF THE SYNOD


{From the Acts. Collatiou A^III., L. and C, Coyic, Tom. V., col. 562.)


Our Great (toJ and Saviour Jesus Christ,
as we learu from tlie parable in the Gospel,
distributes taleuts to each man according


a suitable definition of the right faith might
be set forth by us all. Moreover the niost
pious Emperor, according to what had


to his ability, and at the fitting time demands seemed good between us, exhorted both


an account of the work done by every man,
And if he to whom but one talent has been
committed is condemned because he has
not worked with it but only kept it without
loss, to how much greater and more horri-
ble judgment must he be subject who not
only is negligent concerning himself, but
even places a stumbling-block and cause of
offence in the way of others ? Since it is
manifest to all the faithful that whenever
any question arises concerning the faith,
not only the impious man himself is con-
demned, but also he who when he has the


him and us to meet together, because it is
comely that the priesthood should after
common discussion impose a common faith.
On this account we besought his reverence
to fulfil his written promises ; for it was
not right that the scandal with regard to
these Three Chapters shoidd go any further,
and the Church of God be disturbed there-
by. And to this end we brought to his re-
membrance the great examples left us by
the Apostles, and the traditions of the Fath-
ers. For although the grace of the Holy
Spirit abounded in each one of the Apostles,


power to correct impiety in others, neglects so that no one of them needed the counsel
to do so.^ of another in the execution of his work, yet

We therefore, to whom it has been com- 1 they were not willing to define on the ques-
mitted to rule the church of the Lord, fear- tion then raised touching the circumcision
ing the curse which hangs over those who of the Gentiles, until being gathered together
negligently perform the Lord's work, hasten they had confirmed their own several say-
to preserve the good seed of faith pure from , ings by the testimony of the divine Script-
the tares of impiety which are being sown ures.


And thus they arrived unanimously at
this sentence, which they wrote to the Gen-
'. tiles : " It has seemed good to the Holy


by the enemy

When, therefore, we saw that the follow
ers of Nestorius were attempting to intro-
duce their impiety into the church of God Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no other
through the impious Theodore, who was burden than these necessary things, that ye
bishop of Mo))suestia, and through his im- abstain from things offered to idols, and
pious writings ; and moreover through those 1 from blood, and from things strangled, and
things which Theodoret impiously wrote, from fornication."

and through the wicked epistle which is But also the Holy Fathers, who from time

said to have been written by Ibas to Maris to time have met in the four holy councils,

the Persian, moved by all these sights we following the example of the ancients, have

rose up for the correction of what was going b}' a common discussion, disposed of by a

on, and assembled in this royal city called fixed decree the heresies and questions

thither by the will of God and the bidding which had si)rung up, as it was certainly

of the most religious Emperor. known, that by common discussion when

And because it happened that the most the matter in dispute was presented by each

religious Yigili us stopping in this royal city, side, the light of truth expels the darkness


was present at all the discussions with regard
to the Three Chapters, and had often con-
demned them orally and in writing, neverthe


of falsehood.

Nor is there any other way in which the
truth can be made manifest when there are


less afterwards he gave his consent in writ- discussions concerning the faith, since each
ing to be present at the Council and examine , one needs the helj) of his neighbour, as we


together with us the Three Chaptei's, that


' This, of course, refers to Pope Vigilius.


read in the Proverbs of Solomon : " A

lu-other helping his brother shall be exalted

I like a walled city ; and he shall be strong


11. CONSTANTmOPLE. A.D. 553


307


as a well-founded kingdom ; " and again in
Ecolesiastes he says : " Two are better than
one ; because they have a good reward for
their labour."

So also the Lord himself says : " Verily
I say unto you that if two of you shall agree
upon earth as touching anything they shall
seek for, they shall have it from my Father
which is in heaven. For wheresoever two
or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them."

But when often he had been invited by
us all, and when the most glorious judges
had been sent to him by the most religious
Emperor, he promised to give sentence
himself on the Three Chapters (sententiam
/iroferre) : And when we heard this answer,
having the Apostle's admonition in mind,
that " each one must give an account of
himself to God," and fearing the judgment
that hangs over those who scandalize one
even of the least important, and knowing
how much sorer it must be to give oflfeuce
to so entirely Christian an Emperor, and to
the people, and to all the Churches ; and
further recalling what was said by God to
Paul : " Fear not, but speak, and be not
silent, for I am with thee, and no one can
harm thee." Therefore, being gathered to-
gether, before all things we have briefly
confessed that we hold that faith which our
Lord Jesus Christ, the true God, delivered
to his holy Apostles, and through them to
the holy churches, and which they who after
them Avere holy fathers and doctors, handed
down to the people credited to them.

We confessed that we hold, preserve, and
declare to the hoi}' churches that confession
of faith which the 318 holy Fathers more at
length set forth, who were gathered together
at Nice, who handed down the holy mat he-
ma or creed. Moreover, the 150 gathered
together at Constantinople set forth our
faith, who followed that same confession of
faith and explained it. And the consent of
the 200 holy fathers gathered for the same
faith in the first Council of Ephesus. And
what things were defined by the 630 gathered
at Chalcedon for the one and the same faith,
which they both followed and taught. And
all those who from time to time have been
condemned or anathematized by the Catho-
lic Church, and by the aforesaid four Coun-
cils, we confessed that we hold them con-
demned and anathematized. And when we
had thus made profession of our faith we


began the examination of the Three Chap-
ters, and first we brought into review the
.matter of Theodore of Mopsuestia; and
I when all the blasphemies contained in his
w'ritings were made- manifest, we marvelled
at the long-sufi'eriug of God, that the tongue
and mind which hud framed such blasphe
mies were not immediately consumed by the
divine fire ; and we never woiild have suf-
fered the reader of the aforenamed blas-
phemies to proceed, fearing [as we didj the
indignation of God for their record alone
i (as each blasphemy surpassed its prede-
I cessor in the magnitude of its impiety and
:uoved from its foundation the mind of the
hearer) had it not been that we saw they
who gloried in such blasphemies stood in
need of the confusion which would come
upon them through their manifestation.
So that all of us, moved with indignation by
these blasphemies against God, both dur-
ing and after the reading, broke forth into
denunciations and anathematisms against
! Theodore, as if he had been living and
present. O Lord be merciful, we cried, not
even devils have dared to utter such things
against thee.

O intolerable tongue ! O the depravity
of the man ! O that high hand he lifted
up against his Creator ! For the wretched
man who had promised to know the Script-
ures, had no recollection of the words of
the Prophet Hosea, " Woe unto them ! for
they have fled from me : they are become
famous because they were impious as touch-
I iug me ; they spake iniquities against me,
and when they had thought them out, they
spake the violent things against me. There-
fore shall they fall in the snare by reason
of the wickedness of their own tongues.
Their contempt shall turn into their own
bosom : because they have transgressed my
covenant and have acted impiously against
my laws."

To these curses the impious Theodore is
justly subject. For the prophecies con-
cerning Christ he rejected and hastened to
destroy, so far as he had the power, the
great mystery of the dispensation for our
salvation ; attempting in many ways to
shew the divine words to be nothing but
fables, for the mirth of the gentiles, and
spurned the other prophetic announce-
ments made against the impious, especially
that which the divine Habacuc said of those
who teach falsely, " Woe unto him that


308


11. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


giveth his neighbour drink, tluit pattest
tby bottle to liini and makest liini drunken
tliat thou njavest h)ok on their nakedness,"
that is, tlieir doctrines full of darkness and
altogether foreign to the light.

And why should we adtl anything further?
For anyone can take in his hands the writ-
ings of the iinpions Theodore or the im-
pious chapters which from his im])ious
writings were inserted by us in our acts,
and find the incredible foolishness and the
detestable things which he said. For we
are afraid to j)roceed further and again to
remember these infamies.

There was also read to us what had been
written by the hoi}' Fathers against him,
and his foolishness which excetnled that of
all hen;tics, and moreover the histories and
the imperial laws, setting forth his impiety
from the beginning, and since after all these
things the defenders of his im})iety, glory-
ing in the injuries uttered by him against
his Creator, said that it was not right to
anathematize him after death, although we
knew the ecclesiastical tradition concern-
ing the impious, that even after death, here-
tics are anathematized; nevertheless we
thought it necessary concerning this also to
make examinaticm, and there were found in
the acts how divers heretics had been anath-
ematized after death ; and in many ways
it was manifest to us that those who were
saying this cared nothing for the judgment
of God, nor for the A])ostolic announce-
ments, nor for the tradition of the Fathers.
And we would like to ask them what they
have to say to the Lord's having said of
himself : " Whosoever should have believed
in him, is not judged : but who should not
have believed in him is judged already,
because he hath not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God," and
of that exclamation of the A])ostle : Al-
though we or an angel from heaven were to
preach to you another gospel than that we
have preached unto you, let him be anath-
ema: as we have said, so now I sav again,
If anyone preach to you another gospel
than that you have received, let him be
anathema."

For when the Lord says : "he is judg(Hl
already," and when the Apostle anathema-
tizes even angels, if they teach anything
different from what we have preached, how
can (!ven those who dare all things, pre-
sume to say that these words refer only to


the living? or are they ignorant, or is it not
rather that they feign to be ignorant, that
the judgment t)f anathema is nothing else
than that of separation from God? For
the impious ])ers()n, although he niav not
have been verl)ally anathematized by i;ny-
one, nevertheless he really is anathema-
tized, having se[)arated himself from the
true life by his impiety.

For what have they to answer to the
Apostle again when he says, " A man that
is an heretic reject after the first and
second corrections. Knowing that such a
man is perverse, and sins, and is con-
demned by himself."

In accordance with which words Cyril of
blessed memory, in the books which he
wrote against Theodore, says as follows :
They are to be avoided who are in the
grasp of such awful crimes whether they be
among the quick or not. For it is neces-
sary always to tlee from that which is hurt-
ful, and not to have respect of persons, but
to consider what is pleasing to God. And
again the same Cyril of holy memory, writ-
ing to John, bishop of Antioch, and to the
synod assembled in that city concerning
Theodore who was anathematized together
with Nestorius, says thus : It was there-
fore necessary to keep a brilliant festival,
since every voice which agreed with the
blasphemies of Nestorius had been cast out
no matter whose. For it ])roceeded against
all those who held these same opinions or
had at one time held them, which is ex-
actly what we and your holiness have said :
AVe anathematize those who say that there
are two Sons and two Christs. For one is
he who is preached by us and you, as we
have said, Christ, the Sou and Lord, only
begotten as man, according to the saying
of the most learned Paul. And also in
his letter to Alexander and Martinian and
John and Paregorius and Maxin.us, pres-
byters and monastic fathers, and those who
with them were leading the solitary life,
he so says : The holy synod of Ephesus,
gathered together according to the will of
God against the Nestoriau perfidy with a
just and keen sentence condemned to-
gether with him tlu^ empty words of those
who afterwards should embrace or Avho
had in time past embraced the same
opinions with him, and who presumed to
say or write any such thing, laying upon
them an e<iual condemnation. For it fob


11. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


309


lowed naturally that when one was con-
demned for sncli profane emptiness of
speech, the sentence should not come
against one only, but (so to speak) against
every one of their heresies or calumnies,
which they utter against the pious doctrines
of the Christ, worshipping two Sons, and
dividing the indivisible, and bringing in the
crime of man-worship {antliropolatry), both
into heaven and earth. For with us the
holy multitude of the supernal spirits adore
one Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover several
letters of Augustine, of most religious
memory, who shone forth resplendent
among the African bishops, were read,
shewing that it was quite right that here-
tics should be anathematized after death.
And this ecclesiastical tradition, the other
most reverend bishops of Africa have pre-
served : and the holy Roman Church as
well had anathematized certain bishops
after their death, although they had not
been accused of any falling from the faith
during their lives : and of each we have the
evidence in our hands.

But since the disciples of Theodore and
of his impiety, who are so manifestly ene-
mies of the truth, have attempted to bring
forward certain passages of Cyril of holy
memory and of Proclus, as though they had
been written in favour of Theodore, it is
opportune to fit to them the words of the
prophet when he says: " The ways of the
Lord are right and the just walk therein ;
but the wicked shall be weak in them."
For these, evilly receiving the things which
have been well and opportunely written by
the holy Fathers, and making excuses in
their sins, quote these words. The fathers
do not appear as delivering Theodore
from anathema, but rather as economical-
ly using certain expressions on account
of those who defended Nestorius and
his im}nety, in order to draw them away
from this error, and to lead them to perfec-
tion and to teach them to condemn not
only Nestorius, the disciple of the impiety,
but also his teacher Theodore. So in these
very words of economy the Fathers shew
their intention on this point, that Theodore
should be anathematized, as has been
abundantly demonstrated by us in our acts
from the writings of Cyril and Proclus of
holy memory with regard to the condem-
nation of Theodore and his impiety. And
such economy is found in divine Scripture :


and it is evident that Paul the Apostle
made use of this in the beginning of his
ministry, in relation to those who had been
brought up as Jews, and circumcised Timo-
thy, that by this econoni}' and condescen-
sion he might lead them on to perfection.
But afterwards he forbade circumcision, writ-
ing thus to the Galatians : " Behold, I Paul
say to you, that if ye be circumcised Christ
profiteth you nothing." But we found that
that Avliich heretics were wont to do, the de-
fenders of Theodore had done also. For
cutting out certain of the things which the
holy Fathers had wi*itten, and placing with
them and mixing up certain false things of
their own, they have tried by a letter of
Cyril of holy memory as though from a
testimony of the Fathers, to free from
anathema the aforesaid impious Theodore :
in which very passages the truth was de-
monstrated, when the parts which had
been cut off were read in their proper order,
and the falsehood was thoroughly evinced
by the collation of the true. But in all
these things, they who spake such vani-
ties, " trusted in falsehood," as it is writ-
ten, " they trust in falsehood, and speak
vanity ; they conceive grief and bring
forth iniquity, weaving the spider's web."
AVhen we had thus considered Theodore
and his impiety, we took care to have re-
cited and inserted in oui- acts a few of these
things which had been impiously written
by Theodoret against the right faith and
against the Twelve Chaj^ters of St. Cyril
and against the First Council of Ephesus,
also certain things written by him in de-
fence of those impious ones Theodore and
Nestorius, for the satisfaction of the read-
er ; that all might know that these had been
justly cast out and anathematized. In the
third place the letter which is said to have
been written by Ibas to Maris the Persian,
was brought forward for examination, and
we found that it, too, should be read.
When it was read immediately its impiety
was manifest to all. And it was right to
make the condemnation and anathematism
of the aforesaid Three Chapters, as even to
this time there had been some question on
the sul^ject. But because the defenders of
these impious ones, Theodore and Nesto-
rius, were scheming in some way or other
to confirm these persons and their impiety,
and were saying that this impious letter,
which praised and defended Theodore and


310


11. CONSTAiXTIXOPLE. A.U. 50;i


Nestorins and their impiety, liad beeu re-
ceived by the holy Coiiueil of Chalcedon ;
we thought it necessary to shew that the
holy synod was free of the impiety which
was eontaintnl in that letter, that it might
be clear that tlit\v who say such things do
not do so with the favour of this holy coun-
cil, but that through its name they may con-
firm their own im])iety. And it Avas shewn
in the acts that in former times Ibas had
been accused because of the very impiety
which is contained in this letter ; at first by
Proclus, of holy memory, the bishop of
Constantinople, and aft(n'wards by Theodo-
sius, of i)ious memory, and by Flavian, avIio
was ordained bishop in succession to Pro-
clus, who delegated the examination of the
matter to Photius, bishop of Tyre, and to
Eustathius, bishop of the city of Bey root.
Afterwards the same Ibas, being found
guilty, was cast out of his bishopric. Such
was the state of the case, how could anyone
presume to say that that impious letter was
received by the holy council of Chalcedon,
and that the holy council of Chalcedon
agreed with it throughout ? Nevei-theless,
in order that they who thus calumniate the
holy council of Chalcedon may have no fur-
ther opportunity of doing so, we ordered to
be recited the decisions of the holy Synods,
to wit, of fii'st E])hesus, and of Chalctnlon,
with regard to the Epistles of Cyril of
blessed memory and of Leo, of pious mem-
ory, sometime Pope of Old Pome. And
since Ave had learned from these that noth-
ing Avritten by anyone else ought to be re-
ceived unless it had been proved to agree
Avith the orthodox faith of the holy Fathers,
Ave intei'ru])ted our ])roceedings so as to re-
cite also tli(! definition of the faith Avhicli
Avas set forth by the holy council of Chalce-
don, so that Ave might compare the things
in the epistle with this decree. And when
this Avas done it Avas ]ierfectly clear that the
contents of the epistle were Avholly oppo-
site to those of the definition.

For the definition agreed with the one and
unchanging faith set forth as Avell by the
318 holy Fathers as by the 150 and by
those Avho assembled at the first synod at
Ej)liesus. Put that im]iious letter, on the
other h;ind, contained the blasphcMuies of
the her(;tics Theodore and Nestorius, and
defended them, and calls tlnun doctors,
while it calls the holy Fathers heretics.

And this avc made manifest to all, that


^ Ave did not have any intention of omitting
the Fathers of the first and second interlo-
cutions, which the followers of Theodore
I and Nestorius cited on their side, but these
and all the others having been read and
their contents examined, Ave found that the
aforesaid Ibas Avas not allowed to be re-
ceiA'ed Avithout being compelled to anathe-
matize Nestorius and his impious teachings,
Avhicli Avero defended in that epistle. And
I this the rest of the religious bishops of the
! aforesaid holy Council did as well as those
I tAvo Avhose interlocutions certain tried to
' use.

I For this they observed in the case of
Theodoret, and required him to anathema-
I tize those things of which he Avas accused.
If therefore they were Avilling to alloAV the
reception of Ibas in no other njanner unless
he condemned the impiety Avliich was con-
tained in his letters, and subscribed the
definition of faith ado])ted by the Council,
how can they attempt to make out that this
impious letter was received by the same
holy council ? For Ave are taught, " What
felloAvship hath right(H)usness Avith un-
righteousness V and Avhat communion hath
light with darkness? And Avhat concord
hath Christ with Belial? Or Avhat ])art
hath he that believeth Avith an infidel ?
And Avhat agreement hath the tem])le of
God Avith idols."

Having thus detailed all that has been
done by us, Ave again confess that A\'e
receive the four holy Synods, that is, the
Nicene, the Constantinopolitan, the first of
Ejjhesus, and that of Chalcedon, and AA'e
have taught, and do teach all that they
defined respecting the one faith. And Ave
account those avIio do not receive these
things aliens from the Catholic Church.
Moreover Ave condenm and anathematize,
together Avitli all the other heretics Avho
have been condemned and anathematized
by the before-mentioned four holy Synods,
and by the holy Catholic and Apostolic
Clnu'ch, Theodore Avho Avas ]3ishop of
Mopsuestia, and his impious Avritings, and
also those things Avhicli Theodoret im-
piously wrote against the right faith, and
against the Taa'cIvc Chapters of th(>. holy
Cyril, and against the first Synod of Ephe-
sus, and also those Avhich he Avrote in
defence of Theodore and Nestorius. In
addition to these we also anathematize the
impious Epistle Avhicli Ibas is said to have


11. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


311


written to Maris, the Persian, which denies
that God the Word was incarnate of the
holy Mother of God, and ever Virgin Mary,
and accuses C3^ril of holy memory, who
taught the truth, as an heretic, and of the
same sentiments Avith Apolliiiaris, and
blames the first Synod of Epliesus as
deposing Nestorius without examination
and inquiry, and calls the Twelve Clia})ters
of the holy Cyril im[)ious, and contrary to
the right faith, and defends Theodorus and
Nestorius, and their impious dogmas and
writings. We therefore anathematize the
Three Chapters before-mentioned, that is,
the impious Theodore of Mopsuestia, with
his execrable writin;is, and those things
which Theodoret impiously wrote, and the
impious letter which is said to be of Ibas,
and their defenders, and those who have
written or do write in defence of them, or
who dare to say that they are correct, and
who have defended or attem])t to defend
their impiety with the names of the holy
Fathers, or of the holy Council of Chalce-
don. These things therefore being settled
with all accuracy, we, bearing in remem-
brance the promises made respecting the


holy Church, and who it was that said that
the gates of hell should not prevail against
her, that is, the deadly tongues of heretics ;
remembering also what was prophesied
respecting it by Hosea, saying, "I will
betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and
thou slialt know the Lord," and numbering
together with the devil, the father of lies,
the unbridled tongues of heretics who per-
severed in their impiety unto death, and
their most impious writings, will say to
them, " Behold, all ye kindle a fire, and
cause the fiame of the fire to grow strong,
ye shall walk in the light of your fire, and
the fiame which ye kindle." But we, hav-
ing a commandment to exhort the people
with right doctrine, and to speak to the
heart of Jerusalem, that is, the Church of
God, do rightly make haste to sow in
righteousness, and to reap the fruit of life ;
and kindling for ourselves the light of
knowledge from the holy Scriptures, and
the doctrine of the Fathers, we have con-
sidered it necessary to comprehend in cer-
tain Capitula, both the declaration of the
truth, and the condemnation of heretics,
and of their wickedness.


THE CAPITULA OF THE COUNCIL.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. V., col. 568.)

I.

If anyone shall not confess that the nature or essence of the Father, of the Son, and
of tlie Holy Ghost is one, as also the force and the power ; | if anyone does not confess]
a cousnbstantial Trinity, one Godhead to be worshipped in three subsistences or Persons :
let him be anathema. For there is but one God even the Father of whom are all things,
and one Lord Jesus Christ through whom are all things, and one Holy Spirit in whom are
all things.

II.

If anyone shall not confess that the Word of God has two nativities, the one from
all eternity of the Fathei", Avithout time and Avithout body ; the other in these last days,
coming doA\m from heaven and being made flesh of the holy and glorious Mary, Mother
of God aud always a virgin, and born of her : let him be anathema.

III.

If anyone shall say that the wonder-working Word of God is one [Person] and the
Christ that suftered another ; or shall say that God the Word was with the womau-born
Christ, or was in him as one person in another, but that he was not one and the same
our Lord eJesus Christ, the Word of God, incarnate and made man, and that his miracles
and the sufieriugs which of his own will he endui'ed in the llesh were not of the same
[Person] : let him be anathema.

IV.

If anyoue shall say that the union of the AVord of God to man was only according to
grace or energy, or dignify, or equality of honour, or authority, or relation, or effect, or
power, or according to good ])leasure in this sense that God the Word was pleased with
a man, that is to say, that he loved him for his own sake, as says the senseless Theodo-
ras, or [if anyone pretends that this union exists only] so far as likeness of name is con-
cerned, as the Nestorians understand, who call also the Word of God Jesus and Christ, and
even accord to the man the names of Christ and of Son, speaking thus clearly of two per-
sons, and only designating disingenuously one Person and one Christ when the reference
is to his honour, or his dignity, or his worship ; if anyone shall not acknowledge as the
Holy Fathers teach, that the union of God the Word is made Avith the Hesh animated
by a reasonable and living soul, and that such unicm is made synthetically and liypostat-
ically, and that therefore there is only one Person, to wit : our Lord Jesus Christ, one
of the Holy Trinity : let him be anathema. As a matter of fact the woi-d " union "
(t77<? €vai<;€Q}<;) has many meanings, and the partisans of Apolliuaris and Eutyches have
affirmed that these natures are confounded inter ,s(\ and have asserted a union produced
by the mixtur(3 of both. On the other hand the followers of Theodorus and of Xestorius
rejoicing in tlic^ division of the natures, have taught <-)nly a relative union. Mt^an while
the Holy Church of God, condemning equally the impiety of both sorts of heresies,
recognises the union of God the Word with the Hesh synthetically, that is to say, hypo-
statically. For in the mystery of Christ the syntlietical union not only })reserves un-
confusedly the natures which are united, but also allows no separation.

V.

If anyone understands the expression "one only Person of our Lord Jesus Christ"
in this sense, that it is the union of many h3'postases, and if he attenqits thus to intro-
duce into the mystery of Christ two hypostases, or two Persons, and, after having inti'O-


II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.I). 5.33 313

duced two persons, speaks of one Person only out of dignity, honour or worship, as both
Theodoras and Nestorius insanely have written ; if anyone shall calumniate the holy
Council of Chalcedon, pretending that it made use of this expression [one hypostasis] in
this impious sense, and if he will not recognize rather that the Word of God is united
with the flesh hypostatically, and that therefore there is but one hypostasis or one only
Person, and that the holy Council of Chalcedon has professed in this sense the one
Person of our Lord Jesus Christ: let him be anathema. For since one of the Holy
Trinity has been made man, viz.: God the Word, the Holy Trinity has not been in-
creased by the addition of another person or hy230stasis.

VI.

If anyone shall not call in a true acceptation, but only in a false acceptation, the
holy, glorious, and ever-virgin Mary, the Mother of God, or shall call her so only in a
relative sense, believing that she bare only a simple man and that God the word was not
incarnate of her, but that the incarnation of God the Word resulted only from the fact
that he united himself to that man who was born [of her] ; ^ if he shall calumniate the
Holy Synod of Chalcedon as though it had asserted the Virgin to be Mother of God
according to the impious sense of Theodore ; or if anyone shall call her the mother of a
man {av^pwiroroKov) or the Mother of Christ {XpcaToroKov), as if Christ w^ere not God,
and shall not confess that she is exactly and truly the Mother of God, because that God
the Word who before all ages was begotten of the Father Avas in these last days made
flesh and born of her, and if anyone shall not confess that in this sense the holy Synod
of Chalcedon acknowledged her to be the Mother of God : let him be anathema.

VII.

If anyone using the expression, " in two natures," does not confess that our one Lord
Jesus Christ has been revealed in the divinity and in the humanity, so as to designate
by that expression a difference of the natures of which an ineffable union is unconfusedly
made, [a union] in which neither the nature of the Word was changed into that of the
flesh, nor that of the flesh into that of the Word, for each remained that it was by
nature, the union being hypostatic ; but shall take the expression with regard to the
mystery of Christ in a sense so as to divide the parties, or recognising the two natures
in the only Lord Jesus, God the Word made man, does not content himself with taking
in a theoretical manner '^ the difference of the natures which compose him, wdiicli differ-
ence is not destroyed by the union between them, for one is composed of the two and
the two are in one, but shall make use of the number [two] to divide the natures or to
make of them Persons properly so called : let him be anathema.^

VIII.

If anyone uses the expression " of two natures," confessing that a union w^as made
of the Godhead and of the humanity, or the expression "the one nature made flesh of
God the Word," and shall not so understand those expressions as the holy Fathers have
taught, to wit : that of the divine and human nature there was made an hypostatic
union, whereof is one Christ; but from these expressions shall try to introduce one
nature or substance [made by a mixture] of the Godhead and manhood of Christ ; let him
be anathema. For in teaching that the only-begotten Word was united hypostatically
[to humanity] Ave do not mean to say that there was made a mutual confusion of natures,
but rather each [nature] remaining what it was, we understand that the Word w^as
united to the flesh. Wherefore there is one Christ, both God and man, consubstantial
wath the Father as touching his Godhead, and consubstantial with us as touching his

' The text here is uncertain, and the Latin and Greek do not I ^ T. e.. "as an abstraction (rfj Oeupia ijlovji)."

agree. Vide Hefele. | » The text here is uncertain. '


314


II. COXSTANTINOPLK. A.D. 553


manhood. Therefore they are eqiially eonderanetl and anathematized by the Church of
God, who divide or part the iny.stery of the divine dispensation of Christ, or who intro-
duce confusion into that mystery.

IX.

If anyone shall take the expression, Christ ou<j;ht to be worshipped in his two
natures, in the sense that he wishes to introduce thus two adorations, the one in special
relation to God the Word and the other as ])ertaininp; to the man ; or if anyone to get
rid of the flesh, [that is of the humanity of Christ,] or to mix toj^ether the divinity and
the humanity, shall s[)eak monstrously of one only nature or essence {(pvcni^ ijyovv ovaiav)
of the united (natures), and so worshiji Christ, and does not venerate, by one adoration,
God the AVord made man, together with his flesh, as the Holy Church has taught from
the beginning : let him be anathema.

X.

If anyone does not confess that our Lord Jesus Christ who was crucified in the flesh
is true God and the Lord of Glory and one of the Holy Trinity : let him be anathema.


XI.

If anyone does not anathematize Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, A]iollinaris, Xesto-
rius, Eutyches and Origeu, as well as their impious writings, as also all other heretics
already condemned and anathematized by the Holy Catholic and Ai)ostolic Church, and
by the aforesaid four Holy Synods and [if anyone does not equally anathematize J all
those who have held and hold or who in their impiety persist in holding to the end the
same opinion as those heretics just mentioned : let him be anathema.


NOTES.


Hefele.


(Hist. Councils, \o]. iv., p. 336.)

Halloix, Gai-nier,Basnage, Walcli and others
suppose, and Viuceuzi maintains with great
zeal, that the name of Origeu is a later insertion
in this anatlicmatisui, because {a) Theodore
Ascidas, the Origenist, was one of the most
influential nienjbcrs of the Synod, and would
certainly have prevented a condemnation of
Origen ; further, (b) because in this anathe-
matism only such heretics would be named as
had been condemned by one of the first four
Ecumenical Synods, which was not the case
with Origen ; (c) because this anathematism
is identical with tlie tenth in the b/j-okoyia of
the Emperor, but in the latter the name of
Origen is lacking ; and, finally, (d) because
Origen does not belon<j to the group of here-
tics to whom this anathematism refers. His
errors were quite diflerent.

All these considerations seem to me of in-
sufficient streno;tli, or mere conjecture, to
make an alteration in the text, and arbitrarily
to remove the name of Origen. As regards
the objection in connection with Theodore
Ascidas, it is known that the latter had al-
ready pronounced a formal anathema on Ori-
gen, and certainly he did the same this time,


if the Emperor wished it or if it seemed ad-
visable. Tlie second and fourth objections
have little weight. In regard to the third (e)
it is quite possible that either the Emperor
subsequently went further than in his bfioXo-
yia, or that the bishops at the fifth Synod, of
their own accord, added Origen, led on per-
haps by one or another anti-Origenist of their
number. "What, however, chiefly determines
us to the retention of the text is : (a) that the
copy of the sjmodal Acts extant in the Roman
archives, which has the highest credibility,
and was probably prepared for Yigilitis him-
self, contains the nanie of Origen in the elev-
enth anathematism ; and {b) that the monks
of the new Lama in Palestine, who are known
to have been zealous Origenists, withdrew
Church communion from the bishops of Pales-
tine after these had subscribed the Acts of
the fifth Synod. In the anathema on the Three
Chapters these Origenists could find as little
ground for such a rupture as their friends and
former cnlloague Ascidas ; it could only be by
tlie synod attacking their darling Origen. (c)
Finally, only on the ground that the name of
Origen really stood in the eleventh anathe-
matism, can we explain the widely-circiilated
ancient rumour that our Synod anathematized
Origen and the Origenists.


II. COAtSTA:^TINOPLE. A.D. 553 315


XII.

If anyone defends the impious Theodore of Mopsuestia, who has said that the Word
of God is one person, but that another person is Christ, vexed by the sufferings of the
soul and the desires of the flesh, and separated little by little above that which is infe-
rior, and become better by the progress in good works and irreproachable in his manner
of life, as a mere man was baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, and obtained by this baptism the grace of the Holy Spirit, and became
worthy of Souship, and to be worshipped out of regard to the Person of God the Word
(just as one worships the image of an emperor) and that he is become, after the resur-
rection, unchangeable in his thoughts and altogether without sin. And, again, this same
impious Theodore has also said that the union of God the AVord with Christ is like to
that which, according to the doctrine of the Apostle, exists between a man and his wife,
"They twain shall be in one flesh." The same [Theodore] has dared, among numerous
other blasphemies, to say that when after the resurrection the Lord breathed upon his
disciples, saying, " Eeceive the Holy Ghost," he did not really give them the Holy
Spirit, but that he breathed upon them only as a sign. He likewise has said that the
profession of faith made by Thomas when he had, after the resurrection, touched the
hands and the side of the Lord, viz. : " My Lord and my God," was not said in reference
to Christ, but that Thomas, filled with wonder at the miracle of the resurrection, thus
thanked God who had raised up Christ. And moreover (which is still more scandalous)
this same Theodore in his Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles compares Christ to
Plato, Manichseus, Epicurus and Marcion, and saj's that as each of these men having
discovered his own doctrine, had given his name to his disciples, who Avere called Platon-
ists, Manicheans, Epicureans and Marcionites, just so Christ, having discovered his doc-
trine, had given the name Christians to his disciples. If, then, anyone shall defend this
most impious Theodore and his impious writings, in which he vomits the blasphemies
mentioned above, and countless others besides against our Great God and Saviour Jesus
Christ, and if anyone does not anathematize him or his impious writings, as well as all
those who protect or defend him, or who assert that his exegesis is orthodox, or who
write in favour of him and of his impious works, or those who share the same opinions, or
those who have shared them and still continue unto the end in this heresy : let him be
anathema.

XIII.

If anyone shall defend the impious writings of Theodoret, directed against the true
faith and against the first holy Synod of Ephesus and against St. Cyril and his XII.
Anathemas, and [defends] that which he has written in defence of the impious Theodore
and Nestorius, and of others having the same opinions as the aforesaid Theodore and Nes-
torius, if anyone admits them or their impiety, or shall give the name of impious to the
doctors of the Church who profess the hypostatic union of God the Word ; and if any-
one does not anathematize these imj^ious writings and those who have held or who hold
these sentiments, and all those who have written contrary to the true faith or against
St. Cyril and his XII. Chapters, and who die in their impiety : let him be anathema.

XIY.

If anyone shall defend that letter which Ibas is said to have written to Maris the
Persian, in which he denies that the Word of God incarnate of Mary, the Holy Mother
of God and ever-virgin, was made man, but says that a mere man was born of her, whom
he styles a Tem]ile, as though the Word of God was one Person and the man another
person ; in which letter also he reprehends St. Cyril as a heretic, when he teaches the
right faith of Christians, and charges him with ^^Titing things like to the wicked Apollinai'is.
In addition to this he vituperates the First Holy Council of Ephesus, aflirming that it
deposed Nestorius without discrimination and without examination. The aforesaid im-
pious epistle styles the XII. Chapters of Cyril of blessed memory, impious and contrary


316 II. CONSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. 553

to the ri^lit faith and defends Theodore and Nestorins and their impions teachings and
■writings. If anyone therefore shall defend the aforementioned epistle and shall not
anathematize it and those -who defend it and say that it is right or that a ])art of it is
right, or if anyone shall defend those "who have Avritten or shall ^rite in its favour, or in
defence of the impieties which are contained in it, as well as those who shall ]n-esnme
to defend it or the iTnpieties which it contains in the name of the Holy Fathers or of
the Holy Synod of Chalcedon, and shall remain in these oflences unto the end : let him
be anathema.


EXCURSUS ON THE XV. ANATHEMAS AGAINST ORIGEN.

That Origan was condemned by name in the Eleventh Canon of this council there seems
no possible reason to doubt. I have given in connexion with that canon a full discussion of
the evidence upon which our present text rests. But there arises a further question, to
wit, Did the Fifth Synod examine the case of Origen and finally adopt the XT. Anathemas
against him which are usually found assigned to it ? It would seem that with the evidence
now in our possession it would be the height of rashness to give a dogmatic answer to this
question. Scholars of the highest repute have taken, and do take to-day, the opposite sides
of the case, and each defends his own side with marked leaniing and ability. To my mind
the chief difiiculty in supposing these anathematisms to have been adopted by the Fifth
Ecumenical is that nothing whatever is said about Origen in the call of the council, nor in
any of the letters written in connexion with it ; all of which would seem unnatural had there
been a long discussion upon the matter, and had such an important dogmatic definition
been adopted as the XV. Anathemas, and yet on the other hand there is a vast amount of
literature subsequent in date to the council which distinctly attributes a detailed and care-
ful examination of the teaching of Origen and a formal condemnation of him and of it to
this council.

The XV. Anathemas as we now have them were discovered b}- Peter Lambeck, the Libra-
rian of Vienna, in the XVIIth century ; and bear, in the Vienna MS., the heading, "Canons
of the 165 holy Fathers of the holy fifth Synod, held in Constantinople." But despite this,
"SValch {Kdzerhist., Vol. vii., p. 661 ct seqq. and 671 ; Vol. viij., j). 281 et seqq.) ; Dullinger
{Church History, Eng. Trans., Vol. v., p. 203 et seqq.) ; Hefele (Hist. Councils, Vol. iv., p. 221
sq.), and many others look upon this caption as untnistworthy. Evagrius, the historian, dis-
tinctly says that Origen was condemned with special anathemas at this Council, but his evi-
dence is likewise (and, as it seems to me, too peremptorily) set aside.

Cardinal Noris, in his Dissertatio Historica de Synodo Qui))ta, is of opinion that Origen
was twice condemned by the Fifth Synod ; the first time by himself before the eight sessions
of which alone the acts remain, and again after those eight sessions, in connexion with two
of his chief followers, Didymus the Blind and the deacon Evagrius. The Jesuit, John Gar-
nier wrote in oi^position to Noris; biit liis work, while exceedingly clevei", is considered by
the learned to contain (as Hefele says) " many statements [which] are rash, arbitrary, and
inaccurate, and on the -whole it is seen to be written in a spirit of opposition to Noris." ' In
defence of Noris's main contention came forward the learned Ballerini brothers, of Verona.
In their Defevsio dissertation is Norisinn<v de S//». V. adv. diss. P. Gurnerii, they expand and
amend Noris's hypothesis. But after all is said the matter remains involved in the great-
est obscurity, and it is far easier to bring forward objections to the arguments in defence
of either view than to bring forward a theory which will satisfy all the conditions of the
problem.

' Hefele, Hut. CounciU, Vol. IV., p. 230, Dote.


II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553 317


Those who deny that the XV. Anathemas were adopted by the Fifth Synod agree in
assigning them to the -'Home Synod," that is a Synod at Constantinople of the bishops sub-
ject to it, in A.D. 543. Hefele takes this view and advocates it with much cogency, but con-
fesses frankly, " We certainly possess no strong and decisive proof that the fifteen anathe-
matisms belong to the Constantinopolitan synod of the year 543 ; but some probable grounds
for the opinion may be adduced.' This appears to be a somewhat weak statement with
which to overthrow so much evidence as there can be produced for the opposite view. For
the traditional view the English reader will find a complete defence in E. B. Pusey, What is
of Faith with regard to Eternal Punishment ?

Before closing it will be well to call the attention of the reader to these words now found
in the acts as we have them :

" And we found that many others had been anathematised after death, also even Origen ;
and if any one were to go back to the times of Theophilus of blessed memoiy or further he
would have found him anathematised after death ; which also now your holiness and Vigil-
ius, the most religious Pope of Old Rome has done in his case." ^ It would seem that this
cannot possibly refer to anything else than a condemnation of Origen by the Fifth Ecumen-
ical Synod, and so strongly is Vincenzi, Origen'a defender, impressed with this that he de-
clares the passage to have been tampered with. But even if these anathemas were adopted
at the Home Synod before the meeting of the Fifth Ecumenical, it is clear that by including
his name among those of the heretics in the Xlth Canon, it practically ratified and made its
own the action of that Synod.

The reader will be glad to know Harnack's judgment in this matter. Writing of the
Fifth Council, he says : " It condemned Origen, as Justinian desired ; it condemned the
Three Chapters and consequently the Antiochene theology, as Justinian desired/' etc., and
in a foot-note he explains that he agrees with " Noris, the Ballerini, Moller (R. Encj^kl., xi.,
p. 113) and Loofs (pp. 287, 291) as against Hefele and Vincenzi."^ A few pages before, he
speaks of this last author's book as " a big work which falsifies history to justify the theses
of Halloix, to rehabilitate Origen and Vigilius, and on the other hand to ' remodel ' the
Council and partly to bring it into contempt." ^ Further on he says : " The fifteen anathe-
mas against Origen, on which his condemnation at the council was based, contained the fol-
lowing points. . . . Since the ' Three Chapters ' were condemned at the same time, Ori-
gen and Theodore were both got rid of. . . . Origen's doctrines of the consummation,
and of spirits and matter might no longer be maintained. The judgment was restored to
its place, and got back even its literal meaning." ^


1 Hefele, Hist. Councils, Vol. IV.. p. 223. I ■> Haraack. Sist. of Dogma, Vol. IV., p. 249 (Eng. Trans.).

2 Speech of Ascidas in the V. Session. | * Ibid., p. 245, note 2. s Ibid., p . 349.


THE ANATHEMAS AGAINST OEIGEN.


I.

If anyone asserts the fabulous pre-exist-
ence of souls, and shull assert the mon-
strous restoration which follows from it :
let him be anathema.


II.

If anyone shall say that the creation (ttjv
Trapaycoyyjvj of all reasonable things in-
cludes only intelligences {v6a<i) without
bodies and altogether immaterial, having
neither number nor name, so that there is
unity between them all by identity of sub-
stance, force and energy, and by their union
with and knowledge of God the Word ; but
that no longer desiring the sight of God,
they gave themselves over to worse things,
each one following his own inclinations,
and that they have taken bodies more or
less subtile, and have received names, for
among the heavenly Powers there is a dif-
ference of names as there is also a diflerence
of bodies; and thence some became and are
called Cherubims, others Seraphims, and
Principalities, and Powers, and Domina-
tions, and Thrones, and Angels, and as
many other heavenly orders as there may
be : let him be anathema.

in.

If anvone shall say that the sun, the
moon and the stars are also reasonable
beings, and that they have only become
what they are because they turned towards
evil : lot him be anathema.

IV.

If anyone shall say that the reasonable
creatures in whom the divine love had
grown cold have been hidden in gross bod-
ies such as ours, and hav(i been called men,
while those who hav(^ attained the lowest
degree of wickedness have shared cold and
ol)scure bodies and are become and called
demons and evil spirits : let him be anath-
ema.


If anyone sliall say that a psvchic
(■ylrvxtKTjv) condition has come from an


angelic or archangcdic state, and moreover
that a demoniac and a human condition
has come from a ])sychic condition, and
that from a human state they may become
again angels and demons, and that each
order of heavenly virtues is either all from
those below or from those above, or from
those above and below : let him be anath-


ema.


VI.


If anyone shall say that there is a two-
fold race of demons, of which the one
inchnles the souls of men and the other the
superior spirits who fell to this, and that
of all the number of reasonable ])eings
there is but one which has remained
unshaken in the love and contemplation
of God, and that that spirit is become
Christ and the king of all reasonable
beings, and that he has created ' all the
bodies which exist in heaven, on earth,
and between heaven and earth ; and
that the world which has in itself ele-
ments more ancient than itself, and which
exists by themselves, viz. : dryness, damp,
heat and cold, and the image (IBiav) to
which it was formed, was so formed, and
that the most holy and consubstantial
Trinity did not create the world, but that it
was created by the working inteiiigence
(Nov^ Srjfxioupryo'i) which is more ancient
than the world, and Avhich communicates
to it its being : let him be anathema.


VII.

If anyone shall say that Christ, of whom
it is said that he appeared in the form of
God, and that he was united before all
time with God the Word, and humbled
himself in these last days even to humanity,
liad (according to their ex])ression) pity
upon the divers falls which had appc^ared
in the spirits united in the same unity (of
which he himself is part), and that to

' The following is Hefele's note (Hist. Cout}cils, Vol. IV.,
p. 220, note 1 K

" riapayayeiv can in no way be tranplated, a? it has hitherto been,
by pra-trr<ires'!>is or ' passed over " : • That Christ has pone over
to all corporeity on heaven and earth," which pives no sense.
Ilapoyfii' means here, like napaytoyri in the second anatheniutism,
rrcnre, prodiircre. ' Tcate,' ' brinp into existence.' Siiicer, in
his T/ie.in»ru.f. completely overlooked this. '/. Stephani. s. vv.
, napdyki and napaytoyrj,^*


II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


319


restore them lie ])assed tlirougli divers
classes, bad different bodies and different
names, became all to all, an Angel among
Angels, a Power among Powers, has clothed
himself in the different classes of reason-
able beings with a form corresponding to
that class, and finally has taken flesh and
blood like ours and is become man for
men ; [if anyone says all this] and does
not profess that God the Word humbled
himself and became man : let him be
anathema.

VIII.

If anyone shall not acknowledge that
God the Word, of the same substance with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, and who
was made flesh and became man, one of
the Trinity, is Christ in every sense of the
word, but [shall aflirm] that he is so only
in an inacdKate manner, and because of
the abasement {Kevcoa-avra), as they call it,
of the intelligence {vov<;) ; if anyone shall
aftirm that this intelligence united {avvrjix-
ixevov) to God the Word, is the Christ in
the true sense of the word, while the Logos
is only called Christ because of this union
with the intelligence, and e converso that
the intelligence is only called God because


of the Logos


let him be anathema.


IX.


If anyone shall say that it was not the
Divine Logos made man by taking an ani-
mated body with a '^v')(ri XoytKrj and voepa,
that he descended into hell and ascended
into heaven, but shall pretend that it is the
Nov<; which has done this, that Nov<; of
which they say (in an impious fashion) he
is Christ properly so called, and that he is
become so by the knowledge of the Monad :
let him be anathema.


If anyone shall say that after the resur-
rection the body of the Lord was ethereal,
having the form of a sphere, and that such
shall be the bodies of all after the resur-
rection ; and that after the Lord himself
shall have rejected his true body and after
the others who rise shall have rejected
theirs, the nature of their bodies shall be
annihilated : let him be anathema.


XI.

If anyone shall say that the future judg-
ment signifies the destruction of the body
and that the end of the story will be an
immaterial i/rucrt?, and that thereafter there
will no longer be any matter, but only
spirit {vov<i) : let him be anathema.

XII.

If anyone shall say that the heavenly
Powers and all men and the Devil and evil
spirits are united with the Word of God in
all respects, as the Nov<; which is by them
called Christ and which is in the form of
God, and which humbled itself as they say;
and [if anyone shall say] that the Kingdom
of Christ shall have an end : let him be
anathema.

XIIL

If anyone shall say that Christ [i.e., the
JVou?] is in no wise different from other
reasonable beings, neither substantially nor
by wisdom nor by his power and might
over all things but that all will be placed at
the right hand of God, as well as he that is
called by them Christ [the Nov<;], as also
they were in the feigned pre-existence of
all things : let him be anathema.

XIV.

If anyone shall say that all reasonable
beings will one day be united in one, when
the hypostases as well as the numbers and
the bodies shall have disappeared, and that
the knowledge of the world to come will
carry with it the ruin of the worlds, and the
rejection of bodies as also the abolition of
[all] names, and that there shall be finally
an identity of the 'yv(oo-L<; and of the hypos-
tasis ; moreover, that in this pretended
apocatastasis, spirits only will continue to
exist, as it was in the feigned pre-exist-
ence : let him be anathema.

XV.

If anyone shall say that the life of the
spirits (vocbv) shall be like to the life which
was in the beginning while as yet the
spirits had not come down or fallen, so that
the end and the beginning shall be alike,
and that the end shall be the true measure
of the beginning : let him be anathema.


THE ANATHEMATISM8 OF THE EMPEROR JUSTINIAN AGAINST ORIGEN.


(LabLe aud Cossart, Concilia, Tom. v., col. 077.)


Whoever says or thinks that human souls
pre-existed, i.e., that they had previously been
spirits and holy powers, but that, satiated
with the vision of God, they had turned to
evil, and in this way the divine love in them
had died out (uTrt/zu-ycitra?) and they had there-
fore become souls (i//u;(as) and had been con-
demned to punishment in bodies, shall be an-
athema.

II.

If anyone says or thinks that the soul of
the Lord j^re-existed and was united with God
the Word before the Incarnation and Concep-
tion of the Virgin, let him be anathema.

III.

If anyone says or thinks that the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ was first formed in the
womb of the holy Virg'iu and that afterwards
there was united with it God the Word and
the pre-existing soul, let him be anathema.

IV.

If anyone says or thinks that the Word of
God has become like to all heavenly orders,
so that for the cherubim he was a cherub, for
the seraphim a seraph : in short, like all the
superior powers, let him be anathema.

V.

If anyone says or thinks that, at the resur-
rection, human bodies will rise spherical in


form and unlike our present form, let him be
anathema.

VI.

If anyone says that the heaven, the sun, the
moon, the stars, and the waters that are above
heavens, have souls, and are reasonable be-
ings, let him be anathema.

VII.

If anyone says or thinks that Christ the
Lord in a future time will be crucified for de-
mons as he was for men, let him be anathema.

VIII.

If anyone says or thinks that the power of
God is limited, and that he created as much
as he was able to compass, let him be anath-
ema.

IX.

If anyone says or thinks that the punish-
ment of demons and of impious men is only
temporary, and will one day have an end, and
that a restoration (aTroKaTao-Tao-is) will take
place of demons and of impious men, let him
be anathema.

Anathema to Origen and to that Adaman-
tius, Avho set forth these opinions together
with his nefarious and execrable and wicked
doctrine,^ and to whomsoever there is who
thinks thus, or defends these opinions, or in
any way hereafter at any time shall presume
to protect them.


' The reader should carefully study the entire tractate of the I ' The text is, I think corrupt, at all evenU the Latin and Greek
Emperor against Orisren of which these anatheniatisms are the I do not agree,
conclusion. It Ib found in Labbe and Cossart, aud in many other |
collections.


THE DECRETAL EPISTLE OF POPE VIGILIUS IN CONFm-
MATION OF THE FIFTH ECUMENICAL SYNOD.

HISTORICAL NOTE.

(Fleury. Hist EccL, Liv. xxxiii. 52.)

At last the Pope Vigilius resigned liimself to the advice of the Council, and six months
afterwards wrote a letter to the Patriarch Eutychius, wherein he confesses that he has been
wanting in charity in dividing from his brethren. He adds, that one ought not to be
ashamed to retract, when one recognises the truth, and brings forward the example of St.
Augustine. He says, that, after having better examined the matter of the Three Chapters,
he finds them worthy of condemnation. " We recognize for our brethren and colleagues all
those who have condemned them, and annul by this writing all that has been done by us or
by others for the defence of the three chapters."


THE DECKETAL LETTER OF POPE |

VIGILIUS. i

]

(The manuscript from which this letter was
printed was found in the Royal Library of
Paris by Peter de Marca and by him first
published, with a Latin translation and with
a dissertation. Both of these with the Greek
text are found in Labbe and Cossart's Con-
cilia, Tom. v., col. 596 et seqq.; also in Migne's
Patr. Lat., Tom. LXIX., col. 121 et seqq.
Some doubts have been expressed about its
genuineness and Harduin is of opinion that
the learned Jesuit, Garnerius, in his notes on
the Deacon Leberatus's Breviary, has proved
its supposititious character. But the learned
have not generally been of this mind but have
accepted the letter as genuine. )

Vigilius to his beloved brother Eutychius.

No one is ignorant of the scandals which
the enemy of the human race has stirred up
in all the world: so that he made each one
with a wicked object in view, striving in some
way to fulfil his wish to destroy the Church
of God spread over the whole world, not only
in his own name but even in ours and in
those of others to compose diverse things as
well in words as in writing ; in so much that
he attempted to divide us who, together with
our brethren and fellow bishops, are stopping
in this royal city, and who defend with
equal reverence the four synods, and sincere-
ly persist in the one and the same faith of
those four synods, by his sophistries and ma-
chinations he tried to part from them ; so
that we ourselves who were and are of the
same opinion as they touching the faith, went


aj^art into discord, brotherly love being de-
spised. ^

But since Christ our God, who is the true
light, whom the darkness comprehendeth not,
hath removed all confusion from our minds,
and hath so recalled peace to the whole world
and to the Church, so that what things should
be defined by us have been healthfully ful-
filled through the revelation of the Lord and
through the investigation of the truth.

Therefore, my dear brothers, I do you to
wit, that in common with all of you, our breth-
ren, we receive in all respects the four synods,
that is to say the Nicene, the Constantino-
politan, the first Ephesian, and the Chalce-
donian ; and we venerate them with devout
mind, and watch over them with all our mind.
And should there be any who do not follow
these holy synods in all things w'hich they
have defined concerning the faith, we judge
them to be aliens to the communion of the
holy and Catholic Church.

Wherefore on account of our desire that
you, my brothers, should know what we have
done in this matter, we make it known to you
by this letter. For no one can doubt how-
many were the discussions raised on account
of the Three Chapters, that is, concerning
Theodore, sometime bishop of Mopsuestia,
and his writings, as well as concerning the
writings of Theodoret, and concerning that
letter which is said to have been written by
Ibas to Maris the Persian : and how diverse
were the things spoken and written concerning
these Three Chapters, Now if in every busi-


1 In this sentence I have followed De Marca's Latin version, but
I must confess that I am not at all saHsfled with the construing
of the long phrase beginning Ovtius cis.


322


11. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


ness sound wisdom demands that there should
be a retractation of wliat was propounded after
examination, there ought to he no shame when
what was at first omitted is made public after
it is discovered byafui'ther studjof the truth.
[And if this is the case in ordinary affairs]
how much more in ecclesiastical strifes should
the same dictate of sound reason be observed '?
Esi^ecially since it is manifest that our Fath-
ers, and especially the blessed Augustine,
who was in very sooth illustrious in the Di-
vine Scriptures, and a master in Roman elo-
quence, retracted some of his own writings,
and corrected some of his own sayings, and
added what he had omitted and afterward
found out. We, led by their example never
gave over the study of the questions raised
by the controversy with regard to the before-
mentioned Three Chapters, nor our search for
passages in the writings of our Fathers which
were applicable to the matter.

As a result of tliis investigation it became
evident that in the sayings of Theodore of
Mo2:)suestia (which are s])oken against on all
hands) there are contained very many things
contrary to the right faith and to the teach-
ings of the holy Fathers ; and for this very
I'eason these same holy Fathers have left for
the instruction of the Church treatises which
they had written against him.

For among other blasphemies of his we
find that he openly said that God the Word
was one [Person] and Christ another [Per-
son], vexed with the passions of the soul
and with the desires of the flesh, and that he
little by little advanced from a lower to a
higher stage of excellence by the impi'ove-
ment (Trpo/coTrfj, per iwofcctum opcrinin) of his
works, and became irreprehensible in his
manner of life.^ And further he taught that
it was a mere man who was l)aptized in the
Name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, and that he received through
his bai:>tism the grace of the Holy Spirit, and
merited liis adoption ; and therefore that
Christ could be venerated in the same way
that the image of the Emperor is venerated \
as being the persona (et? TrporroiTroi) of God the
Word. And he also taiight tliat [only] after
his resurrection he became immutable in his I
thoughts and altogether impeccable.

Moreover he said that the union of the ]
Word of God was made with Christ as the
Apostle says the union is made between a [
man and his wife : They twain shall be one '
flesh; and that after his resurrect ion, when i


' The reader will notice that this ip hardly diptinguiphable
from the " moral growth " and "' ethical development " which the
modem " kenotists " attribute to the Incarnate Son of God.


the Lord breathed upon his disciples and said.
Receive the Holy Ghost, he did not give to
them the Holy Spirit. In like strain of pro-
fanity he dared to say that the confession
which Thomas made, when he touched the
hands and side of the Lord after his resur-
rection, saying, 'Sly Lord and my God, did
not apply to Christ (for Theodore did not
acknowledge Christ to be God) ; l)ut that
Thomas gave gl<n-y to God being filled with
wonder at the miracle of the resurrection,
and so said these words.

But what is still worse is this, that in inter-
preting the Acts of the Apostles, Theodm'e
makes Christ like to Plato, and Manichseus, and
Epicurus, and Marcian, saying : Just as each
of these were the authcn'S of their own peculiar
j teachings, and called their disciples after their
I own names, Platonists, and Manichaeans, and
Epicureans, and Marcionites, just so Christ
invented dogmas and called his followers
Christians after himself.

Let therefore the whole Catholic Church
know that justly and irreproachably we have
arrived at the conclusions contained in this
! our constitution. Wherefore we condemn
and anathematize Theodore, formerly bishop
of Mopsuestia, and his imi^ious writings, to-
gether with all other heretics, who (as is mani-
; fest) have been condemned and anathematized
b}' the four holy Synods aforesaid, and by the
Catholic Church : also the writings of Theo-
doret which are opposed to the right faith,
and are against the Twelve Chapters of St.
Cyril, and against the first Council of Ejihe-
sus, which wei-e written by him in defence of
Theodore and Nestorius.

Moreover Ave anathematize and condemn
the letter to the Persian heretic Maris, which
is said to have been written by Ibas, which
denies that Clirist the Woi'd was incarnate of
the holy Mother of God and ever - virgin
Mary, and was made man, but declares that a
mere man was born of her, and this man it
styles a temjile, so from this we are given to
understand that God the Word is one [Per-
son] and Christ another [Person]. Moreover
it calumniates Saint Cyril, tlie master and lier-
ald of the orthodox faith, calling him a here-
tic, and charging him with writing things
similar to Ajiollinaris ; and it i-eviles the first
Synod of Ephesus, as having condemned
Nestorius without deliberation or investiga-
tion ; it likewise declares the twelve chapters
of St. Cyril to be inqiiotis and contrary to the
right faith ; and further still it defends Theo-
dore and Nestorius, and their impious teach-
ings and writings.

Thei'efore we anathematize and condemn


II. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 553


323


the aforesaid impious Three Chapters, to-wit,
the impious Theodore of Mopsuestia and his
impious writings ; And all that Theodoret
impiously wrote, as well as the letter said to
have been written by Ibas, in which are con-
tained the above mentioned profane blasphe-
mies. We likewise subject to anathema who-
ever shall at any time believe that these chap-
ters should be received or defended ; or shall
attemjit to subvert this present condemna-
tion.

And further we define that they are our
brethren and fellow-j)riests who ever keep the
right faith set forth by those afore-mentioned
synods, and shall have condemned the above-
named Three Chapters, or even do now con-
demn them.

And further we annul and evacuate by this
present written definition of ours whatever
has been said by me (a me) or by others in
defence of the aforesaid Three Chapters.


Far be it from the Catholic Church that
' anyone should say that all the blasphemies
above related or they who held and followed
such things, were received by the before-men-
tioned four synod-s or by any one of them.
j For it is most clear, that no one was admitted
by the before-mentioned holy Fathers and
especially by the Council of Chalcedon, about
whom there was any suspicion, unless he had
first repelled the above-named blasphemies
and all like to them, or else had denied and
condemned the heresy or blasphemies of
which he was suspected.

Subscription.

May God preserve thee in health, most
honourable brother. Dated VI. Id. Dec. in
the xxijd year of our lord the Emperor Jus-
tinian, eternal Augustus, the xijth year after
the consulate of the illustrious Basil. ^


HISTORICAL EXCURSUS ON THE AFTER HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL.


Pope Vigilius died on his way home, but not until, as we have seen, he had accepted and
approved the action of the council in doing exactly that which he " by the authority of the
Apostolic See " in his Constitutum had forbidden it to do.'"^ He died at the end of 554 or the
beginning of 555.

Pelagius I., who succeeded him in the See of Rome, likewise confirmed the Acts of the Fifth
Synod. The council however was not received in all parts of the West, although it had ob-
tained the approval of the Pope. It was bitterly opjjosed in the whole of the north of Italy,
in England, France, and Spain, and also in Africa and Asia. The African opposition died out
by 559, but Milan was in schism until 571, when Pope Justin II. published his " Heuoticon."
In Istria the matter was still more serious, and when in 607 the bishop of Aquileia-Grado
with those of his suffragans who were subject to the Empire made their submission and were
reconciled to the Church, the other bishops of his jurisdiction set ujd a schismatical Patri-
archate at old Aquileia, and this schism continued till the Council of Aquileia in 700. But
before this the II. Council of Constantinople was received all the world over as the Fifth
Ecumenical Council, and was fully recognized as such by the Sixth Council in 680.


1 i.e. A.D. 553.

= The last sentence of the Coiutituttim, the sentence which the
Pope gave and which the council rejected, is as follows : " We or-
dain and decree that it be permitted to no one who stands in eccle-
siastical order of office, to write or bring forward, or undertake,
or teach anything contrary to the contents of this Constitutum in


I regard to the Three Chapters or. after this declaration begin a new
controversy about them. And Lf anything has already been done
or spoken in regard of the Three Chapters in contradiction of this

; our ordinance by anyone whomsoever, this we declare void by the
authority of the Apostolic See." It is perfectly clear that the Em-
peror is the " anyone " referred to.


y


THE SIXTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE THIRD COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


A.D. 680-681.


Emperor. — Constantine Pogonatus.
Pox)e. — Agatho I.


Historical Introduction.

Extracts from the Acts, Session I.

The Letter of Pojpe Agatho to the Em-
j>eror.

The Letter of the Roman Synod to the
Council.

Introductory Note.

Extracts from the Acts, Session YIIL

The Sentenr.e against the Monothelites,
Session XIII.


Elenchiis.

The Acclamations, Sessio7i XVI.

The Definition of Faith.

Abstract of tlte ProsphoDeticus to the
Emperor.

The Synodal Letter to Pope Agatho.

Excursus on the Condemnation of Pope
Ilonorius.

The Imperial Edict in abstract.


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

The Sixth Ecumenical Council met on November 7, G80, for its first session, and ended
its meetings, which are said to have been eighteen in number, on September IGth of the
next year. The number of bishops present was under three hundred and the minutes of the
last session have only 174 signatures attached to them.

"When the Emperor first summoned the council he had no intention that it should be
ecumenical. From the Sacras it appears that he had summoned all the Meti'opolitaus and
bishops of the jurisdiction of Constantinople, and had also informed the Archbishop of
Antioch that he might send Metropolitans and bishops. A long time before he had written
to Pope Agatho on the subject.

When the synod assembled however, it assumed at its first session the title " Ecumeni-
cal," and all the five patriarchs were represented, Alexandria and Jerusalem having sent
deputies although they were at the time in the hands of the infidel.

In this Council the Emperor presided in person surrounded by high court officials. On
his right sat the Patriarchs of Constantino2:)le and Antioch and next to them the representa-
tive of the Patriarch of Alexandria. On the Emperor's left were seated the representatives
of the Pope. In the midst were placed, as usual, the Holy Gosjoels. After the eleventh
session however the Emperor was no longer able to be jpresent, but returned and presided
at the closing meeting.

The sessions of the council were held in the domed hall (or possibly chapel) in the
imperial palace ; which, the Acts tell us, was called Trullo [Iv tw aeKpiTO) tov ^eiov TraXarLov,

TO) ovTio AeyojU.efo) TpdvAAw).

It may be intei'esting to remark that the Sacras sent to the bishops of Rome and Con-
stantinople are addressed, the one to " The Most holy and Blessed Archbishop of Old
Rome and Ecumenical Pope," and the other to "The Most holy and Blessed Archbishop of
Constantinople and Ecumenical Patriarch." Some of the titles given themselves by the
signers of the " Prosphoneticus " are interesting — "George, an humble presbyter of the
holy Roman Church, and holding the place of the most blessed Agatho, ecumenical Pope of
the City of Rome . . .," "John, an humble deacon of the holy Roman Church and
holding the place of the most blessed Agatho, and ecumenical Pope of the City of Rome
, . . ," " George, by the mercy of God bishop of Constantinople which is New Rome,"
"Peter a presbyter and holding the place of the Apostolic See of the great city Alexandria
. . . ," " George, an humble presbyter of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God, and
holding the place of Theodore the presbyter, beloved of God, who holds the place of the
Apostolic See of Jerusalem . . . ," "John, by the mercy of God bishop of the City of
Thessalonica, and legate of the Apostolic See of Rome," "John, the unworthy bishop of
Portus, legate of the whole Council of the holy Apostolic See of Rome," "Stephen, by the
mercy of God, bishop of Corinth, and legate of the Apostolic See of Old Rome."


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 609 et seqq.)


\After a history of the assembly of the
Council, the Acts begin with the Speech of
the Papal Legates, as follows ;]

Most benigD lord, in accordance with the
Sacra to om- most holy Pope ^ from your
God-instructed majesty, we have been sent
by him to the most holy footsteps of your
God-confirmed serenity, bearing with us his
suggestion (dva(f)opd<i, suggestionc) as well as
the other suggestion of his Synod equally
addressed to your divinely preserved Piety
by the venerable bishops subject to it, which
also we offered to your God-crowned Forti-
tude. Since, then, during the past forty-
six years, more or less, certain novelties in
expression, contrary to the Orthodox faith,
have been introduced by those who were at
several times bishops of this, your royal
and God-preserved city, to wit : Sergius,
Paul, Pyrrhus, and Peter, as also by Cynis,
at one time archbishop of the city of Alex-
andria, as well also as by Theodore, who was
bishop of a city called Pharan, and by cer-
tain others their followers, and since these
things have in no small degree brought con-
fusion into the Church throughout the whole
world, for they taught dogmatically that

* The word " our " omitted in the Latin.


there was but one will in the dispensation
of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
one of the Holy Trinity, and one operation ;
and since many times your servant, our
apostolic see, has fought against this, and
then prayed against it, and by no means
been able, even up to now, to draw away
from such a depraved opinion its advo-
cates, we beseech your God-crowned for-
titude, that such as share these views of the
most holy church of Constantinople may
tell us, what is the source of this new-fangled
language.

\^Ansiver of the Monothelites made at the
Emj)eror's bidding .']

We have brought out no new method of
speech, but have taught whatever we have
received from the holy Ecumenical Synods,
and from the holy approved Fathers, as
Avell as from the archbishops of this impe-
rial city, to wit : Sergius, Paul, Pyrrhus,
and Peter, as also from Honorius who was
Pope of Old Rome, and from Cj-ms who was
Pope of Alexandria, that is to say with ref-
erence to will and operation, and so we have
believed, and so we believe, so we preach ;
and further we are ready to stand by, and
defend this faith.


THE LETTER OF AGATHO, POPE OF OLD ROME, TO THE
EMPEROR, AND THE LETTER OF AGATHO AND OF 125
BISHOPS OF THE ROMAN SYNOD, ADDRESSED TO THE
SIXTH COUNCIL.

{Read at the Fourth Session^ November 15, at the request of George^ Patriarch of
Constantinople and his Suffragans.)

INTRODUCTOEY NOTE.

(Bossuet, Defensio Cler. Gal. Lib. VII., cap. xxiv.)
All the fathers spoke one by one, and only after examination were the letters of St.
Agatho and the whole Western Council approved. Agatho, indeed, and the Western Bish-
ops put forth their decrees thus [' We have directed persons from our humility to your
valour protected of God, which shall oifer to you the report of us all, that is, of all the Bishops
in the Northern or Western Regions, in which too we have summed up the confession of our
Apostolic Faith, yet'] not as those who wished to contend about these things as being uncer-
tain, but, being certain and unchangeable to set them forth in a brief definition, [suppliantly
beseeching you that, by the favour of your sacred majesty, you would command these same
things to be preached to all, and to have force with all. '] TJndoiibtedl}', therefore, so far as
in tliem lay, the}' defined the matter. The question was, whether the other Churches through-
out the world would agree, and a matter so great was only made clear after Episcoj^al exam-
ination. But the high, magnificent, yet true expressions, which St. Agatho had used of his
See, namely, that resting on the promise of the Lord it had never tui'ned aside from the path
of truth, and that its Pontiffs, the predecessors of Agatho, who were charged in the jjerson
of Peter to strengthen their brethren, had ever discharged that office, this the Fathers of the
Council hear and receive. But not the less they examine the matter, they inquire into the
decrees of Roman Pontiffs, and, after inquiry held, approve Agatho's decrees, condemn those
of Honorius : a certain proof that they did not understand Agatho's expressions as if it were
necessary to receive without discussion every decree of Roman Pontiffs even de fide, inasmuch
as they are subjected to the supreme and final examination of a General Council : but as if
these expressions taken as a whole, in their total, hold good in the full and complete succes-
sion of Petei', as we have often said, and in its proper place shall say at greater length.

THE LETTER OF POPE AGATHO.


{Found in Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXXXVIL, col. 1161 ; L. and C, Tom. VI., col 630.)

Agatho a bishop and servant of tlie ser-
vants of God to the most devout and serene
victors and conquerors, our most beloved


God, in prayer tliat he might impart to ray

wavering soul the comfort of his divine

mercy, and might lift me by his right hand

sons and lovers of God and of our Lord out of the de])ths of grief and anxiety, I

Jesus Christ, the Empcsror Coustantine the most gratefully recognize, my most illus-


Great, and to Heraclius and Tiberius,
Augustuses


trious lords and sons, that your purpose

[i.e. of hohling a Council] afforded me deep

and wonderful consolation. For it was

While contemplating tlie various anxie- ; most pious and emanated from your most

ties of human life, and while groaning with j meek trancpxillity, taught by the divine

vehement weeping before the one true benignity for the benefit of the Christian

' The words in brackets are not quoted by Bossuet.


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-681


329


commonwealth divinely entrusted to your
keeping, that your imperial power and
clemency might have a care to enquire
diligently concerning the things of God j
(through whom Kings do reign, who is
himself King of Kings and Lord of Lords)
and might seek after the truth of his
spotless faith as it has been handed down
by the Apostles and by the Apostolic
Fathers, and be zealously afiected to com-
mand that in all the churches the pure tra-
dition be held. And that no one may be
ignorant of this pious intention of yours,
or suspect that w^e have been compelled by
force, and have not freely consented to the
carrying into effect of the imperial decrees
touching the preaching of our evangelical
faith which was addressed to our pred-
ecessor Donus, a pontiff of Apostolic
memory, they have through our ministry
been sent to and entirely approved by all
nations and peoples ; for these decrees the
Holy Spirit by his grace dictated to the
tongue of the imperial pen, out of the
treasure of a pure heart, as the Avords of an
adviser not of an oppressor, defending him-
self, not looking with contempt upon others ;
not afflicting, but exhorting; and invitiug
to those things which are of God in godly
wise, because he, the Maker and Redeemer
of all men, who had he come in the majesty
of his Godhead into the world, might
have terrified mortals, preferred to descend
through his inestimable clemency and hu-
mility to the estate of us whom he had
created and thus to redeem us, who also
expects from us a willing confession of the
true faith.

And this it is that the blessed Peter, the
prince of the Apostles, teaches : " Feed
the flock of Christ which is among you, not
by constraint, but willingly, exhorting it
according to God." Therefore, encouraged
by these imperial decrees, O most meek lords
of all things, and relieved from the depths
of affliction and raised to the hope of con-
solation, I have begun, refreshed somewhat
by a better confidence, to comply wdtli
promptuess with the things which were
sometime ago bidden by the Sacra of your
gentlest fortitude, and am endeavouring in
obedience therewith to find persons, such
as our deficient times and the quality of
this obedient province permit, and taking
advice with my fellow-servant bishops, as
"well concerning the approaching synod of


this Apostolic See, as concerning our own
clergy, the lovers of the Christian Empire,
and, afterwards concerning the religious
servants of God, that I might exhort them
to follow in haste the footsteps of your
most pious Tranquillity. And, were it not
that the great compass of the provinces, in
which oui- humility's council is situated
had caused so great a loss of time, our
servitude a while ago could have fulfilled
with studious obedience Avhat even now
has scarcely been done. For while from
the various provinces a council has been
gathering about us, and while we have been
able to select some persons of those from
this very Roman city immediately subject
to your most serene power, or from those
I near by, others again we have been obliged
to wait for from far distant proviuces, in
which the word of Christian faith was
preached by those sent by the predecessors
of my littleness ; and thus quite a space of
time has elapsed : and I pass over my bodily
pains in consequence of which life to a per-
petually suffering person is neither possible
nor pleasant. Therefore, most Christian
lords and sons, in accordance with the
most pious jussio of your God-protected
clemency, we have had a care to send, with
the devotion of a prayerful heart (from the
obedience we owe you, not because we re-
lied on the [superabundant] knowledge of
! those wdiom we send to you), our fellow-
j servants here present, Abundantius, John,
I and John, our most reverend brother bish-
I ops, Theodore and George our most belov-
i ed sons and presbyters, with our most
beloved son John, a deacon, and with Con-
stantine, a subdeacon of this holy spiritual
mother, the Apostolic See, as well as
Theodore, the presbyter legate of the holy
Church of Eavenua and the religious ser-
vants of God the monks. For, among men
placed amid the Gentiles, and earning their
daily bread by bodily labour with considera-
ble distraction, how could a knowledge of
the Scriptures, in its fulness, be found un-
less what has been canonically defined by
our holy and ajiostolic predecessors, and by
the venerable five councils, we preserve in
simplicity of heart, and Avithout any dis-
torting keep the faith come to us from the
Fathers, always desirous and endeavouring
to possess that one and chiefest good, viz. :
that nothing be diminished from the things
, canonically defined, and that nothing be


330


in. COXSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. G80-681


changed nor added tlu'ifto, l)ut that those
same things, both in words and sense, be
guarded untouched ? To these same com-
missioners we also have given the witness
of some of tlie holy Fathers, whom this
Apostolic Churcli of Christ receives, to-
gether with their books, so that, having
obtained from the })ower of your mo-t
benign Christianity the privilege of sug-
gesting, they might out of these endeavour
to give satisfaction, (when yoiir imperial
Meekness shall have so commanded) as
to what this Apostolic Church of Christ,
their spiritual mother anil the mother of
your God-s])rung empire, believes and
preaches, not in words of worldly eloquence,
which are not at the command of ordinary
men, but in the integrity of the apostolic
faith, in which having been taught from
the cradle, we pray that we may serve
and obey the Loid of heaven, the Propa-
gator of your Cliristian empire, even unto
the end. Consequently, we have granted
them faculty or authority with your most
tran([uil mightiness, to aiford satisfaction
with simplicity whenever your clemency
shall command, it being enjoined on them
as a limitation that they presume not to
add to, take away, or to change anything ;
but that they set forth this tradition of the
Apostolic See in all sincerity as it has been
taught by the apostolic pontiffs, who were
our predecessors. For these delegates w^e
most humbly im])lore with bent knees of
the mind your clemency ever full of con-
descension, that agreeably to the most be-
nign and most august promise of the impe-
rial Sacra, ycmr Christlike Tranquillity may
deem tluMU worthy of acceptanct; and may
deign to give a favourable hearing to their
most humble suggestions. Thus may your
meekest Piety find the ears of Almighty
God open to your prayers, and may you
order that they return to their own
unharmed in thvAv rectitude of our Apos-
tolic faith, as well as in the integrity of
their bodies. And thus may the su])ernal
Majesty restore to the benign rule of
your government through the most heroic
and unconquerable labours of your God-
strengthened clemency, the whole Christian
commonwealth, and may he .subdue hostile
nations to your mighty sceptre, that there
may be satisfaction from this time forth to
every soul and to all nations, because what
you deigned to promise solemnly by your


most august letters about the immunity
and safety of those who came to the Coun-
cil, you have fulhlled in all respects. It is
not their wisdom that gave us confidence
to make l)old to send them to your i)ious
presence ; but our littleness obediently
complied with what your inq)erial benig-
iiitv, with a gi'acious order, exhorted to.
Ami brietiy we shall intimate to your di-
vinely instructed Piety, what the strength
of our A])ostolic faith contains, which we
have received through Apostolic tradition
and tlirough the tradition of the Apos-
tolical pontilfs, and that of the five holy
general synods, through which the founda-
tions of Christ's Catholic Church have been
strengthened and established ; this then is
the status (and the regular tradition 'J of
our Evangelical and Apostolic faith, to wit,
that as we confess the holy and insepa-
ral)le Trinity, that is, th»; Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost, to be of one deity, of
one nature and substance or essence, so we
will profess also that it has one natural
will, power, operation, domination, majesty,
|)otency, and glory. And whatever is said
of the same Holy Trinity essentially in
singular number we untlerstand to refer to
the one nature of the three consubstantial
Persons, having been so taught by canonical
logic. But when we make a confession con-
cerning one of the same three Persons of
that Holy Trinity, of the Son of God, or
God the Word, and of the mystery of his
adorable dispensatiim according to the tiesli,
we assert that all things are double in the one
and the same our Lord and Savit)ur Jesus
Christ according to the Evangelical tradi-
tion, that is to say, we confess his two
natures, to wit the divine and the human,
of which and in which he, even after the
wonderful and inseparable union, subsists.
And we confess that each of his natures
has its own natural propriety, and that the
divine has all things that are divine, with-
out any sin. And we recognize that each
one (of the two natures) of the one and
the same incarnated, that is, humanated
(humanafi) Word of God is in him uncon-
fusedly, inseparably and unchangeably, in-
t(dlig(mce alone discerning a unity, to avoid
the error of confusit»n. For we equally detest
the blasphemy of division and of commixt-
ure. For when we confess two natures and


> Only in the Latin.


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-G81


331


two natural wills, and two natural operations
in our one Lord Jesus Christ, we do not
assert that they are contrary or opposed
one to the other (as those who err from
the path of truth and accuse the apostolic
tradition of doing. Far be this impiety
from the hearts of the faithful !), nor as
though separated {ptr se separated) in two
persons or subsistences, but we say that
as the same our Lord Jesus Christ has
two natures so also he has two natural wills
and operations, to wit, the divine and the
human : the divine will and operation he
has in common with the coessential Father
from all eternity : the human, he has i
received from us, taken with our nature in
time. This is the apostolic and evangelic
tradition, which the spiritual mother of
your most felicitous empire, the Apostolic
Church of Christ, holds. This is the pure
expression of piety. This is the true and
immaculate profession of the Christian
religion, not invented by human cunning,
but which was taught by the Holy Ghost
through the princes of the Apostles. This
is the firm and irreprehensible doctrine of
the holy Apostles, the integrity of the sin-
cere piety of which, so long as it is preached
freel}', defends the empire of your Tran-
quillity in the Christian commonwealth,
and exults [will defend it, will render it
stable ; and exulting], and (as we firmly
trust) Avill demonstrate it full of happiness.
Believe your most humble [servant], my
most Christian lords and sons, that I am
pouring forth these prayers with my tears,
for its stability and exultation [in Greek
exaltation]. And these things I (although
unworthy and insignificant) dare advise
through my sincere love, because your God-
granted victory is our salvation, the hap-
piness of your Tranquillity is our joy,
the harmlessness of your kindness is the
security of our littleness. And therefore I
beseech you with a contrite heart and
rivers of tears, with prostrated mind, deign
to stretch forth your most clement right
hand to the Apostolic doctrine which the
co-worker of your pious labours, the blessed
apostle Peter, has delivered, that it be not
hidden under a bushel, biit that it be
preached in the whole earth more shrilly
than a bugle : because the true confession
thereof for which Peter Avas pronounced
blessed by the Lord of all things, was re-
vealed by the Father of heaven, for he


received from the Redeemer of all himself,
by three commendations, the duty of feed-
ing the spiritual sheep of the Church ;
under whose })rotecting shield, this Apos-
tolic Church of his has never turned away
from the path of truth in any direction of
error, whose authority, as that of the
Prince of all the Apostles, the whole Cath-
olic Church, and the Ecumenical Synods
have faithfully embraced, and followed in
all things; and all the venerable Fathers
have embraced its Apostolic doctrine,
through which they as the most approved
luminaries of the Church of Christ have
shone ; and the holy orthodox doctors
have venerated and followed it, Avliile the
heretics have pursued it with false crimina-
tions and with derogatory hatred. This is
the living tradition of the Apostles of
Christ, which his Church holds every-
where, which is chiefly to be loved and
fostered, and is to be preached with confi-
dence, which conciliates with God through
its truthful confession, which also renders
one commendable to Christ the Lord, which
keeps the Christian empire of your Clem-
ency, which gives far-reaching victories
to your most pious Fortitude from the
Lord of heaven, which accompanies you in
battle, and defeats your foes ; which pro-
tects on every side as an impregnable wall
your God-sprung empire, which throws
terror into opposing nations, and smites
them with the divine wrath, which also in
wars celestially gives triumphal palms over
the downfall and subjection of the enemy,
and ever guards your most faithful sov-
ereignty secure and joyful in peace. For
this is the rule of the true faith, which this
spiritual mother of your most tranquil
empire, the Apostolic Church of Christ, has
both in prosjierity and in adversity always
held and defended with energy ; which, it
will be proved, by the grace of Almighty
God, has never erred from the path of the
apostolic tradition, nor has she been de-
praved by yielding to heretical innovations,
but from the beginning she has received
the Christian faith from her founders, the
princes of the Apostles of Christ, and re-
mains undefiled unto the end, according to
the divine promise of the Lord and Saviour
himself, which he uttered in the holy
Gospels to the prince of his disciples :
saying, "Peter, Peter, behold, Satan hath
desired to have you, that he might sift


332


III. COXSTANTIXOPLE. A.D. G80-G81


you as wlicut ; bnt T have juavod for tlicc,
that (tliy) faith fail not. Aiul when thou
art converted, strengthen thy brethren." Let
your tranquil Clemency therefore consider,
since it is the Lord and Saviour of all,
whose faith it is, that proniisfd that Peter's
faith should not fail and exhorted him to
strengthen his brethren, how it is known
to all that the Ajiostolic jiontiffs, the ])red-
ecessors of my littleness, have always con-
fidently done this very thing : of whom
also our littleness, since I have received
this ministry by divine designation, wishes
to be the follower, although uncKjual to them
and the least of all. l*'or woe is me, if I
neglect to preach the ti'uth of my Lord,
which they have sincerely ])reached. Woe
is me, if I cover over with silence the truth
which lam bidden to give to the exchangers,
i.e., to teach to the Christian people and
imbue it therewith. What shall I say
in the future examination by Christ him-
self, if I blush (which God forbid!) to
preach here the truth of his words?
What satisfaction shall I be able to give
for myself, what for the souls committed to
me, whtm he demands a strict account of
the office I have received ? Who, then, my
most clement and most pious lords and
sons, (I s])(>alv trembling and prostrate in
spirit) would not be stirred by that admi-
rable promise, whicfi is made to the faith-
ful : " Whoever shall confess me before
men, him also will I confess before my
Father, who is in heaven"? And which
one even of the intidels shall not be terri-
fied by that most severe threat, in which he
]n-otests that he will be full of wrath, and
declares that " Whoever shall deny me
before men, him also will I deny before my i
Father, who is in heaven"? Whence also
blessed Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles, '
gives warning and says : "But though we,
or an angel from the heaven should j)reach
to you any other Gospel from what wo,
have evangel iz(Ml to you, let him be anath-
ema." 8inc(% therefore, such an extremity
of ])unishmeut overhangs the corruptors, or
suppressors of truth by silence, would not
any one flee from an attem])t at curtailing
the truth of the Lord's faith ? Wherefore
the predecessors of Apostolic memory of
my littleness, learned in the doctrine of the
Lord, ever since the prelates of the Church
of Constantino])le have been trying to
introduce into the immaculate Church of


Christ an heretical innovation, have never
ceased to exhort and warn them with many
prayers, that they should, at least by
silence, desist from the heretical error of
the de]iraved dogma, lest ho\n this they
make the beginning of a split in the unity
of the Church, by asserting one will, and
one operation of the two natiu-es in the
one Jesus Christ our Lord : a thing which
the Arians antl the Apollinarists, the Euty-
chians, the Timotheans, the Ace})hali, the
Theodosiaus and the Gaianita3 taught, and
<^very heretical madness, whether of those
who confound, or of tlK)se who divide the
mystery of the Incarnation of Christ.
Those that confound the mystery of the
holy Incarnation, inasmuch as they say
that there is one nature of the deity and
humanity of Christ, contend that he has
one will, as of one, and (one) personal
operation. But they who divide, on the
other hand, the inseparable union, unite
the two natures which they acknowledge
that the Saviour possesses, not however
in an union which is recognized to be
hypostatic; but l)lasphemously join them
by concord, through the ali'ection of the
will, like two subsistences, i.e., two some-
bodies. Moreover, the Apostolic Church
of Christ, the s]uritual mother of your
God-founded empire, confesses one Jesus
Christ our Lord existing of and in two
natures, and she; maintains that his two
natures, to wit, the divine and the human,
exist in him unconfused even after their
inseparable union, and she acknowledges
that each of these natures of Christ is ])er-
fect in the proprieties of its natiu'e, and
sh(i confesses that all things belonging to
the proprieties of the natures are double,
because the same our Lord Jesus Christ
himself is both perfect God and ])erfect
man, of two and in two natures: and after
his wonderful Incarnation, his deity cannot
be thought of with(mt his humanity, nor
his humanity without his deity. Conse-
quently, therefor(\ according to the rule
of the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
of Christ, she also confesses and preaches
that there are in him two natural wills and
two natural operations. I'^or if anybody
shoidd mean a |)ersonal will, when in the
holy Trinity there are said to be tlirc^e Per-
sons, it would be necessary that there
should be asserted three ]iersonal wills, and
three personal oi^erations (which is absurd


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-681


and truly profane). Since, as the truth of
the Christian faith holds, the will is nat-
ural, where the one nature of the holy and
inseparable Trinity is spoken of, it must be
consistently understood that there is one
natural will, and one natural operation.
But when in truth Ave confess that in the
one person of our Lord Jesus Christ the
mediator between God and men, there are
two natures (that is to say the divine and
the human), even after his admirable
miion, just as we canonically confess the
two natures of one and the same person, so
too we confess his two natural wills and
two natural operations. But that the
understanding of this truthful confession
may become clear to your Piety's mind
from the God-inspired doctrine of the Old
and the New Testament, (for your Clemency
is incomparably more able to penetrate the
meaning of the sacred Scriptures, than our
littleness to set it forth in flowing Avords),
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is
true and perfect God, and true and per-
fect man, in his holy Gospels shews
forth in some instances human things, in
others divine, and still in others both
together, making a manifestation concern-
ing himself in order that he might instruct
his faithful to believe and preach that he
is both true God and true man. Thus as '
man he prays to the Father to take away |
the cup of suffering, because in him our
human nature was complete, sin only
excepted, " Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me ; nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou wilt." And in another
passage: "Not my will, but thine be
done." If we wish to know the meaning of
which testimony as explained by the holy
and approved Fathers, and truly to under-
stand what " my will," what " thine "
signify, the blessed Ambrose in his second
book to the Emperor Gratian, of blessed
memory, teaches us the meaning of this
passage in these words, saying :
then, receives my will, he takes my
row, I confidently call it sorrow as I am
speaking of the cross, mine is the will,
which he calls his, because he bears my
sorrow as man, he spoke as a man, and
therefore he says : ' Not as I will but as
thou wilt.' " Mine is the sadness which he
has received according to my affection.^

> Meo affectU : Kaj eVrji/ Sia9eatv.


"He

sor-


See, most pious of princes, how clearly
here this holy Father sets forth that the
words our Lord used in his prayer, " Not
my will," pertain to his humanity ; through
which also he is said, according to the
teaching of Blessed Paul the Apostle of
the Gentiles, to have " become obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross."
Wherefore also it is taught us that he was
obedient to his parents, which must piously
be understood to refer to his voluntary
obedience, not according to his divinity (by
which he governs all things), but according
to his humanity, by Avhich he spontane-
ously submitted himself to his parents.
St. Luke the Evangelist likewise bears wit-
ness to the same thing, telling how the
same our Lord Jesus Christ prayed accord-
ing to his humanity to his Father, and
said, "Father, if it be possible let the cup
pass from me; nevertheless not my will but
thine be done," — which passage Athana-
sius, the Confessor of Christ, and Arch-
bishop of the Church of Alexandria, in his
book against Apollinaris the heretic, con-
cerning the Trinity and the Incarnation,
also understanding the wills to be two,
thus explains : And when he says, " Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless not my will but thine be
done," and again, " The spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak ; " he shews that there
are two wills, the one human which is the
will of the flesh, but the other divine. For
his human will, out of the weakness of the
flesh was fleeing away from the passion,
but his divine will was ready for it. What
truer explanation could be found ? For
how is it possible not to acknowledge in
him two wills, to wit, a human and a divine,
when in him, even after the inseparable
union, there are two natures according to
the definitions of the synods? For John
also, Avho leaned upon the Lord's breast, his
beloved disciple, shews forth the same self-
restraint in these words : "I came down
from heaven not to do mine OAvn w: but
the will of the Father that sent me." And
again : " This is the Avill of him that sent
me, that of all that he gave me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again
at the last day." Again he introduces
the Lord as disputing with the Jews, and
saying among other things : "I seek not
mine own Avill, but the will of him that sent
me." On the meaning of which divine words


334


III. COXSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-681


blessed Aiigustiue, a most illustrious doc-
tor, thus writes iu his book af:;aiust Maxi-
miuus the Ariau. He says, " When the
Sou says to the Father ' Not what I will,
but what thou wilt,' what doth it profit thee,
that thou broughtest thy words iuto sub-
jectiou aud sayest, it shews truly that his
will was subject to his Father, as though
we would deny that the will of man should
be subject to the will of God? For that
the Lord said this iu his human nature,
anyone will quickly see who studies atten-
tively this place of the Gospel. For therein
he says, ' My soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death.' Can this ])ossibly b*;
said of the nature of the One Word? JJut,
O man, who thinkest to make the nature of
the Holy Ghost to groan, why do you say
that the nature of the Only-begotten Word
of God cannot be sad? But to prevent
anyone arguing in this way, he does not
say ' I am sad ; ' (and even if he had so
said, it could })rop(;rly only have been
understood of his human nature) but he
says ' My soul is sad,' which soul he has as
man ; however in this also which he said,
'Not what I will ' he shewed that he willed
something diflferent from what the Father
did, which he could not have done except
in his human nature, since lie did not
introduce our infirmity into his divine
nature, but would transfigure human attVc-
tion. For had he not been made man, the
Only Word could in no way have said to
the Father, 'Not what I \vill.' For it
could never be possible for that immutable
nature to will anything dil'fcrent from what
the Father willed. If you \vould but make
this distinction, O ye Arians, ye would not
be hei'ctics."

In this disputation this venerable Father
shews that when the Lord says " his OAvn "
he means the will of his humanity, and
when he says not to do " his own will," he
teaches us not chiefiy to seek our own wills
but that through obedience we should sub-
rait our wills to the Divine Will. From
all which it is evident that he had a human
will by which he obeyijd his Father, and
that he had in himself this same human
will immaculate from all sin, as true God
and man. Which thing St. Ambrose also
thus treats of in his explanation of St. Luke
the Evangelist.


[After thisfolloios a catena of PatristiG
ijHotdtlons ii'hich I have not thowjht worth
while to produce in fall. After St. Arnhrose
he cites St. Leo, then St. Gregory N^azianzen,
then St. Augustine. (L. & C, col. O-i?.)]

From which testimonies it is clear that
(^ach of those natures which the sj)iritual
Doctor has here enumerated has its own
natural jiroperty, and that to each one a
will ought to be assigned. For an angelic
nature cannot have a divine or a human
will, neither can a human nature have a
divine or an angelic will. For no nature
can have anything or any motion which
})ertains to anotlu-r nature but only that
which is naturally given by creation. And
as this is the truth of the matter it is most
certainly clear that we must needs confess
that in our Lord Jesus Christ there are two
natures aud substances, to wit, the Divine
and human, united in his one subsistence
or ])erson, and that Ave further confess
that there are in him two natural wills,
viz, : the divine and the human, for his
divinity so far as its nature is concerned
could not he said to possess a human will,
nor should his humanity be believed to
have naturally a divine will : And again,
neither of these two substances of Christ
must be confessed as being without a
natural will ; but his human will was lifted
up l)y the omnipotency of his divinity, and
liis divine will was revealed to men through
his humanity. Therefore it is necessary to
r(^fer to him as God such things as are
divine, and as man such things as are hu-
man ; and each must be truly recognized
through the hypostatic union of the one
and the same our Lord Jesus Christ, which
the most true decree of the Council of
Chalcedou sets forth — [Here foUoics cita^
tio7i.] This same thing also the holy synod
which was gathered together in Constanti-
nople in the time of the Emperor Justinian
of august menuny, teaches in the viith.
chapter of its definitions. [Here follows
fl/r cif(i/l(»i.] ^Moreover it is necessary that
we should faithfully keej) what those Vener-
able Synods taught, so that we never take
away the difference of natui-es as a result
of the union, but confess one Christ, true
and perfect God and also true and perfect
man, the propnety of each nature being
k(^pt intact. Whercifore, if in no res])ect
the diflereuce of the natures of our Lord


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-G81


335


Jesus Christ has been taken away, it is
necessary that we preserve this same clitier-
ence in all its proprieties. For whoso
teaches that the difference is in no respect
to be taken away, declares that it must be
preserved in all things, liut when the here-
tics and the followers of heretics say that
there is but one will and one operation, how
is this difference recognized? Or where is
the difference which has been defined by
this holy Synod preserved ? AVliile if it is
asserted that there is but one will in him
(which is absurd), those who make this as-
sertion must needs say that that will is
either human or divine, or else composite
from both, mixed and confused, or (accord-
ing to the teaching of all heretics) that
Christ has one will and one operation, pro-
ceeding from his one composite nature (as
they hold). And thus, without any doubt,
the difference of nature is destroyed, which
the holy synods declared to be preserved in
all respects even after the admirable union.
Because, though they taught that Christ
was one, his person and substance one,
yet on account of the union of the natures
which was made hypostatically, they like-
wise decreed that we should clearly ac-
knowledge and teach the difference of
those natures which were united in him,
after the admirable union. Therefore if
the proprieties of the natures in the same
our one Lord Jesus Christ were preserved
on account of the difference [of the nat-
ures], it is congruous that we should with
full faith confess also the difference of his
natural wills and operations, in order that
we may be shewn to have followed in all
respects their doctrine, and may admit into
the Church of Christ no heretical novelty.

And although there exist numerous works
of the other holy Fathers, nevertheless we
subjoin to this our humble exposition a few
testimonies out of the books which are in
Greek, for the sake of fastidiousness.^

{Here follows a catena of passages frotn
the Greek fathers, viz. : St. Gregory Theolo-
gus, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. John bishop
of Constantinople, St. Cyril, bishop of Alex-
andria. (L. & C, col. 654.)]

From these truthful testimonies it is also
demonstrated that these venerable fathers

' Propter fastidium, what this may mean I have no idea ; the
Greek is still more extraordinary : po9u/uit'as (vel. /3apu9u/uic'as) x6.fn.v.


predicated in the one and the same Lord
Jesus Christ two natural wills, viz. : a di-
vine and a human, for when St. Gregory
Nazianzen says, " The willing of that man
who is understood to be the Saviour," he
shews that the human will of the Saviour
was deified thrt)ugh its union with the
Word, and therefore it is not contrary to
God. So likewise he proves that he had a
human, although deified will, and this same
he had (as he teaches in what follows) as
well as his divine will, which was one and
the same with that of the Father. If there-
fore he had a divine and a deified will,
he had also two wills. For what is divine
by nature has no need of being deified ;
and what is deified is not truly divine by
nature. And when St. Gregor}' Nyssen, a
great bishop, says that the true confession
of the mystery is, that there should be
understood one human will and another a
divine will in Christ, what does he bid us
understand when he says one and another
will, except that there are manifestly two
wills ?

\^Ile next jproceeds to comment ujwn
the passage cited from St. John, then
upon that from St. Cyril of Alexandria.
After this folJoio quotations from St.
Hilar}', St. Athanasius, St. Denys the
Areopagite, St. Ambrose, St. Leo, St. Greg-
ory Nyssen, St. Cyril of Alexandria, vhich
are 'next commented on in their order. He
then jyroceeds : (L. & C, col. 662.)]

There are not lacking most telling pas-
sages in other of the venerable fathers,
who speak clearly of the two natural
operations in Christ, not to mention St.
Cyril of Jerusalem, St. John of Constan-
tinople, or those who afterwards conducted
the laborious conflicts in defence of the
venerable council of Chalcedon and of the
Tome of St. Leo against the heretics from
whose error the assertion of this new dogma
has arisen : that is to say, John, bishop of
Scythopolis, Eulogius, bishoj) of Alexan-
dria, Euphraemius and Anastasius the elder,
most worthy rulers of the church of Theop-
olis, and above all that emulator of the
true and apostolic faith, the Emperor Jus-
tinian of pious memory, whose uprightness
of faith exalted the Christian State as much
as his sincere confession pleased God.
And his pious memory is esteemed worthy


330


III. CONSTAKTIXOrLE. A.D. 680-681


of veneration by all nations, whose ii]>-
riglituess of faith was dissominated with
praise throughout the whole world by his
most august edicts : one of these, to wit,
that addressed to Zoilus, the patriarch of
Alexandria, against the heresy of the Ace})h-
ali to satisfy tlu-ni of the rectitude of tlu;
apostolic faith, we offer to your most tran-
quil Christianity, sending it together Avith
this paper of our lowliness through the
same carriers. But lest this declaration
should be thought burdensome on account
of its length, we have inserted in this decla-
ration of our humility only a few of the
testimonies of the Holy Fathers, especially
[when writing to those] on whom the care
and arrangement of the whole world as on a
lirni foundation are recognized forest ; since
this is altogether incomparable and great,
that the care of the whole Christian State
being laid aside for a little out of love and
zeal for true religion, your august and most
religious clemenc}- should desire to under-
stand more clearly the doctrine of apostoli-
cal preaching. For from the different ap-
proved fathers the truth of the Orthodox
faith has become clear although the treat-
ment is short. For the a})proved fathers
thought it to be superfluous to discourse at
length up(ju what was evident and clear to
all ; for who, even if he be dull of wit, does
not perceive what is evident to all ? For it
is impossible and contrary to the order of
nature that there should be a nature without
a natural operation : and even the heretics
did not dar<i to say this, although they
were, all of them, hunting for human
craftiness and cunning questions against
the orthodoxy of the faith, and arguments
agreeable to their depravities.

How then can that now be asserted which
never was said by the holy orthodox fathers,
nor even Avas presumptuously invtmted by
the profane heretic^s, viz. : that of the two
natures of Christ, the divine and the human,
the proprieties of each of which are recog-
nized as being i)reserv('d in Chiist, that
anyone in souud mind should declare there
Avas but one operation? Since if there is
one, let them say whether it be temporal
or eternal, divine or human, uncreated or
created : the same as that of the Father
or different from that of the Father. If
therefore it is one, that one and the same
must be common to the divinity and
to the humanity (which is absurd), there-


fore while the Son of God, who is both
(lod and man, wrought human things on
earth, likewise also the Father worked with
him according to his nature (naturaliter,
(f>v(TiKw<,) ; for what things the Father doetli
these th(! Son also doeth likewise. But if
(as is the truthj the human acts which
Christ did are to be referred to his person
alone as the Son, which is not the same as
that of the Father; in one nature Christ
worked one set of works, and in the other
another, so that according to his diAanity
the Son does the same things that the Father
does; and likewise according tohishunum-
ity, Avhat things are proper to the manhood,
those same, he as man, did because he is
truly both God and man. For Avhicli reason
we rightly believe that that same person,
since he is one, has two natural operations, to
Avit, the divine and the human, one uncreated,
and the other created, as true and perfect
God and as true and ])erfect man, the one
and the same, the mediator between God and
men, the Lord Jesus Christ. AVherefore
from the quality of the operations there
is recognized a difference void of offence
(dTrpotTKOTTos) of the natures Avhich are joined
in Christ through the hypostatic union.
We now proceed to cite some passages from
the execrable writings of the heretics hated
of God,' Avhose words and sayings Ave
equally abominate, for the demonstration
of those things which our inventors of new
dogma have folloAved teaching that in Christ
there is but one Avill and one operation.

[Then follow quotations from A])ollinaris,
Severus, Theodosius of Alexandria. (L, &
C, col. G67.)J

Behold, most pious lords and sons, by
the testimonies of the holy Fathers, as by
spiritual rays, the doctrine of the Catho-
lic and A])ostolic Church has been illus-
trated and the darkness of heretical blind-
ness, Avhich is offering error to men for
imitation, has been revealed. Now it is
necessary that the new doctrine sliould fol-
low somebody, and by Avhose authtnity it
is supported, Ave shall note.

\Hvr<' folhvo qnotatinns from Cyrus of
Alexandria, Theodore of Pharon, Sergius of
Constantino})l(^, Pyrrhus, Paulus his succes-

> The meaning of Hub passage is clear enough bat the text is
slighily corrupt.


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. G80-G81


337


SOT, Peter his successor.

670.)]


(L. & C, col.


Let then yonr God-foiinded clemency
with the interuul eye of discrimiuatioii,
which for the guiduuce of the Christian ^
people you have been deemed worthy to re- !
ceive by the Grace of God, take heed which
one of such doctors you think the Christian |
people should follow, the doctrine of which j
one of these they should embrace so as to j
be saved ; for thev condemn all, and each
one of them the other, according as the
various and unstable definitions in their
writings assert sometimes that there is one
will and one operation, sometimes that
there is neither one nor two operations,
sometimes one will and operation, and
again two wills and two operations, like-
wise one will and one operation, and again
neither one, nor two, and somebody else
one and two.

Who does not hate, and rage against, and
avoid such blind errors, if he have any de-
sire to be saved and seek to offer to the
Lord at his coming a right faith? There-
fore the Holy Church of God, the mother
of your most Christian power, should be
delivered and liberated with all your might
(through the help of God) from the errors
of such teachers, and the evangelical and
apostolic uprightness of the orthodox faith,
which has been established upon the firm
rock of this Church of blessed Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, which by his grace
and guardianship remains free from all er-
ror, [that faith I say] the whole number of
rulers and priests, of the clergy and of the
people, unanimously should confess and
preach with us as the true declaration of
the Apostolic tradition, in order to please
God and to save their own souls.

And these things vs'e have taken pains to
insert in the tractate of our humility, for
we have been afflicted and have groaned
without ceasing that such grievous errors
should be entertained by bishops of the
Church, who are zealous to establish their
own peculiar views rather than the truth
of the faith, and think that our sincere fra-
ternal admonition has its spring in a con-
tempt for them. And indeed the apostolic
predecessors of my humility admonished,
begged, upbraided, besought, reproved, and
exercised every kind of exhortation that the
recent wound might receive a remedy, moved


thereto not by a mind filled with hatred
(God is my witness) nor through the elation
of boasting, nor through the opposition of
contention, nor through an inane desire to
find some fault with their teachings, nor
through anything akin to the love of arro-
gance, but out of zeal for the uprightness
of the truth, and for the rule of the confes-
sion of the pure Gospel, and for the salva-
tion of souls, and for the stability of the
Christian state, and for the safety of those
who rule the Eoman Empire. Nor did they
cease from their admonitions after the long
duration of this domesticated error, but
always exhorted and bore record, and that
with fraternal charity, not through malice
or pertinacious hatred (far be it from the
Christian heart to rejoice at another's fall,
wlien the Lord of all teaches, " I desire not
the death of a sinner, but that he be con-
verted and live ; " and who rejoiceth over
one sinner that repenteth more than over
ninety-and-nine just persons : who came
down from heaven to earth to deliver the
lost sheep, inclining the power of his maj-
esty), but desiring them with outstretched
spiritual arms, and exhorting to embrace
them returning to the unity of the ortho-
dox faith, and awaiting their conversion
to the full rectitude of the orthodox faith :
that they might not make themselves
aliens from our communion, that is from
the communion of blessed Peter the Apos-
tle, whose ministiy, we (though unworthy)
exercise, and preach the faith he has hand-
ed dow^n, but that they should together
with us pray Christ the Lord, the spotless
sacrifice, for the stability of your most
strong and serene Empire.

We believe, most pious lords [singular in
the Latin] of all things, that there has been
left no possible ambiguity which can pre-
vent the recognizing of those who have fol-
lowed the inventors of new dogma. For
the sweetness of spiritual understanding
with which the sayings of the Fathers are
full has become evident to the eyes of all ;
and the stench of the heretics, to be avoided
by all the faithful, has been made notorious.
Nor has it remained unknown that the in-
ventors of new dogma have been shewn to
be the followers of heretics, and not the
walkers in the footsteps of the holy Fath-
ers : therefore whoever wishes to colour any
error of his whatever, is condemned by the
light of truth, as the Apostle of the Gentiles


338


III. COXSTAXTINOPLE. A.D. 080-681


savs, " For evervtbincf that doth make man-
ifest is light," for tlie truth ever remains
constant and the same, but falseliooil is
ever varying, and in its wanderings adopt-
ing things mutually contradictory. On this
account the inventors of the new dogma
have been shewn to have taught things mut-
ually contradictory, because they were not
willing to be followers of the Evangelical
and Apostolic faith. Wherefore since the
truth has shoue forth by the observations
of your God-inspired piety, and falsity
which has been exposed has attained the
contempt which it deserved, it remains that
the crowned truth may shine forth victori-
ously through the pious favours of your
God-ci'owned clemency ; and that the error
of novelty ^vath its inventors and with those
who follow their doctrine, may receive the
punishment due their presumption, and be
cast forth from the midst of the orthodox
prelates for the heretical pravity of their
innovation, which into the holy. Catholic and
Apostolic Ohiu'ch of Christ they have en-
deavoured to introduce, and to stain with the
contagion of heretical pravity the indivisible
and unspotted body of the Chuivh [of Christ] .
For it is not just that the injurious should
injure the innocent, nor that the offences
of some should be visited upon the inoifen-
sive, for even if in this world to the con-
demned mercy is extended, yet they who
are thus spared reap for that sparing no
benefit in the judgment of God, and by those
thus sparing them there is incurred no little
danger for their unlawful comjmssion.

But we believe that Almighty God has
reserved for the happy days of your gentle-
ness the amending of these things, that
filling on earth the places and zeal of our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, who has vouch-
safed to crown your rule, ye may judge just
judgment for his Evangelical and Apostoli-
cal truth : for although he be the lledeemcr
and Saviour of the human race yet he suf-
fered injury, and bore it even until now, and
inspired the empire of your fortitude, so that
you shouUl he worthy to follow the cause of
his faith (as equity demanded, and as the de-
termination of the Holy Fathers and of the
Five General Synods decreed), and that you
should avenge, through his guardianship,
on the spurners of his faith, the injury done
your Redeemer and Colleague in reigning,
thus fulfilling magnanimously with impe-
rial clemency that prophetic utterance with


which David the King and Prophet, spake
to (4(>d, saying, '"The zeal of thine house
hiith eaten me up." AVherefore having been
extolled for so God-pleasing a zeal, he was
deemed fit to hear that blessed word
spoken by the Creator of all men, " I have
found Da^'id, a man after my heart, who
will do all my will." And to him also it
was promised in the Psalms, " I have found
David, my servant, with my holy oil have I
anointed him : My hand shall aid him and
my arm shall comfort him," so that the most
pious majesty of your Christian clemency
may work to further the cause of Christ
with burning zeal for the sake of remuner-
ation, and may he make all the acts of your
most powerful empire both happy and
prosperous, who hath stored up his promise
in the Holy Gospels, saying, " Seek ye first
the kingdom of God and all these things
shall be added unto you." For all, to whom
has come the knowledge of the sacred
heads,' have been ofiering innumerable
thanksgivings and unceasing praises to the
defender of your most powerful dominion,
being filled with admiration for the great-
ness of your clemency, in that you have so
benignly set forth the kind intention of
your august magnanimity ; for in truth, as
most pious and most just pruices, you have
deigned to treat divine things with the
fear of God, having promised every immun-
ity to those persons sent to you from our
littleness.

And we are confident that what your
pious clemency has promised, you are pow-
erful to carry out, in order that what has
been vowed and promised to God by the
religious philanthropy beyond your Chris-
tian power, may nevertheless be fulfilled by
the aid of his omnipotency.

Wherefore let praise by all Christian na-
tions, and eternal memory, and frequent
prayer be poured forth before the Lord
Christ, whose is the cause, fen- your safety,
and your triumphs, and youi- complete vic-
tory, that the nations of the Gentiles, l)emg
impressed by the terror of the supernal
majesty, may lay down most humbly their
necks beneath the sceptre of your most
powerful rule, that the power of Aour most
pious kingdom may continue until the
ceaseless joy of the eternal kingdom suc-
ceeds to this temporal reign. Nor could

' r e , the imperial edicts.


III. CONSTANTINOPLE, A.D. 680-681


339


anything be found more likely to commend
the clemency of your unconquerable forti-
tude to the divine majesty, than that those
who err from the rule of truth should be re-
pelled and the integrity of our Evangelical
and Ajjostolic faith should be everywhere
set forth and preached.

Moreover, most pious and God-instructed
sons and lords, if the Ai'chbishop of the
Church of Constantinople shall choose to
hold and to preach with us this most un-
blameable rule of Apostolic doctrine of the
Sacred Scriptures, of the venerable synods,
of the spiritual Fathers, according to their
evangelical understanding, through which
the form of the truth has been set forth by
us through the assistance of the Spirit,
there will ensue great peace to them that
love the name of God, and there will re-
main no scandal of dissension, and that will
come to pass which is recorded in the Acts
of the Apostles, when through the grace of
the Holy Spirit the people had come to the
acknowledging of Christianity, all of us will
be of one heart and of one mind. But if
(which God forbid !) he shall prefer to em-
brace the novelty but lately introduced by
others ; and shall ensnare himself with doc-
trines which are alien to the rule of ortho-
dox truth and of our Apostolic faith, to
decline Avhich as injurious to souls these
have put off, despite the exhortation and
admonitions of our predecessors in the
Apostolic See, down to this day, he him-
self should know what kind of an answer
he will have to give for such contempt
in the divine examination of Christ before
the judge of all, who is in heaven, to whom
when he cometli to judgment also we our-
selves are about to give an account of the
ministry of preaching the truth which has
been committed to us, or for the toleration
of things contrary to the Christian religion :
and may we (as I humbly pray) preserve
unconfusedly and freely, with simplicity and
purity, whole and midefiled, the Apostolic
and iSvangelical rule of the right faith as


I we have received it from the beginning.
And may your most august serenity, for the
affection and reverence which you bear to
the Catholic and Apostolic right faith, re-
ceive the perfect reward of your pious la-
bours from our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
the ruler with you of your Christian empire,
whose true confession you desire to pre-
serve undefiled, because nothing in any re-
spect has been neglected or omitted by your
God-crowned clemency, which could minis-
ter to the peace of the churches, provided
always that the integrity of the true faith
was maintained : since God, the Judge of
all, who disposes the ending of all matters
as he deems most expedient, seeks out the
intent of the heart, and ^vi\\ accept a zeal for
piety. Therefore I exhort you, O most pious
and clement Emperor, and together with my
littleness every Christian man exhorts you
on bended knee with all himiility, that to all
the God-pleasing goodnesses and admirable
imperial benefits which the heavenly con-
descension has vouchsafed to grant to the
human race through your God-accepted
care, this also you would order, for the re-
dintegration of perfect piety, to offer an ac-
ceptable sacrifice to Christ the Lord your
fellow-ruler, granting entire impunity, and
free faculty of speech to each one washing
to speak, and to urge a word in defence of
the faith which he believes and holds, so
that it may most manifestly be recognized
by all that by no terror, by no force, by no
threat or aversion any one wishing to speak
for the truth of the Catholic and Apostolic
faith, has been prohibited or repulsed, and
that all unanimously may glorify your im-
perial (divinam) majesty, throughout the
whole sjDace of their lives for so great and
so inestimable a good, and may pour forth
unceasing prayers to Christ the Lord that
your most strong empire may be preserved
untouched and exalted. The Subscription.
Ma}^ the gi-ace from above keep your em-
pire, most pious lords, and place beneath
its feet the neck of all the nations.


THE LETPER OF AGATHO AND OF THE ROMAN SYNOD OF
125 BISHOPS WHICH WAS TO SERVE AS AN INSTRUC-
TION TO THE LEGATES SENT TO AITEND THE SIXTH
SYNOD.


{Found in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 677 et seqq., and in 2Iigne^
Pat. Lat., Tom. LXXXVII.^ col. 1215 et seqq. {This last text, which is Mansi''s, I have
followed^.)


To the most pious Lords and most serene
victors and conquerors, our own sous beloved
of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, (^on-
stantine, the great Emperor, and Heraclius
and Tiberius, Augustuses, Agatho, the bish-
op and servant of the servants of God, to-
gether with all the synods subject to the
council of the Apostolic See.


I same Holy and inseparable Trinity, which
hath crcahnl all thinj^s, hatli made disposi-
tion of them, and still contains them.

Moreover we confess that one of the same
holy consubstantial Trinity, God the "Word,
who was begotten of the Father before the
worlds, in the last days of the world for us

j and for our salvation came down from heav-
en, and was incarnate of the Holy Ghost,
and of our Lady, the holy, immaculate,
ever-virgin and glorious Mary, truly and
properly the INlother of God, that is to say


{The Letter opens toith a number of com-
pliments to the Emperoi\ much in style and
matter like the introduction of the preceding
letter. I have not thought it loorth while to

translate this,hiit have begun at the doctrinal her; and was truly made man, the same be
j)a)'t, v^hich, is given to the reader in full, ing very God and very man. God of God
(Labbe and Cossart, col. 682.)]


according to the flesh which was born of


We believe in God the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth, and of all things
visible and invisible ; and in his only-be-
gotten Son, who was begotten of him before
all worlds ; very God of Very God, Light
of Light, begotten not made, being of one
substance with the Father, that is of the
same substance as the Father ; by him were
all things made which are in heaven and
which are in earth ; and in the Holy Ghost,
file Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth
from the Father, and with the Father and
the Son together is worshipped and glori-
fied ; the Trinity in unity and Unity in
trinity ; a unity so far as essence is con-
cerned, but a trinity of persons or subsis-
tences ; and so we confess God the Father,
God the Son. and God the Holy Ghost;
not three gods, but one God, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost : not a sub-
sistency of three names, but one substance
of three subsistences ; and of these per- '
sons one is the essence, or substance or
natm-e, that is to say one is the godhead,
one the eternity, one the power, one the :
kingdom, one the glory, one the adoration,
one the essential will and opcraticm of the


his Father, but man of his Virgin Mother,
incarnate of her Hesh with a reasonable and
intelhgent soul : of one substance wath God
the Father, as touching his godhead, and
consubstantial with us as touching his man-
hood, and in all points like unto us, but
without sin. He was crucified for us under
Pontius Pilate, he suiiered, was buried and
rose again; ascended into heaven, and
sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and
he shall come again to judge both the quick
and the dead, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end.

And this same one Lord of ours, Jesus
Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, we
acknowledge to subsist of and in two sub-
stances unconfus(>dly, unchangeably, indi-
visibl}', inseparably, the diHerence of the
natures being by no means taken away by
the union, but rather the proprieties of each
nature being preserved and concurring in
one Person and one Subsistence, not scat-
tered or divided into two Persons, nor con-
fused into one composite nature ; but we
confess one and the same only-begotten Son,
God the Word, our Lord Jesus Christ, not
one in another, nor one added to another,
\)\\i himself the same in two natures — that
is to say in the Godhead and in the man-


111. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. G80-681


341


hood even after the hypostatic union : for
ueitlier was the Word changed into the nat-
ure of Hesh, nor was the liesh transformed
into the nature of the Word, for each re-
mained what it was by nature. We discern
by contemplation alone the distinction be-
tween the natures united in him of which
inconfusedly, insejjarably and unchangcuibly
he is composed ; for one is of both, and
through one both, because there are to-
gether both the height of the deity and the
humility of the Hesh, each nature preserv-
ing after the union its own proper character
without any defect ; and each form acting
in comnninion with the other what is proper
to itself. The Word working what is proper
to the Word, and the tiesli what is proper
to the flesh ; of whicii the one shines with
miracles, the other bows down beneath in-
juries. Wherefore, as we coofess that he
truly has two natures or substances, viz. :
the Godhead and the manhood, inconfused-
ly, indivisibly and unchangeably [united],
so also the rule of piety instructs us that he
has two natural wills and two natural oper-
ations, as perfect God and perfect man, one
and the same our Lord Jesus Christ. And
this the apostolic and evangelical tradition
and the authority of the Holy Fathers
(whom the Holy Apostolic and Catholic
Church and the venerable Synods receive),
has plainly taught us.

[ Tlie letter goes on to say that this is the
traditional faith , and is that tvhich was set
forth in a council over which Pope Martin
presided, and that those opposed to this faith
have erred from the truth, some in one way,
and some in a.nother. It next ajyologizes
for the delay in sending the persons ordered
hy the imperial Sacra, and proceeds thus :
(Labbe and Cossart, col. 686 ; Migne, col.
1224).]

In the first place, a great number of us
are spread over a vast extent of country
even to the sea coast, and the length of their


journey necessarily took much time. More-
over we were in hopes of being able to join
to our humility our fellow-servant and
brother bishop, Theodore, the archbishop
and philosopher of the island of Great Brit-
ain, with others who have been kept there
even till to-day ; and to add to these divers
bishops of this council who have their sees in
different parts, that our humble suggestion
[i.e., the doctrinal definition contained in
the letters] might proceed from a council of
wide spread influence, lest if only a part
were cognizant of what was being done, it
might escape the notice of a part ; and es-
pecially because among the Gentiles, as the
Longobards, and the Sclavi, as also the
Franks, the French, the Goths, and the
Britaius, there are known to be very many
of our fellow-servants who do not cease
curiously to enquire on the subject, that they
may know what is being done in the cause
of the Apostolic faith : who as they can be of
advantage so long as they hold the true faith
with us, and think in unison with us, so are
they found troublesome and contrary, if
(which may God forbid !) they stumble at any
article of the faith. But we, although most
humble, yet strive with all our might that
the commonwealth of your Christian empire
may be shown to be more sublime than
all the nations, for in it has been founded
the See of Blessed Peter, the prince of
the Apostles, by the authority of which, all
Christian nations venerate and worship with
us, through the reverence of the blessed
Apostle Peter himself. {This is the Latin,
which appears to tne to he corrupt, the Greek
reads as follotvs : " The authority of which
for the triith, all the Christian nations to-
gether with us worship and revere, accord-
ing to the honour of the blessed Peter the
Apostle himself.")

[The letter ends with prayers for con-
stancy, and hlessings on the State and Em-
peror, and hopes for the universal diffusion
and acceptance of the truth.~\


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION VIII.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 730.)


\_The Em^teror said]

Let George, the most holy arcbliishop of
this onr God-preserved city, ami let iMaca-
rins, the venerable archbishop of Antioch,
and let the synod subject to them [i.e., their
suffrai^ans] say, if tliey submit to the force
(ei (TTOi')(ovai TJ] Suvdfxei) of the suggestions
sent by the most holy Agatho Pope of Old '

Home and by his Synod. I

i
I

[The answer of George, with which all h/'s \
bishops, mamj of them, speaking one hy one, \
agreed excejit Theodore of Metilene {ivho


subject to the See of Constantinople. (Col.

735.)]

And we, most pious Lord, accepting the
teaching of the suggestion sent to your most
gentle l\jrtitud(! Ijy the most holy and
blessed Agatho, Pope of Old Home, and of
that other suggestion which was adopted by
the council subject to him, and following
the sense therein contained, so we are
minded, so we profess, and so we believe
that in our one Lord Jesus Christ, our true
God, there are two natures unconfusedly,
michangeably, undividedly, and two natural


handed in his assent at the end of the Tenth l ^^j^^'^ /^"^^ ^"'^^ natural operations ; and all


Session)?^


who have taught, and who now say, that
there is but one will and one operation in
the two natures of our one Lord Jesus
Christ oift- true God, we anathematize.


I have diligently examined the whole
force of the suggestions sent to your most

pious Fortitude as well l)y Agatho, the most , ^jhe Emperor's demand to Macarius.

holy Pope ot Old ' Home, as by his syntxl, I (q^j 739 \-|

and I have scrutinized the works of the '

holy and approved Fathers, which are laid Let Macarius, the Venerable Archbishop

up in my venerable patriarchate, and I '• of Antioch, who has now heard what has


been said by this holy and EcunuMiical Sy-
nod [demanding the expression of his faith],


have found that all the testimonies of the
holy and accepted Fathers, which are con-
tained in thost3 suggestions agree with, and answer what seemeth him good
in no particular differ from, the holy and
accepted Fathers. Therefore I give my
submission to them and thus I profess and
believe.


[ The answer of Macarius?^


I do not say that there are two wills or
two operations in the dispensation of the
incarnation of our Loi'd Jesus Christ, but
{The ansioei' of all the rest of the Bishops ' one will and one theandric operation.


THE SENTENCE AGAINST THE MONOTHELITES.


SESSION XIIL

(L. and C, ConriUa, Tom. VI., col. 943.)


The holy council said : After we had re-
considereil, according to our pi-omise which
we had made to your highness, the doctrinal


was then bislio]i of Phasis and to Honorius
some time Po])C of ( )ld Pome, as well as tiie
letter of the latter to the same Sergius, we


letters of Sergius, at one time patriarch of find that these documents are quite foreign
this royal god-protected city to Cyrus, who | to the a]V)stolic dogmas, to the declarations


' " Old " omitted in Latin.


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. G80-G81


343


of the holy Couucils, and to all the accepted
Fathers, and that they follow the false
teachings of the heretics ; therefore we en-
tirely reject them, and execrate them as
hurtful to the soul. But the names of those
men Avhose doctrines we execrate must also
be thrust forth from the holy Church of
God, iiamel}', that of Sergius some time
bishop of this God-preserved royal city
who was the first to write on this impi-
ous doctrine ; also that of Cyrus of Alex-
andria, of Pjrrhus, Paul, and Peter, who
died bishops of this God-preserved city,
and were like-minded with them ; and that
of Theodore sometime bishop of Pharau,
all of whom the most holy and thrice blessed
Agatlio, Pope of Old Eome, in his sugges-
tion to our most pious and God-preserved
lord and mighty Emperor, rejected, because
they were minded contrary to oui- orthodox


faith, all of whom we define are to be sub-
jected to anathema. And with these we
define that there shall be expelled from the
holy Church of God and anathematized
Honorius who was some time Po})e of Old
Rome, because of what we found Avrittcn by
him to Sergius, that in all respects he fol-
lowed his view and confirmed his impious
doctrines. We have also examined the sy-
nodal letter of Sophrouius of holy memory,
some time Patrinrch of the Holy City of
Christ our God, Jerusalem, and have found
it in accordance with the true faith and with
the Apostolic teachings, and with those of
the holy apju'oved Fathers. Therefore we
have received it as orthodox and as salutary
to the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
and have decreed that it is right that his
name be inserted in the diptychs of the Holy
Churches.


SESSION XVI.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1010.)


\_The Acclamations of the Fathers.^

Many years to the Emperor ! Many
years to Constantine, our great Emperor !
Many years to the Orthodox King ! Many
years to our Emperor that maketli peace !
Many years to Constantine, a second Mar-
tian ! Many years to Constantine, a new
Theodosius ! Many years to Constantine,
a new Justinian ! Many years to the keep-
er of the orthodox faith ! O Lord preserve
the foundation of the Churches ! O Lord
preserve the keeper of the faith !

Many years to Agatho, Pope of Eome !
Many years to George, Patriarch of Con-
stantinople ! Many years to Theophanus,
Patriarch of Antioch ! Many years to the
orthodox council ! Many years to the or-
thodox Senate!


To Theodore of Pharan, the heretic,
anathema ! To Sergius, the heretic, anath-
ema ! To Cyrus, the heretic, anathema! To
Honorius, the heretic, anathema I To Pyr-
rhus, the heretic, anathema !


To Paul
To Peter
To Macarius
j To Stephen
To Polychronius |

To Apergius of Perga J


\


the heretic, anath-
ema!


To all heretics, anathema ! To all who
side with heretics, anathema !

May the faith of the Christians increase,
and long years to the orthodox and Ecu-
menical Council !


THE DEFINITION OF FAITH.


{Found in the AcU, Session XVI IL, L. ;iud 0., Concilia^ Tom. YI., col. 1019.)


The holy, great, and Ecumenical Synod
which has been assembled by the grace of
God, and the religious decree of the most
religious and faithful and mighty Sovereign
C'Onstantiue, in this God-i)rotected and
royal city of Constantinople, New Rome, in
the Hall of the imperial Palace, called Trul-
lus, has decreed as follows.

The only-begotten Son, and Word of God
the Father, who was made man in all things
like unto iis without sin, Christ our true
God, has declared expressly in the words
of the Gospel, " I am the light of the world ;
he that foUoweth me shall not walk in dark-
ness, but shall have the light of life." And
again, " My peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you." Our most gentle
Sovereign, the cliam])ion of orthodoxy, and
opponent of evil doctrine, being reverential-
ly led by this divinely uttered doctrine of
peace, and having convened this our holy
and Ecumenical assembly, has united the
judgment of the whole Church. Wherefore
this our liolv and Ecumenical Synod haviner
driven away the impious error which had
prevailed for a certain time until now, and
following closely the straight j^ath of the
holy and approved Fathers, has piously
given its full assent to the five holy and
Ecumenical Synods (that is to say, to that
of the 318 holy Fathers who assembled in
Nice against the raging Arius ; and the
next in Constantino[)le of the 150 God-
inspired men against Macedonius the ad-
versary of the Spirit, and the impious Apol-
linaris ; and also the first in Ephesus of 200
venerable men convened against Nestorius
the Judaizer ; and that in Chalcedon of
630 God-inspired Fathers against Eutyches
and Dioscorus hatetl of God ; and in addi-
tion to these, to the last, that is the Fifth
holy Synod assembled in this place, against
Theodore of Mopsuestia, Origen, Did}'-
raus, and Evagrius, and the Avritings of
Theodoret against the Twelve Chapters of
the celebrated Cyril, and the Epistle which
was said to be written by Tbas to ^Nlaris tht^
Persian), renewing in all things the ancient
decrees of religion, and chasing away the
impious doctrines of irreligion. And this


our holy and Ecumenical Synod inspired of
God has set its seal to the Creed which was
put forth by the 318 Fathers, and again re-
ligiously confirmed by the 150, which also
the other holy synods cordially received
and ratified for the taking away of every
soul-destroying heresy.

The Nicene Creed of the 318 holy Fa-
thers.

We believe, etc.

The Creed of the 150 holy Fathers as-
sembled at Constantinople.

We believe, etc.

The holy and Ecumenical Synod further
saj's, this pious and orthodox Creed of the
Divine grace would be sufiicient for the full
knowledge and confirmation of the ortho-
dox faith. But as tlu; author of evil, who,
in the beginning, availed himself of the aid
of the serpent, and by it brought the poison
of death upon the human race, has not
desisted, but in like manner now. having
found suitable instruments for working out
his will (we mean Theodorus, w^ho was
Bishop of Pliaran, Sergius, Pyrrhus. Paul
and Peter, who were Archbishops of this
royal city, and moreover, Honorius who
was Pope of the elder Rome, Cyrus Bishop
of Alexandria, Macarius who was lately
bishop of Antioch, and Stephen his disci-
ple), has actively emi)lo3'ed them in raising
up for the whole Church the stumbling-
blocks of one will and one operation in the
two natures of Christ our true God, one of
the Holy Trinity ; thus disseminating, in
novel terms, amongst the orthodox jieople,
an heresy similar to the mad and wicked doc-
trine of the impious Apollinaris, Severus,
and Themistius, and endeavouring craft-
ily to destroy the perfection of the incar-
nation of the same our Lord Jesus Christ,
our God, by blasphemously representing
his flesh endowed with a rational soul as
devoid of will or operation. Christ, there-
fore, our God, has raised up our faithful
Sovereign, a new David, having found him
a man after his own heart, who as it is writ-
ten, " has not;3afi'erod his eves to sleep nor
his eyelids to slumber," until he has found
a perfect declaration of orthodoxy b}' this


III. CONSTANTINOPLE. A.D. G80-G81


345


our God-collected and holy Syuod ; for, ac-
cording to the sentence spoken of God,
" Where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the midst of
them," the present holy and Ecumenical
Synod faithfully receiving and saluting with
uplifted hands as well the suggestion which
by the most holy and blessed Agatho, Pope
of ancient Rome, was sent to our most pious
and faithful Emperor Constantine, Avhich
rejected by name those who taught or
preached one will and one operation in the
dispensation of the incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ who is our very God, has
likewise adopted that other synodal sug-
gestion which was sent by the Council
holden under the same most holy Pope,
composed of 125 Bishops, beloved of God,
to his God-instructed tranquillity, as conso-
nant to the holy Council of Chalcedon and
to the Tome of the most holy and blessed
Leo, Pope of the same old Rome, which was
directed to St. Flavian, which also this
Council called the Pillar of the right faith ;
and also agrees with the Synodal Epistles
which were written by Blessed Cyril against
the impious Nestorius and addressed to the
Oriental Bishops. Following the five holy
Ecumenical Councils and the holy and ap-
proved Fathers, with one voice defining that
our Lord Jesus Christ must be confessed
to be very God and very man, one of the
holy and consubstantial and life - giving
Trinity, perfect in Deity and perfect in hu-
manity, very God and very man, of a rea-
sonable soul and human body subsisting ;
consubstantial with the Father as touching
his Godhead and consubstantial with us as
touching his manhood ; in all things like unto
us, sin only excepted ; begotten of his Father
before all ages according to his Godhead,
but in these last days for us men and for
our sah^ation made man of the Holy Ghost
and of the Virgin Mary, strictly and prop-
erly the Mother of God according to the
flesh; one and the same Christ our Lord
the only-begotten Son of two natures un-
confusedly, unchangeably, inseparably, in-
divisibly to be recognized, the peculiarities
of neither nature being lost by the union
but rather the proprieties of each nature
being preserved, concurring in one Person
and in one subsistence, not parted or di-
vided into two persons but one and the
same only-begotten Son of God, the Word,
our Lord Jesus Christ, according as the


Prophets of old have taught us and as our
Lord Jesus Christ himself hath instructed
us, and the Creed of the holy Fathers hath
delivered to us ; defining all this we like-
wise declare that in him are two natural
wills and two natural operations indivisibly,
inconvertibly, inseparably, inconfusedly, ac-
cording to the teaching of the holy Fathers.
And these two natural wills are not contrary
the one to the other (God forl)id !) as the
impious heretics assert, but his human will
follows and that not as resisting and reluc-
tant, but rather as subject to his divine and
omnipotent will. For it was right that the
flesh should be moved but subject to the
divine will, according to the most wise
Athanasius. For as his flesh is called and
is the flesh of God the Word, so also the
natural will of his flesh is called and is the
proper will of God the Word, as he him-
self says : " I came down from heaven, not
that I might do mine own will but the
will of the Father which sent me ! " where
he calls his own will the will of his flesh,
inasmuch as his flesh was also his own. For
as his most holv and immaculate animated
flesh was not destroyed because it \\as dei-
fied but continued in its own state and nat-
ure (op&) re Koi Xoyo)), so also his human will,
although deified, was not suppressed, but
was rather preserved according to the say-
ing of Gregory Theologus : " His will [i.e.,
the Saviour's] is not contrary to God but
altogether deified."

We glorify two natural operations indi-
visibly, immutably, inconfusedly, insepara-
bly in the same our Lord Jesus Christ our
true God, that is to say a divine operation
and a human operation, according to the
divine preacher Leo, who most distinctly
asserts as follows : " For each form {/j-opcjir})
does in communion with the other what per-
tains properly to it, the Word, namely, do-
ing that which pertains to the Word, and
the flesh that which pertains to the flesh."

For we will not admit one natural opera-
tion in God and in the creature, as we will
not exalt into the divine essence "\^'hat is
created, nor will Ave bring down the glory
of the divine nature to the place suited to

I the creature.

! We recognize the miracles and the suffer-
ings as of one and the same [Person], but
of one or of the other nature of which he is
and in which he exists, as Cyril admirably

I says. Preserving therefore the inconfused-


346


ITT. rOXSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-681


ness and indivisibility, we make briefly this
whole confession, believing our Lord Jesus
Christ to be one of the Trinity and after
the incarnation our true God, we say that
his two naturt's shone forth in his one sub-
sistence in which he both performed the
miracles and endured the sufferings through
the whole of his economic conversation iSl
o\r)<; avTov t/}? OLKOvofiKri<i dvaarpocprj'i), and
that not in appearance only but in very
deed, and this by reason of the difference
of nature which must be recognized in the
same Person, for although joined together
yet each nature wills and does the things
proper to it and that indivisibly and incon-
fusedly. Wherefore we confess two wills
and two opei-ations, concurring most fitly in
him for the salvation of the human race.


These things, therefore, with all diligence
and care having been formulated by us, we
define that it he permitted to no one to bring
forward, or to write, or to com])ose, or to
think, or to teach a different faith. AVhoso-
ever shall presume to compose a different
faith, or to propose, or teach, or hand to
those wishing to be converted to the knowl-
edge of the truth, from the Gentiles or Jews,
or from any heresy, any different Creed ; or
to introduce a new voice or invention of
speech to subvert these things which now
have been determined by us, all these, if
they be Bishops or clerics let them be de-
]iosed, the Bishops from the Episcopate,
the clerics from the clergy ; but if they be
monks or laymen : let them be anathema-
tized.


THE PKOSPHONETICUS TO THE EMPEKOR.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1047 et seqq.)


[TJiis address begins with many comijli-
ments to the Emperor, especially for his zeal
for the true faith.^

But because the adversary Satan allows
no rest, he has raised up the very ministers
of Christ against him, as if armed and carry-
ing Aveapons, etc.

\_The various heretics are then named and
hoiv they were condemned by the preceding
five councils is set forth.']

Things being so, it was necessary that
your beloved of Christ majesty should gath-
er together this all holy, and numerous as-
sembly.

Thereafter being inspired by the Holy
Ghost, and all agreeing and consenting to-
gether, and giving our approval to the doc-
trinal letter of our most blessed and exalted
pope, Agatho, which he sent to 3'our mighti-
ness, as also agreeing to the suggestion of
the holy synod of one hundred and twenty-
five fathers held under him, we teach that
one of the Holy Trinity, our Lord Jesus
Christ, was incarnate, and must be cele-
brated in two perfect natures without divis-
ion and without confusion. For as the
Word, he is consubstantial and eternal with
God his father ; but as taking flesh of the
immaculate Virgin Mary, the Mother of God,
he is perfect man, consubstantial with us
and made in time. We declare therefore
that he is perfect in Godhead and that the
same is perfect likewise in manhootl, ac-
cording to the pristine tradition of the
fathers and the divine definition of Chalce-
dou.

And as we recognize two natures, so also
we recognize two natural wills and two
natural operations. For we dare not say
that either of the natures which are in Christ
in his incarnation is without a will and
operation : lest in taking away the pro-
prieties of those natures, we likewise take
away the natures of which they are the
proprieties. For we neither deny the
natural will of his humanity, or its natural


operation : lest we also deii}' what is the
chief thing of the dispensation for our sal-
vation, and lest we attribute passions to the
Godhead. For this they were attempting
who have recently introduced the detestable
novelty that in him there is but one will
and one operation, renewing the malignancy
of Arius, Apollinaris, Eutyches and Severus.
For should we say that the human nature
of our Lord is without will and ojieration,
how could we affirm in safety the perfect
humanity? For nothing else constitutes
the integrity of human nature except the
essential will, through which the strength
of free-will is marked in us ; and this is
also the case with the substantial operation.
For how shall we call him perfect in hu-
manity if he in no wise suffered and acted
as a man? For like as the union of two
natures preserves for us one subsistence
without confusion and without division ; so
this one subsistence, shewing itself in two
natures, demonstrates as its own what
things belong to each.

Therefore we declare that in him there
are two natural wills and two natural opera-
tions, proceeding commonly and without
division : but we cast out of the Church and
rightly subject to anathema all superfluous
novelties as well as their inventors : to wit,
Theodore of Pharan, Sergius and Paul, Pyr-
rlius, and Peter (who were archbishops of
Constantinople), moreover Cyrus, who bore
the priesthood of Alexandria, and with
them Honorius, who Avas the ruler {irpoehpov)
of Home, as he followed them in these
things. Besides these, with the best of
cause we anathematize and depose Maca-
rius, who was bishop of Antioch, and his
disciple Stephen (or rather we should say
master), who tried to defend the impiety of
their predecessors, and in short stirred up
the whole world, find by their pestilential
letters and by their fraudulent institutions
devastated multitiTdes iu every direction.
Likewise also that old man Polychronius,
with an infantile intelligence, who promised
he would raise the dead and who when they
did not rise, was laughed at ; and all who
have taught, or do teach, or shall presume


348


111. CONSTAiSTl^'OPLE. A.D. r.sO-C.Sl


to teach one will aud one operation in the
incarnate Christ. . . . But the highest
prince of the Apostles fought with us: for
Ave had on our side his imitator and the
successor in his see, who also liad set forth
in his letter the mysterv of the divine
word (^£0X071^9). For the ancient city of
Rome handed thee a confession of divine
character, and a chart from the sunsetting
raised up the day of dogmas, and made the
darkness manifest, and Peter spoke through
Agatho, and thou, O autocratic King, ac-
cording to the divine decree, with the Om-
nipotent Sharer of thy throne, didst judge.


But, O benign antl justice-loving Lord,


do thou in return do this favoiir to him who
hath bestowed thy power upon thee ; and
give, as a seal to what has been defined by us,
thy imperial ratilicatioii in writing, and so
confirm them with the custt)mary pious
edicts and constitutions, that no one may
contradict the things which have been done,
nor raise any fresh question. For rest
assured, (J serene majesty, that we have not
falsified anything detined by the Ecumeni-
cal Councils and by the approved fathers,
but we have confirmed them. And now we
all cry out with one mind and one voice,
"O God, save the King ! etc., etc."

[Then follow numerous compliments to the
Emperor and prayers for his preservation.^


LETTER OF THE COUNCIL TO ST. AGATHO.


{Found in Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXXXVII., col. WJi7 et seqq. ; and Lahbe and Cossart,

Concilia, To)n. VI., col. 1071 et seqq.)


A copy of the letter sent by the holy and
Ecumenical Sixth Council to Agatho, the
most blessed and most holy pope of Old
Rome.

The holy and ecumenical council which
by the grace of God and the pious sanction
of the most pious and faithful Coustantine,
the great Emperor, has been gathered to-
gether in this God-preserved and royal city,
Constantinople, the new Rome, in the
Secret um of the imperial (Oeiov, sacri)
palace called Trullus, to the most holy and
most blessed pope of Old Rome, Agatho,
health in the Lord.

Serious illnesses call for greater helps,
as you know, most blessed [father] ; and
therefore Christ our true God, who is the
creator and governing power of all things,
gave a wise physician, namely your God-
honoured sanctity, to drive away by force
the contagion of heretical pestilence by the
remedies of orthodox}', and to give the
strength of health to the members of the
church. Therefore to thee, as to the bish-
op of the first see of the Universal Chui'ch,
we leave what must be done, since you wil-
lingly take for your standing ground the
firm rock of the faith, as we know from
having read your true confession in the
letter sent by your fatherly beatitude to
the most pious emperor : and we acknoAvl-
edge that this letter was divinely written
{perscriptas) as by the Chief of the Apos-
tles, and through it we have cast out the
heretical sect of many errors whicli had re-
cently sprung up, having been urged to
making a decree by Constantine who di-
vinely reigns, and wields a most clement
sceptre. And by his help we have over-
thrown the error of impiety, having as it
were laid siege to the nefarious doctrine of
the heretics. And then tearing to pieces
the foundations of their execrable heresy,
and attacking them with spiritual and pa-
ternal arms, and confounding their tongues
that they might not s]")eak consistently with
each other, we overturned the tower built
up by these followers of this most impious


heresy ; and we slew them with anathema,
as lapsed concerning the faith and as sin-
ners, in the morning outside the camp of
the tabernacle of God, that we may express
ourselves after the manner of David,^ in
accordance with the sentence already given
concerning them in your letter, and their
names are these : Theodore, bishop of
Pbaran, Sergius, Honorius, Cyrus, Paul,
Pjrrhus and Peter. Moreover, in addition
to these, we justl}' subjected to the anath-
ema of heretics those also Avho live in
their imjiiety which they have received, or,
to speak more accuratel}-, in the impiety of
these God - hated persons, ApoUinaris,
Severus and Themestius, to wit, Macarius,
who was the bishop of the great city of
Antioch (and him w^e also stripped deserv-
edly of his pastor's robes on account of
his impenitence concerning the orthodox
faith and his obstinate stubbornness), and
Stephen, his disciple in craziness and his
teacher in impiety, also Polychronius, who
w^as inveterate in his heretical doctrines,
thus answering to his name ; and finally all
those who impenitently have taught or do
teach, or now hold or have held similar
doctrines.

Up to now gi'ief, sorrow, and many
tears have been our portion. For we can-
not laugh at the fall of our neighbours, nor
exult with joy at their unbridled madness,
nor have we been elated that we might fall
all the more grievously because of this
thing ; not thus, O venerable and sacred
head, have we been taught, we who hold
Christ, the Lord of the universe, to be
both benign and man-loving in the highest
deoree ; for he exhorts us to be imitators
of him in his priesthood so far as is possi-
ble, as becometh the good, and to obtain
the pattern of his pastoral and concilia-
tory government. But also to true repent-
ance the most Serene Emperor and our-
selves have exhorted them in various ways,
and we have conducted the whole matter
with great religiousness and care. Nor

1 Psalm C, verse 8 (Heb. ci., uit.) neither LXX. nor Vulgate
version.


350


111. COXSTANTINOPLE. A.D. 680-G81


have we been moved to do so for the sake '
of gain, uor by liatred, as you can easily '
see from what things liave been done in
each session, and related in the minutt's,
which are herewith sent to your blessed- j
ness : and you will understand from your
holiness's vicars, Thcod(jre and Cleorge, pres-
byters beloved of Goil, and from John, the
most religious deacon, and from Coustan-
tiue, the most venerable sub-deacon, all of
them your spiritual children and our well-
loved brethren. So too you will hear the
same things from those sent by your holy
synod, the holy bishops who rightly and
uprightly, in accordance with your disci-
pline, decreed with us in the tirst chapter of
the faith.

Thus, illuminated by the Holy Spirit,
and instructed by your doctrine, we have
cast forth the vile doctrines of im|)iety,
making smooth the right path of orthodox^',
being in every way encouraged and helped
in so doing by the wisdom and power of
our most pious and serene Emperor Con-
stantine. And then one of our number,
the most holy prsesul of this reigning Con-
stantinople, in the first place assenting
to the orthodox compositions sent by 3-011
to the most pious emptiror as in all re-
spects agreeable to the teaching of the
approved Fathers and of the Clod-instruct-
ed Fathers, and of the holy five universal
councils, we all, by the help of Christ
our God, easily accomplished what we
were striving after. For as God was the
mover, so God also he crowned our coun-
cil.

Thereupon, therefore, the grace of the
Holy Spirit shone upon us, displaying his
power, through your assiduous prayers, for
the uprooting of all weeds and every tree
which brought not forth good fruit, and giv-
ing command that they should be consumed
by fire. And W(! all agree both in heart and
tongue, and hand, and have put forth, by
the assistance of the life-giving Spirit, a


definition, clean from all error, certain, and
infallil)le; not 'removing the ancient land-
marks, as it is written (God forbid !j, but
remaining steadfast in the testimonies and
authority of the holy and approved fathers,
and defining that, as of two and in two
natures (to wit, the divinity and the hu-
manity) of which he is composed and in
which he exists, Christ our true God is
preached by us, and is glorified insepaiably,
unchangeably, unconfusedly, and undivid-
edly ; just so also we predicate of him
two natural operations, undividedly, incon-
trovertibly, unconfusedly, inseparably, as
has be(Mi declared in our synodal di'fini-
tion. These decrees the majesty of our
God-copying Emperor assented to, and sub-
scribed them with his own hand. And, as
has been said, we rejected and condemned
that most inii)ious and unsubstantial heresy
Avliich alHrnied but one will and one oper-
ation in the incarnate Christ our true God,
and by so doing we have pressed sore upon
the crowd who confound and who divide,
and have extinguished the inflamed storm
of other heresies, but we have set forth
clearly with you the shining light of the
orthodox faith, and we pray your paternal
sanctity to confirm our decree by your
honourable rescript ; through which we
confide in good hope in Christ that his
merciful kindness will grant freely to the
lloman State, committed to the care of our
most clement Emperor, stability; and will
adorn with daily ^-okes and victories his
most serene clemency ; and that in addition
to the good things he has here bestowed
upon us, he will set youi' God-honoured
holiness before his tremendous tribunal as
one who has sincerely confessed the true
faith, preserving it unsullied and keeping
tjood ward over the orthodox flocks com-
mitted to him by God.

We and all who are with us salute all
the brethren in Christ who are with your
blessedness.


III. CONSTxVNTINOPLE. A.D. 680-081 351


EXCURSUS ON THE CONDEMNATION OF POPE HONORIUS.

To this decree attaches not only the necessary importance and interest which belongs to
any ecumenical decision upon a disputed doctrinal question with regard to the incarnation
of the Son of God, but an altogether accidental interest, arising from the fact that by this
decree a Pope of Rome is stricken with anathema in the person of Honorius. I need hardly
remind the reader how many interesting and diliicult questions in theology such an action
on the part of an Ecumenical Council raises, and how all important, not to say vital, to such
as accept the ruling of the recent Vatican Council, it is that some explanation of this fact
should be arrived at which will be satisfactory. It would be highly improper for me in these
pages to discuss the matter theologically. Volumes on each side have been written on this
subject, and to these I must refer the reader, but in doing so I hope I may be pardoned if I
add a word of counsel — to read both sides. If one's knowledge is derived only from modern
Eastern, Anglican, or Protestant writers, such as " Janus and the Council," the Pere Gratry's
" Letters," or Littledale's controversial books against Rome, one is apt to be as much one-
sided as if he took his information from Cardinal Baronivis, Cardinal Bellarmine, Rohr-
bacher's Historij, or from the recent work on the subject by Pennacchi.' Perhaps the aver-
age reader will hardly find a more satisfactory treatment than that by Bossuet in the
Defensio. [Liber VIL, cap. xxi , etc.)

It will be sufficient for the purposes of this volume to state that Roman Catholic Curi-
alist writers are not at one as to how the matter is to be treated. Pennacchi, in his work
referred to above, is of opinion that Honorius's letters were strictly speaking Papal decrees,
set forth auctoritate apostoUca, and therefore irreformable, but he declares, contrary to the
opinion of almost all theologians and to the decree of this Council, that they are orthodox,
and that the Council erred in condemning them ; as he expresses it, the decree rests upon
an error in facto dogmatico. To save an Ecumenical Synod from error, he thinks the synod
ceased to be ecumenical before it took this action, and was at that time only a synod of a
number of Orientals ! Cardinal Barouius has another way out of the difficulty. He says
that the name of Honorius was forged and put in the decree by an erasure in the i^lace of
the name of Theodore, the quondam Patriarch, who soon after the Council got himself re-
stored to the Patriarchal position. Baronius moreover holds that Honorius's letters have
been corrupted, that the Acts of the Council have been corrupted, and, in short, that every-
thing which declares or proves that Honorius was a heretic or was condemned by an Ecu-
menical Council as such, is untrustworthy and false. The groundlessness, not to say
absurdity, of Baronius's view has been often exposed by those" of his own communion, a brief
but sufficient summary of the refutation will be found in Hefele, who while taking a very
halting and unsatisfactory position himself, yet is perfectly clear that Baronius's contention
is utterly indefensible.'^

Most Roman controversialists of recent years have admitted both the fact of Pope Ho-
norius's condemnation (which Baronius denies), and the monothelite (and therefore heretical)
character of his epistles, but they are of opinion that these letters were not his ex cathedrd
utterances as Doctor Universalis, but mere expressions of the private opinion of the Pontiff
as a theologian. With this matter we have no concern in this connexion.

I shall therefore say nothing further on this point but shall simply supply the leading
proofs that Honorius was as a matter of fact condemned by the Sixth Ecumenical Council.

1. His condemnation is found in the Acts in the xiiith Session, near the beginning.

2. His two letters were ordered to be burned at the same session.


' Pennacchi. De Honor ii I., Romani Pontificis, eausa in Concilio VI.
^ Hefele. History of the Councils. Vol. V., p. 190 et seqq.


352 III. CONSTAXTIA'OPLE. A. I). G80-G81

3. In the xvitb Session the bishops exclaimed " Anathema to the heretic Sergius, to the
heretic Cyrus, to the heretic Honorius, etc."

4. In the decree of faitli {nibhshed at the xviijtli Session it is stated that '• the originator
of all evil . . . found a tit tool for his will in . . . Honorius, Pope of Old Rome, etc."

5. The report of the Council to the Emperor says that " Honorius, formerly LishoiJ of
Rome " they had *' punished with exclusion and anathema " because he followed the mono-
thelites.

6. In its letter to Pope Agatho the Council says it " has slain with anathema Honorius."

7. The imperifil decree speaks of the " unholy priests who infected the Church and falsely
governed " and mentions among them " Honorius, the Pope of Old Rome, the confirnicr of
heresy who contradicted himself." The Emperor goes on to anathematize "Honorius who
was Pope of Old Rome, who in everything agreed with them, went with them, and strength-
ened the heresy."

8. Pope Leo II. confirmed the decrees of the Council and expressly says that he too
anathematized Honorius.'

9. That Honorius was anathematized by the Sixth Council is mentioned in the Ti'ullan
Canons (No. j.).

lU. So too the Seventh Council declares its adhesion to the anathema in its decree of
faith, and in several places in the acts the same is said.

11. Houorius's name was found in the Roman copy of the Acts. This is evident from
Anastasius's life of Leo II. ( ]'ita Lconis IF.)

12. The Papal Oath as found in tlie Liber Diurnus ^ taken by each new Pope from the
fifth to the eleventh century, in the form probably prescribed by Gregory II., " smites with
eternal anathema the originators of the new heresy, Sergius, etc., together with Honorius,
because he assisted the base assertion of the heretics."

13. In the lesson for the feast of St. Leo II. in the Roman Breviary the name of Pope
Honoi'ius occurs among those excommunicated by the Sixth Synod. Upon this we may
well hear Bossuet : "They su])j)ress as far as they can, the Liber Diurnus : they have erased
this from tlie Roman Breviary. Have they therefore hidden it ? Truth breaks out from all
sides, and these things become so much the more evident, as they are the more studiously
put out of sight." -^

With such an array of proof no conservative historian, it would seem, can question the
fact that Honorius, the Pope of Rome, was condemned and anathematized as a heretic by
the Sixth Ecumenical Council.


' " AI?o llonoriup. qni banc apoptolicam scdem non apoptolicae
traditionis doctrina lustravit, sed profana poditioiic iininacula-
tam fidera subvcrturu couatus est, et oiunes, qui in suo errorc de-
functi sunt."


" Ed. En<rcne de Roziere. Paris, 1SG9, No. S4.
' Bossuet. De/. VUri Gal., Lib. vij., cap. xxvj.


THE IMPERIAL EDICT POSTED IN THE THIRD ATRIUM OF THE
GREAT CHURCH NEAR WHAT IS CALLED DICYMBALA.


In the name of our Lonl and Master
Jesus Christ, our God and Saviour, the
most pious Emperor, the peaceful and
Christ-loving Constautine, an Emperor
faithful to God in Jesus Christ, to all our
Christ-loving people living in this God-
preserved and royal city.

[The document is very long, Hefele gives
the following epitome, tvhich is all sufficient
for the ordinary reader, who ivill remember
that it is an Edict of the Emperor and not
anything proceeding f-om the council. ~\

Hefele's Epitome {Hist, of the Councils, Vol.
v., p. 178).

"The heresy of Apollinaris, etc., has been
renewed by Theodore of Pharan and con-
firmed by Houorius, sometime Pope of Old
Rome, who also contradicted himself. Also
Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Paul, Peter; more recently,
Macarius, Stephen, and Polychronius had
diffused Monothelitism. He, the Emperor,


I had therefore convoked this holy and Ecu-
menical Synod, and published the present
! edict with the confession of faith, in order to
: confirm and establish its decrees. (There fol-
lows here an extended confession of faith,
with proofs for the doctrine of two wills and
operations.) As he recognized the five earlier
Ecumenical Synods, so he anathematized all
heretics from Simon Magus, but especially
the originator and patrons of the new heresy,
Theodore and Sergius ; also Pope Honorius,
who was their adherent and patron in every-
thing, and confirmed the heresy (tov Kara irdv-
Ta TOVTOts (rvvatpeTTjv kol a-vvSpofiov kol (SefiaiwTrjv
T^s atpecrews), further, Cja-us, etc, and ordained
that no one henceforth should hold a different
faith, or venture to teach one will and one en-
ergy. In no other than the orthodox faith
could men be saved. Whoever did not obey
the imperial edict should, if he were a bishop
or cleric be deposed ; if an ofiicial, punished
with confiscation of property and loss of the
girdle {Ci^wrj) ; if a private person, banished
from the residence and all other cities. "


THE CANOXS OF THE COUNCIL IN TRULLO ;

OFTEN CALLED

THE QUINISEXT COUNCIL,

A.D. 092.
Elenchus.


Introductory Note.

The Canons ivitli the Ancient Epitome and
Notes.


Excursus to Canon VI., On the Blarriage
of the Clergy.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

From the fact that the canons of the Council in Trullo are included in this volume of
the Decrees and Canons of the Seven Ecumenical Councils it must not for an instant be
supposed that it is intended thereby to affirm that these canons have any ecumenical au-
thority, or that the council by which they were adopted can lay any claim to being ecu-
menical either in view of its constitution or of the subsequent treatment by the Church of
its enactments.

It is true that it claimed at the time an ecumenical character, and styled itself such in
several of its canons, it is true that in the mind of the Emperor Justinian II., who sum-
moned it, it was intended to have been ecumenical. It is true that the Greeks at first de-
clared it to be a continuation of the Sixth Synod and that by this name they frequently
denominate and quote its canons. But it is also true that the West was not really rep-
resented at it at all (as we shall see presently) ; that when the Emperor afterwards sent the
canons to the Pope to receive his signature, he absolutely refused to have anything to do
with them ; and it is further true that they were never practically observed by the West at
all, and that even in the East their authority was rather theoretical than real.

f-^'^^- ■ ' — (Fleury. Ilistoire Eccles'mstique, Livre XL., Chap, xlix.)

As the two last General Councils (in 553 and in 681) had not made any Canons, the
Orientals judged it suitable to suj^j^ly them eleven years after the Sixth Council, that is to
say, the year 692, fifth indiction. For that purpose the Emperor Justinian convoked a
Council, at which 211 Bishops attended, of whom the principal were the four Patriarchs,
Paul of Constantinople, Peter of Alexandria, Anastasius of Jerusalem, George of Antioch.
Next in the subscrijDtious are named John of Justinianopolis, Cyriacus of Cesarea in Cappa-
docia, Basil of Gortyna in Crete, who says that he represents the whole Council of the
Roman Church, as he had said in subscribing the Sixth Council. But it is certain otherwise
that in this latter council there were present Legates of the Holy See. This council, like
the Sixth,' assembled in the dome of the palace called in Latin Trullus, which name it has
kept. It is also named in Latin Quinisextum, in Greek Penthectou, as one might say, the
fifth-sixth, to mark that it is only the supplement of the two preceding Councils, though
properly it is a distinct one.

The intention was to make a body of discipline to serve thenceforth for the whole Church,
and it was distributed into 102 Canons.

To this statement by Fleury some additions must be made. First, with regard to the
date of the synod. This is not so certain as would appear at first sight. At the Seventh
Ecumenical Council, the patriarch Tarasius of Constantinople asserted that, " four or five
years after the sixth Ecumenical Council the same bishops, in a new assembly under
Justinian II. had published the [Trullan] Canons mentioned," and this assertion the Seventh
Council appears to have accepted as true, if we understand the sixth session aright. Now
were this statement true, the date would l)e probably 686, but this is impossible by the
words of the council itself, where we find mention made of the fifteenth of January of the
past 4th indiction, or the year of the world, 6109. To make this agree at all, scholars tell
us that for iv. must be read xiv. But the rest of the statement is equally erroneous, the
bishops were not the same, as can readily be seen by comparing the subscriptions to the Acts.

The year of the world 6109 is certainly wrong, and so other scholars would road 6199,

' This statement of Fleary'H is contested by those who agree with ABseman in thinking that the Sixth Synod was held in Santa
Sophia, vide Biblioth. Jur., Orient. Tom. v., p. 85.


QUINI8EXT. A.D. 692 357


but here a division takes place, for some reckon by the Constantinopolitan era, and so fix
the date at 691, and others following the Alexandrian era fix it at 706. But this last is cer-
tainly wrong, for the canons were sent for signature to Pope Sergius, who died as early as
701. Hefele's conclusion is as follows :

(Hefele. Hist, of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 222.)

The year 6199 of the Constantinopolitan era coincides with the year 691 after Christ and
the IVth Indiction ran from September 1, 690, to August 31, 691. If then, our Synod, in
canon iij., speaks of the 15th of January in the /jas^ Indiction IV., it means January 691; but
it belongs itself, to the Vth Indiction, i.e., it was opened after September 1, 691, and before
September 1, 692.

As this is not a history of the Councils but a collection of their decrees and canons with
illustrative notes, the only other point to be considered is the reception these canons met with.

The decrees were signed first by the Emperor, the next place was left vacant for the Pope,
then followed the subscriptions of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem,
and Antioch, the whole number being 211, bishops or representatives of bishops. It is not
quite certain whether any of the Patriarchs were present except Paul of Constantinople ; but
taking it all in all the probability is in favour of their presence.^ Blank places were left for
the bishops of Thessalonica, Sardinia, Ravenna and Corinth. The Ai'chbishop of Gortyna in
Crete added to his signature the phrase " Holding the place of the holy Church of Rome
in eveiy synod." He had in the same way signed the decrees of III. Constantinoj)le, Crete be-
longing to the Roman Patriarchate ; as to whether his delegation on the part of the Roman
Synod continued or was merely made to continue by his own volition we have no informa-
tion. The ridiculous blunder of Balsamon must be noted here, who asserts that the bishops
whose names are missing and for which blank places were left, had actually signed.

Pope Sergius refused to sign the decrees when they were sent to him, rejected them as
"lacking authority" {invalidi) and described them as containing "novel errors." "With the
efforts to extort his signature we have no concern further than to state that they signally
failed. Later on, in the time of Pope Constantine, a middle course seems to have been
adopted, a course subsequently in the ninth century thus expressed by Pope John VIII., " he
accepted all those canons which did not contradict the true faith, good morals, and the de-
crees of Rome," a truly notable statement ! Nearly a century later Pope Hadrian I. dis-
tinctly recognizes all the Trullan decrees in his letter to Tenasius of Constantinople and
attributes them to the Sixth Synod. "All the holy six synods I receive with all their canons,
which rightly and divinely were promulgated by them, among which is contained that in
which reference is made to a Lamb being pointed to by the Precursor as being found in cer-
tain of the venerable images." Here the reference is unmistakably to the Trullan Canon

Lxxxn.

Hefele's summing up of the whole matter is as follows :

(Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 242.)

That the Seventh Ecumenical Council at Nice ascribed the Trullan canons to the Sixth
Ecumenical Council, and spoke of them entirely in the Greek spirit, cannot astonish us,
as it was attended almost solely by Greeks. They specially pronounced the recognition of
the canons in question in their own first canon ; but their own canons have never received
the ratification of the Holy See.

' Cf. Hefele, I.e., Vol. V., 237. On the other hand vide Aseeman (I.e. Tom. V., pp. 30, 69), who thinks Alexandria and Jeru-
salem were vacant at the tirae !


358 QUIXISEXT. A.D. 692


Thus far Hefele, but it seems that Gratian's statement on the subject in the Decretum
should not be omitted here. (Pars I., Dist. XVL, c. v.)

" Canon V. The Sixth Si/nod is confirmed by the aidhority of Hadrian.

" I receive the Sixth Synod with all its canons.

" Gratian. There is a doubt tchether it set forth canons but this is easily removed by examin-
ing the fourth session of the Vllth [Vlth by mistake, vide Eoman Correctors' note] Synod.

"For Peter the Bp. of Nicomedia says :

" C. YI. The Sixth Synod ivrote canons.

"I have a book containing the canons of the holy Sixth SjTiod. The Patriarch said:
§ 1. Some are scandalized through their ignorance of these canons, saying : Did the Sixth
Synod make any canons ? Let them know then that the Sixth Holy Synod was gathered
together under Constantino against those who said there is one operation and one will in
Christ, in which the holy Fathers anathematized these as heretics and explained the orthodox
faith.

"II. Pars § 2. And the sjTiod was dissolved in the XIYth year of Constantine. After
four or five years the same holy Fathers met together under Justinian, the son of Constan-
tine, and promulgated the aforementioned canons, of which let no one have any doubt. For
they who under Constantine were in sjTiod, these same bishops under Justinian subscribed
to all these canons. For it was fitting that a Universal Synod should promulgate ecclesias-
tical canons. Item : § 3. The Holy Sixth Synod after it promulgated its definition against
the Monothelites, the emperor Constantine who had summoned it, dying soon after, and
Justinian his son reigning in his stead, § the same holy synod divinely inspired again met
at Constantinople four or five years afterwards, and promulgated one hundred and two canons
for the correction of the Church.

" Gratian. From this therefore it may be gathered that the Sixth Synod ivas twice assembled :
the first time under Constantine and then passed no canons; the second time under Justinian his
son, and promidgated the aforesaid canons."

Upon this passage of Gratian's the Roman Correctors have a long and interesting note,
with quotations from Anastasius, which should be read with care by the student but is too
long to cite here.

I close with some eminently wise remarks by Prof. Michaud.

(E, Michaud, Discussion sur les Sept Conciles (Ecumeniques, p. 272.)

Upon the canons of this council we must remark :

1. That save its acceptance of the dogmatic decisions of the six Ecumenical Councils,
which is contained in the first canon, this council had an exclusively disciplinary character ;
and consequently if it should l)e admitted by the particular churches, these would always
remain, on account of their autonomy, judges of the fitness or non-suitability of the j^ractical
application of these decisions.

2. That the Easterns have never pretended to impose this code upon the practice of the
Western Churches, especially as they themselves do not practise everywhere the hundred and
two canons mentioned. All they wished to do was to maintain the ancient discipline against
the abuses and evil innovations of the Roman Church, and to make her j)ause ujjon the dan-
gerous course in which she was already beginning to enter.

3. That if ainong these canons, some do not apjMy to the actual present state of society,
e.g., the 8tli, 10th, 11th, etc.; if others, framed in a spirit of transition between the then East-
ern customs and those of Rome, do not appear as logical nor as wise as one might desire, e.g.,
the 6th, 12th, 48th, etc., nevertheless on the other hand, many of them are marked with the
most profound sagacity.


THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL IN TRULLO.

(Labbe and Cossart, Cuncilia, Tom. VI., col. 1135 et seqq.)

CANON I.

That order is best of all which makes every word and act begin and end in God.
"Wherefore that piety may be clearly set forth by us and that the Church of which
Christ is the foundation may be continually increased and advanced, and that it may be
exalted above the cedars of Lebanon ; now therefore we, by divine grace at the begiu-
niug of our decrees, define that the faith set forth by the God-chosen Apostles who
themselves had both seen and were ministers of the Word, shall be preserved without
any innovation, unchanged and inviolate.

Moreover the faith of the three hundred and eighteen holy and blessed fathers
who were assembled at Nice under Constantine our Emperor, against the impious Arius,
and the gentile diversity of deity or rather (to speak accurately) multitude of gods
taught by him, who by the unanimous acknowledgment of the faithful revealed and
declared to us the consubstautiality of the Three Persons comprehended in the Di-
vine Nature, not suffering this faith to lie hidden under the bushel of ignorance, but
openly teaching the faithful to adore with one worship the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, confuting and scattering to the winds the opinion of different grades, and
demolishing and overturning the puerile toyings fabricated out of sand by the heretics
against orthodoxy.

Likewise also we confirm that faith which was set forth by the one hundred and
fifty fathers who in the time of Theodosius the Elder, our Emperor, assembled in this
imperial city, accepting their decisions with regard to the Holy Ghost in assertion of
his godhead, and expelling the profane Macedonius (together with all previous enemies
of the truth) as one who dared to judge Him to be a servant who is Lord, and who
wished to divide, like a robber, the inseparable unity, so that there might be no perfect
mystery of our faith.

And together with this odious and detestable contender against the truth, we con-
demn Apollinaris, priest of the same iniquity, who impiously belched forth that the
Lord assumed a body unendowed with a soul,^ thence also inferring that his salvation
wrouglit for us was imperfect.

Moreover what things were set forth by the two hundred God-bearing fathers in the
city of Ephesus in the days of Theodosius our Emperor, the son of Arcadius ; these doc-
trines we assent to as the unbroken strength of piety, teaching that Christ the incarnate
Son of God is one ; and declaring that she who bare him without human seed was the
immaculate Ever- Virgin, glorifying her as literally and in very truth the Mother of
God. We condemn as foreign to the divine scheme the absurd division of Nestorins,
who teaches that the one Christ consists of a man separately and of the Godhead sep-
arately and renews the Jewish impiety.

Moreover we confirm that faith which at Chalcedon, the Metropolis, was set forth
in accordance with orthodoxy by the six hundred and thirty God-approved fathers in
the time of Marcian, who was our Emperor, which handed down with a great and
mighty voice, even unto the ends of the earth, that the one Christ, the son of God, is of
two natures, and must be glorified ~ in these two natures, and which cast forth from the
sacred precincts of the Church as a black pestilence to be avoided, Eutyches, babbling
stupidly and inanely, and teaching that the great mystery of the incarnation (olKovcofiia<;)
was perfected in thought only. And together with him also Nestorius and Dioscorus
of whom the former was the defender and champion of the division, the latter of the
confusion [of the two natures in the oiie Christ], both of whom fell away from the
divergence of their impiety to a common depth of perdition and denial of God.

1 Latin reads '• mind or soul." » Latin, " believed in."


360 QUIXISEXT. A.D. 692


Also we recognize as inspired by the Spirit the pious voices of the one hundred and
sixty-live God-bearing fathers who assembled in this imperial city in the time of our
Emperor Justinian of blessed memory, and we teach them to those who come after us ;
for these synodically anathematized and execrated Theodore of Mopsuestia (the teacher
of Nestorius), and Origen, and Didymus, and Evagrius, all of whom reintroduced
feigned Greek myths, and brought back again the circlings of certain bodies and souls,
anil deranged turnings |or transmigrations] to the wanderings or dreamings of their
minds, and impiously insulting the resurrection of the dead. Moreover [they con-
demned] what things were written by Theodoret against the right faith and against the
Twelve Chapters of blessed Cyril, and that letter which is said to have been written
by Ibas.

Also Ave agi'ee to guard untouched the faith of the Sixth Hoi}- Synod, which first
assembled in this imperial city in the time of Constantine, our Emperor, of blessed
memor>', which faith received still greater confirmation from the fact that the pious Em-
peror ratified with his own signet that which was written for the security of future
generations. This council taught that we should openly profess our faith that in the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, our true God, there are two natural wills or volitions and
tAvo natural operations ; and condemned by a just sentence those who adulterated the
true doctrine and taught the people that in the one Lord Jesus Christ there is but one
will and one operation ; to Avit, Theodore of Pharan, Cyrus of Alexandria, Honorius of
Kome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, Avho were bishops of this God-preserved city ;
Macarius, Avho Avas bisho[) of Antioch ; Stephen, Avho was his disciple, and the insane
Polychronius, depriving them henceforth from the communion of the body of Christ
our God.

And, to say so once for all, we decree that the faith shall stand firm and remain un-
sullied until the end of the Avorld as well as the writings divinely handed doAvn and the
teachings of all those avIio have beautified and adorned the Church of God and Avere
lights in the world, having embraced the word of life. And we reject and anathematize
those whom they rejected and anathematized, as being enemies of the truth, and as in-
sane ragers against God, and as lifters up of iniquit3^

But if any one at all shall not obserA'e and embrace the aforesaid pious decrees, and
teach and preach in accordance therewith, but shall attempt to set himself in opposition
thereto, let him be anathema, according to the decree already promulgated by the ap-
proved holy and blessed Fathers, and let him be cast out and stricken off as an alien
from the number of Christians. For our decrees add nothing to the things preA'iously
defined, nor do they take anything aA\'ay, nor have we any such power.


NOTES.


Anciext Epitome of Ca:<on I.


No innovation upmi the faith of the Apostles is


of Marcion are to he celehrnted uith eternal
rcni('inl>rance, ivho deposed Eati/chrs, u:h<> dared
to sat/ that the great 7ni/stcr// u-a*' acconijAi^hed


to be alloiced. The faith of the Nicene fathers is only in image, as u-ell as Nestorius and Diosco-
perfect, ichich orcrthroios through the homousion rus, observing eqiad tilings in an opposite direc-
thc doctrines of Arias irho introduced degrees tion.
into the Godhead. One hundred and sixtg-fire were assembled in

The Synod held under Theodosius the great the imperial citg by Justinian, uho anathenta-
shall be held inviolate, irhich dcjtoscd Mncedo- tized Origen, for teachiiKj periods (-n-epu'thovi) of
nius ivho asserted that the Holy Ghost icas a bodies and souls, and Theodoret n-Jio dared to
servant. [ set himself up to oppose the Twelve Chapters of

The two hundred who under Theodosius the Cyril.
Younger a.'fsembled at Ephesus are to be revered At Constant inojile a Synod teas collected
for thy ejpelled Nestoriu.'i ivho asserted that the under Constantine wliich rejected Honorius of
Lord was man and God separately {l8ikC}<;). Rome and Sergius, prelate of Constantinople, for


Those who assembled at Chalcedon in the time


teaching one tvill and one operation.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692 361


Aristenus. I that Paradise was not subject to the appre-

The fifth was held in the time of Justiuian ^^^^^^"^^ «^*^^^, f f ^' ^"^^ ^^f j* was not from
the Great at Constantinople against the crazy God and tnat Adam was not formed m flesh,


{■n-apd<j>pov';) Origen, Evagrius and Didymus,
who remodelled the Greek figments, and
stupidly said that the same bodies they had
joined with them would not rise again ; and


and that there would be an end of punish-
ment, and a restitution of the devils to their
pristine state, and other innumerable insane
blasphemies.


CANON II.

It has also seemed good to this holy Council, that the eighty-five canons, received
and ratified by the holy and blessed Fathers before us, and also handed down to us in
the name of the holy and glorious Apostles should from this time forth remain firm and
unshaken for the cure of souls and the healing of disorders. And in these canons avb
are bidden to receive the Constitutions of the Holy Apostles [written] by Clement. But
formerly through the agency of those who erred from the faith certain adulterous mat-
ter was introduced, clean contrary to piety, for the polluting of the Church, which ob-
scures the elegance and beauty of the divine decrees in their present form. We there-
fore reject these Constitutions so as the better to make sure of the edification and security
of the most Christian flock ; by no means admitting the oflspring of heretical error, and
cleaving to the pure and perfect doctrine of the Apostles. But we set our seal likewise
upon all the other holy canons set forth by our holy and blessed Fathers, that is, by the
318 holy God-bearing Fathers assembled at Nice, and those at Ancyra, further those at
Neocaesarea and likewise those at Gangra, and besides, those at Antioch in Syria : those
too at Laodicea in Phrygia : and likewise the 150 who assembled in this heaven-pro-
tected royal city : and the 200 who assembled the first time in the metropolis of the
Ephesians, and the 630 holy and blessed Fathers at Chalcedon. In like manner those
of Sardica, and those of Carthage : those also who again assembled in this heaven-pro-
tected royal city under its bishop Nectarius and Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria.
Likewise too the Canons [i.e. the decretal letters] of Dionysius, formerly Archbishop
of the great city of Alexandria ; and of Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria and Martyr ;
of Gregory the Wonder-worker, Bishop of Neocaesarea ; of Athanasius, Ai'chbishop of
Alexandria ; of Basil, Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia ; of Gregory, Bishop of
Nyssa ; of Gregory Theologus ; of Amphilochius of Iconium ; of Timothy, Archbishop
of Alexandria; of Theophilus, Archbishop of the same great city of Alexandria; of
Cyril, Archbishop of the same Alexandria ; of Gennadius, Patriarch of this heaven- pro-
tected royal city. Moreover the Canon set forth by Cyprian, Archbishop of the coun-
try of the Africans and Martyr, and by the Synod under him, which has been kept only
in the country of the aforesaid Bishops, according to the custom delivered down to them.
And that no one be allowed to transgress or disregard the aforesaid canons, or to re-
ceive others beside them, supposititiously set forth by certain who have attempted to
make a traftic of the truth. But should any one be convicted of innovating upon, or
attempting to overturn, any of the afore-mentioned canons, he shall be subject to receive
the penalty which that canon imposes, and to be cured by it of his transgression.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon II. ' Seventh Ecumenical Council in its first canon

WJiafever additions have been made through ^s the canons of the Sixth Ecumenical (of

guile b>/ tlie heterodox in tJie Apostolic Constitu- ^1^^^^ ^^^^ Quinisext claimed to be a legitimate

tions edited by Clement, shall be cut out continuation) there can be no doubt that all

these canons enumerated m this canon are set

This canon defines what canons are to be forth for the guidance of the Church.

understood as having received the sanction of With regard to what councils are intended :

ecumenical authority, and since these canons there is difiiculty only in two particulars, viz. ,

of the Council in Trullo were received at the ! the " Council of Constantinople under Necta-


362 QFIKISEXT. A.D. G92


rius and Tlieophilus," ' and the " Council un-
der Cyprian ; " tlie former must be the Coun-
cil of 394, and the latter is usually considered
to be the III. Synod of Carthage, a.d, 257.


Fleury.

(//. E. Liv. xl., chap, xlix.)

The Council of Constantinople under Nec-
tarius and Tlieophilus of Alexandria must be
that held in 894, at the dedication of liuffi-


It will be noticed that Avhile the canon is
most careful to mention the exact nianber of
Apostolic canons it received, thus deciding" in
favour of the larger code, it is equally care-
ful not to assign them an Apostolic origin^
but merely to say that tliey had come down
to them " in the name of" the Apostles. In
the face of this it is strange to find Balsamon
saying, " Through this canon their mouth is
stojjjjed who say that 85 canons were not
set foi'th by the holy Apostles ; " what the
council did settle, so far as its authority went,
nus's Cliurcli ; but we have not its canons. ' was the number not the autliorship of the
. . . ■• The canon published by St. Cyprian canons. Tliis, I think, is all that lialsamon
for the African Church alone." It is difficult intended to assert, but his words might easily
to understand what canon is referred to un- 1 be quoted as having a diflerent meaning,
less it is the preface to the council of St. Cyp-
rian where he says that no one should pre- This canon is found, in jiart, in the Corpus
tend to be bishop of bishops, or to oblige his Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I.,
colleagues to obey him by tyrannical fear. ' Dist. XYI , c. YII.


C.^NON III.

Since our pious and Christian Emperor has addressed this holy and ecumenical
council, in order that it might provide for the purity of those who are in the list of the
clergy, and who transmit divine tilings to otliers, and that they may be l)lameless minis-
trants, and worthy of the sacritiee of the great God, who is botli OHering and High
Priest, a sacrifice apprehended by the intelligence : and that it might cleanse away the
pollutions wherewith these have been branded by unlawful marriages : now Avhereas
they of the most holy Roman Church purpose to keep the rule of exact perfection, but
those wlio are luider the throne of this heaven-protected and royal city keep that of
kindness and consideration, so blending both together as our fathers have done, and as
the love of God requires, that neither gentleness fall into licence, nor severity into
harshness ; especially as the fault of ignorance has reached no small number of men, we
decree, that those who are involved in a secoml mari'iage, and have been slaves to sin
up to the fifteenth of the i)ast month of January, in the ])ast fourth Indiction, the
GlODtli year, and have not resolved to repent of it, be subjected to canonical dejjosition :
but that they avIio are involved in this disorder of a second marriage, but before our
decree have acknowledged what is fitting, and have cut oil" their sin, and have put far
from them this strange and illegitimate^ connexion, or they whose Avives by second
marriage are alread}' dead, or who have turned to repentance of their own accord, liav-
ing learnt continence, and having quickly forgotten their former iniquities, whether
they be presbyters or deacons, these Me have determined should cease from all ])riestly
ministrations or exercise, being under punishnK^nt for a cei'tain time, but should retain
the honour of their seat and station, being satisfied with their seat before the laity and
begging with tears from the Lord that the transgression of their ignorance be pardoned
them : lor unfitting it were that he should bless another who has to tend his own
wounds. But those wlio have been married to one wife, if she was a widow, and like-
wise those who after their ordination have inilawfuUy entered into one marriage that is,
presbyters, and deacons, and subdeacons, being debarred for some short time from
sacred ministration, and censured, shall be restoied again to their proper rank, never
advancing to anv further rank, their unlawful marriage being openly dissolved. This
we decree to hold good only in the case of those that are involvc^d in tli'^ aforesaid


'The ntramoTitnne Roisselet de SauoliiTPs, in his Ifistnire i der is also niado by Ivo. cf. Gratian's Ler., P. 1., Dist. xvi.. c.
r/iroiKiloqlfiue et dnijtnatiqne des Concites df In chritientr. Tome vil., notu by correctors.
UI.. p. 131, curiously divides this into two councils. This blun- |


QITINISEXT. A.D. 092


dij's


faults up to the fifteenth (as was said) of the month of January, of the fourth Indiction,
decreeing from the present time, and renewing the Canon which declares, that he who
has been joined in two marriages after his baptism, or has had a concubine, cannot be
bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal list ; in like manner, that he
who has taken a widow, or a divorced person, or a harlot, or a servjint, or an actress,
cannot be bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal list.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.


Priests mho shall have contracted second tnar-
rkifies and will not give them up are to be de-
posed. But those ivho leave off the ivickedness,
let them cease for a fixed period. For he that
is himself wounded does not bless. But who are
implicated in nefarious marriage and who (fter
ordination have contracted marriage, after a def-
inite time theg shall be restored to their grade,
ptrovided theg remain xoithout offence, having
jjlainlg broken off the marriage. Bat if after it
shall have been prohibited bg this decree they at-
tempt to do so theg shall remain deposed.

Zonae AS.

What things pertain to this third canon are
only adapted to the time in which the canon
was passed ; and afterwards are of no force at
all. But what things the Fathers wished to
be binding on posterity are contained in the
seventeenth and eighteenth canons of the
holy Apostles, which as having been neglected
during the course of time this synod wished
to renew.

Van Espen.

It is clear from this canon that the Emperor
very esjDecially intended that the indulgence
which the Church of Constantinople extended
to its presbyters and deacons in allowing
them the use of marriage entered into before
ordination, should not be allowed to go any
further, nor to be an occasion for the viola-
tion of that truly Apostolic canon, " The
bishop, the presbyter, and the deacon must be
the husband of one wife." I. Tim. iii. 2.

For never did the Constautinopolitan nor
any other Eastern Church allow by canon a
digamist (or a man successively the husband
of many wives) to be advanced to the order
of presbyter or deacon, or to use any second


marriage.


Antonio Pereiea.


{Tentativa Theologica. [Eng. trans.] III. Prin-
ciple, p. 79.)
In the same manner a second marriage al-
ways, and everywhere, incapacitated the clergy
for Holy Orders and tlie Episcopate. This
appears from St. Paul, 1 Tim. Chap, iii., and


Titus, Chap, i., and it was expressly enacted
by the sixteenth of the Apostolical Canons,
renewed by the Popes Siricius, Innocent and
Leo the Great, and may be gathered from the
ancient fathers and councils generally re-
ceived in the Church.

Nevertheless we know from Theodoret,
Bishop of Cyrus, that manj- bishoi:)s remark-
able for their learning and sanctity, frequently
dispensed with this Apostolical law ; as Alex-
ander of Antioch, Acacius of Berea, Praylius
of Jerusalem, Proclus of Constantinople, and
others, by whose example Theodoret defends
his own conduct in the case of Irenseus, in
ordaining him Archbishop of Tyre, although
he had been twice married. But what is
more surprising in this matter is that, not-
withstanding the eleventh Decretal of Siri-
cius, and the twelfth of Innocentius the First,
that they who had either been twice married,
or had married widows, were incapable of or-
dination, and ought to be deposed ; the Coun-
cil of Toledo, Canon 3, and the First Council
of Orange, Canon 25, both dispensed with these
Pontifical laws. The first, in order that those
who had married widows might remain in
holy orders ; the second, that such as had
twice married might be promoted to the order
of subdeacon. Socrates also observes that
although it was a general law not to admit
catechumens to orders, the bishops of Alex-
andria were in the habit of promoting such
to the order of readers and singers.

Fleuey.

[H. E., Liv. XL., chap. 1.)

These canons of the Council of Trullo have
sei'ved ever since to the Greeks and to all the
Christians of the East as the universal rule
with regard to clerical continence,and they have
been now in full force for a thousand years.
That is to say. It is not j^ermitted to men who
are clerics in Holy Orders to marrj' after their
ordination. Bishops must keep perfect con-
tinence, whether before their consecration
they are married or not. Priests, deacons,
and subdeacons already married can keep
their wives and live with them, except on the
days they are to ajDproach the holy mysteries.


364


QUIXISEXT. A.D. G'J2


CAXON IV.

If any bishop, presbyter, deacon, sub-Jeacou, lector, cantor, or door-keeper has
had intercourse with a woman dedicated to God, let him be deposed, as one who has
corrupted a spouse of Christ, but if a layman let him be cut ofl'.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.


A cleric coupled to a spouse of God shall be
deposed In the case of a layman he shall be
cut off.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris


Canonici, Gratian's Becretum, Pars II., Causa
XXVII., Q. I.,c. vj.

A layman ravishing a nun, by secular law
was punished by death. Balsamon gives the
reference thus : V Cap. primi tit. iiij. lib.
Basilic, or cxxiij. Novel.


CAXON V.

Let none of those Avho are on the ]>riestly list possess any woman or maid sen'ant,
beyond those who are enumerated in the canon as being persons free from sus])icion,
preserving himself hereby from being implicated in any blame. But if anyone trans-
gresses our decree let him be deposed. And let eunuchs also observe the same rule,
that by foresight they may be free of censure. But those who transgress, let them be
deposed, if indeed they are clerics ; but if laymen let them be excommunicated.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.


A priest, even if a eunuch, shall not have in
his house a maid or other ivoman except those on
whom no suspicion can light.


See Canon III., of First Ecumenical Council
at Nice. This canon adds Eunuchs.


CANON \l.

Srs'CE it is declared in the apostolic canons that of those who are advanced to the
clergy unmarried, only lectors and cantors are able to many ; we also, maintaining this,
determine that henceforth it is in nowise lawful for any subdeacon, deacon or presbyter
after his ordination to contract matrimony but if he shall have dared to do so, let him
be deposed. And if any of those who enter the clergy, wishes to be joined to a Avife in
lawful marriage before he is ordained subdeacon, deacon, or presbyter, let it be done.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


If any ordained person contracts matrimony,
let him be deposed. If he wishes to be married
he should become so before his ordination.


vided at the time of his ordination he had in
the presence of witnesses declared his inabil-
ity to remain chaste or his desire to marry.
This present canon follows the XXYIth of
the Apostolic canons.


Aristenus points out how this canon annids The last clause of this canon, limited in its
the tenth canon of Anoyra, whicli allows a application to subdeacons, is found in the
deacon and even a presbyter t<i marry aiterCorjius Juris (\i»(»>iri, Gratian's Decretumy
ordination and continue in his ministry, pro- [Pars I., Dist. XXXIL, c. vi.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692 365


EXCUKSUS ON THE MAKRIAGE OF THE CLERGY.

On this subject there is a popular misconception which must first be removed. In the
popular mind to-day there is no distinction between " a married clergy " being allowed, and
" the marriage of the clergy " being allowed ; even theological writers who have attained some
repute have confused these two things in the most unfortunate and perplexing fashion. It
will suffice to mention as an instance of this Bp. Harold Browne in his book on the XXXIX.
Articles, in which not only is the confusion above spoken of made, but the very blunder is
used for controversial purposes, to back up and support by the authority of the ancient
Church in the East (which allowed a married clergy) the practice of the Nestorians and of
the modern Church of England, both of which tolerate the marriage of the clergy, a thing
which the ancient Church abhorred and punished with deposition.

I cannot better express the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church in the East than
by quoting the words of the Rev. John Fulton in the Introduction to the Third Edition of his
Index Canonum} He says : " Marriage was no impediment to ordination even as a Bishop ;
and Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, equally with other men, were forbidden to put away their
wives under pretext of religion. The case was different when a man was unmarried at the
time of his ordination. Then he was held to have given himself wholly to God in the office
of the Holy Ministry, and he was forbidden to take back from his offering that measure of
his cares and his affections which must necessarily be given to the maintenance and nurture
of his family. In short, the married man might be ordained, but with a few exceptions no
man was allowed to marry after ordination." In his "Digest" suh voce "Celibacy" he gives
the earliest canon law on the subject as follows : " None of the clergy, except readers and
singers may marry after ordination (Ap. Can. xxvi.) ; but deacons may marry, if at their or-
dination they have declared an intention to do so (Ancyra x.). A priest who marries is to be
deposed (Neocgesarea i.). A deaconess who marries is to be anathematized (Chal. xv.) ; a
monk or dedicated virgin who marries, is to be excommunicated (Chal. xvi.). Those who
break their vows of celibacy are to fulfil the penance of digamists (Ancyra xix.)." '^

We may then take it for a general principle that in no part of the ancient Church was a
priest allowed to contract holy matrimony ; and in no place was he allowed to exercise his
priesthood afterwards, if he should dare to enter into such a relation with a woman. As I
have so often remarked it is not my place to approve or disapprove this law of the Church,
my duty is the much simpler one of tracing historically what the law was and what it is in
the East and West to-day. The Reformers considered that in this, as in most other matters,
these venerable churches had made a mistake, but neither the maintenance nor the disproof
of this opinion in any way concerns me, so far as this volume is concerned. All that is neces-
sary for me to do is to affirm that if a priest were at any time to attempt to many, he would
be attempting to do that which from the earliest times of which we have any record, no priest
has ever been allowed to do, but which always has been punished as a gross sin of immo-
rality.

In tracing the history of this subject, the only time during which any real difficulty pre-
sents itself is the first three centuries, after that all is much clearer, and my duty is simply
to lay the undisputed facts of the case before the reader.

We begin then with the debatable ground. And first with regard to the Lord, "the
great High Priest of our profession," of course there can be no doubt that he set the exam-
ple, or — if any think that he was not a pattern for the priests of his Church to follow — at
least lived the life, of celibacy. When we come to the question of what was the practice of
his first followers in this matter, there would likewise seem to be but little if any reasonable

' John Fulton, Index Canmum, p. 29 (N. Y., 1892.) ' Ibid., p. 294.


366


QUIXISEXT. A.D. 692


doubt. For while of the Apostles we have it recorded only of Peter that he was a married
man, we have it also expressly recorded that in his case, as in that of all the rest who had
"forsaken all "' to follow him, the Lord himself said, "Every one that hath forsaken houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake
shall receive an hundred fold and shall inherit eternal life." ^

There can be no doubt that St. Paul in his ej^istles allows and even contemplates the
probability that those admitted to the ranks of the clergy will have been already married,
but distinctly says that they must have been the "husband of one wife,"-' by Avhich all an-
tiquity and every commentator of gravity recognizes that digamists are cut off from the pos-
sibility of ordination, but there is nothing to imply that the marital connexion was to be
continued after ordination. For a thorough treatment of this whole subject from the ancient
and Patristic point of view, the reader is referred to St. Jerome.^

The next stage in our progress is marked by the so-called Apostolical Canons. Now for
those who hold that these canons had directly or indirectly the Apostles for their author, or
that as we have them now they are all of even sub-Apostolic date, the matter becomes more
simple, for while indeed these canons do not expressl}' set forth the law subsequently formu-
lated for the East, they certainly seem to be not inconsistent therewith, but rather to look
that way, especially Canons V. and LI. But few will be found willing to support so extreme
an hypothesis, and while indeed many scholars are of opinion that most of the canons of the
collection we style "Apostolical," are ante-Nicene, yet they will not be recognized as of
more value than as so many mirrors, displaying what was at their date considered pure dis-
cipline. It is abundantly clear that the fathers in council nt l^ruUo thought the discipline
they were setting forth to be the original discipline of the Church in the matter, and the dis-
cipline of the West an innovation, but that such was i-eally the case seems far from certain.
Thomassinus treats this point with mucli learning, and I shall cite some of the authorities he
brings forward. Of these the most important is Epiphanius, who as a Greek would be cer-
tain to give the tradition of the East, had there been any such tradition known in his time.
I give the three great passages.

"It is evident that those from the priesthood are chiefly taken from the order of virgins,
or if not from virgins, at least from monks ; or if not from the order of monks, then they are
wont to be made priests who keep themselves from their wives, or who are widows after a
single marriage. But he that has been entangled by a second marriage is not admitted to
priesthood in the Church, even if he be continent from his wife, or be a wudower. Anyone
of this sort is rejected from the grade of bishop, presbyter, deacon, or subdeacon. The
order of reader, however, can be chosen from all the orders these grades can be chosen from,
that is to say from virgins, monks, the continent, widowers, and thej' who are bound by
honest marriage. Moreover, if necessity so compel, even digamists may be lectors, for such
is not a priest, etc., etc." ^

" Christ taught us by an example that the priestly work and ornaments should be commu-
nicated to those who shall have preserved their continency after a single marriage, or shall
have persevered in virginity. And this the Apostles thereafter honestly and piously decreed,
through the ecclesiastical canon of the priesthood."'

"Nay, moreover, he that still uses marriage, and begets children, even though the
husband of but one wife, is by no means admitted by the Church to the order of deacon,
presbyter, bishop, or subdeacon. But for all this, he who shall have kept himself from
the commerce of his one wife, or has been deprived of her, may be ordained, and this is


I Matt. xix. 29 ; Lk xviii. 29. In Mark x. 29 if found the same
incident recorded, bnt while "wife" is mentioned among the
things '■ left." no •' wife" is found among the things gained.

' 1 Tim. iii , 2 and 12 ; Titue i., 6.


' Ilieron
lihrif Adr.


Adv. Jovin. Lib. I.
Jnvin.


Confer aieo the In Apolog. pro


* Epil)h. Kxposit. Fid. Cath.
» Ibid. Hareti. 48. n T.


C. XXI.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


367


most usually the case in those places where the ecclesiastical canons are most accurately
observed." ^

Nor is the weight of this evidence lessened, but much increased, by the acknowledgment
of the same father that in some places in his days the celibate life was not observed by
such priests as had wives, for he explains that such a state of things had come about " not
from following the authority of the canons, but through the neglect of men, which is wont
at certain periods to be the case. " ^

The witness of the Western Fathers although so absolutely and indisputably clear is not
so conclusive as to the East, and yet one passage from St. Jerome should be quoted. " The
Virgin Christ and the Virgin Mary dedicated the virginity of both sexes. The Apostles were
chosen when either virgins or continent after marriage, and bishops, presbyters, and deacons
are chosen either when virgins, or widowers, or at least continent forever after the priesthood."^

It would be out of place to enter into any detailed argument upon the force of these
passages, but I shall lay before the reader the summing up of the whole matter by a weighty
recent writer of the Ultramontane Roman School.

" Is the celibate an Apostolic ordinance ? Bickel affirmed that it is, and Funk denied
it in 1878. To-day [1896] canonists commonly admit that one cannot prove the existence of
any formal precept, either divine or apostolic, which imposes the celibate upon the clergy,
and that all the texts, whether taken out of Holy Scripture or from the Fathers, on this sub-
ject contain merely a counsel, and not a command." " In the Fourth Century a great num-
ber of councils forbade bishops, priests, and deacons to live in the use of marriage with their
lawful wives. . . . But there does not appear to have been any disposition to declare by
law as invalid the marriages of clerics in Holy Orders. In the Fifth and Sixth Centuries the
law of the celibate was observed by all the Churches of the West, thanks to the Councils and
to the Popes." " In the Seventh and down to the end of the Tenth Century,^ as a matter of
fact the law of celibacy was little observed in a great part of the Western Church, but as a
matter of law the Roman Pontiffs and the Councils were constant in their proclamation of
its obligation." By the canonical practice of the unreformed West, the reception of Holy
Orders is an impedhnentum dirimens matrimonii, which renders any marriage subsequently
contracted not only illicit but absolutely null. On this diriment impediment the same
Roman Catholic writer says : "The diriment impediment of Holy Orders is of ecclesiastical
obligation and not of divine, and consequently the Church can dispense it. This is the
present teaching which is in opposition to that of the old schools."

" There is no question of the nullity of the marriages contracted by clerics before 1139.
At the Council of the Lateran of that year, Innocent II. declared that these marriages con-
tracted in contempt of the ecclesiastical law are not true marriages in his eyes. His suc-
cessors do not seem to have insisted much upon this new diriment impediment, although it
was attacked most vigorously by the offending clergymen ; but the School of Bologna, the
authority of which was then undisputed, openly declared for the nvdlity of the marriages
contracted by clerics in Holy Orders. Thus it is that this point of law has been settled
rather by teaching, than by any precise text, or by any law of a kno^vn date." ^

It should not, however, be forgotten that although this is ti-ue with regard to Pope
Innocent II. in 1139, it is also true that in 530 the Emperor Justinian declared null and
void all marriages contracted by clerics in Holy Orders, and the children of such marriages
to be spurious [spurii).

The reader will be interested in reading the answer on this point made by King Henry


» Epiph. Haresi. 59, n. 4.

' Ibid, ut Bupra.

» Hieron. Apolog. pro. lib. adv. Jovin.


* It is curious that this ie just four centuries, the same length
of time as from the Reformation
» L'Ami du CUrgi, 6 Aofit, 1896, pp. 677 and 678.


368 QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


VIII. to the letter sent him by the German ambassadors.' I can here give but a part
translated into English. "Although the Church from the beginning admitted married men,
as priests and bishops, who were without crime, the husband of one wife, (out of the necessity
of the times, as sufficient other suitable men could not be found as would suffice for the
teaching of the world) yet Paul himself chose the celibate Timothy ; but if anyone came
unmarried to the priesthood and afterwards took a wife, he was always deposed from the
priesthood, according to the canon of the Council of Neocjesarea which was before that of
Nice. So, too, in the Council of Chalcedon, in the first canon of which all former canons
are confirmed, it is established that a deaconess, if she give herself over to marriage, shall
remain under anathema, and a virgin who had dedicated herself to God and a monk who
join themselves in marriage, shall remain excommunicated. . . . No Apostolic canon
nor the Council of Nice contain anytliing similar to what you assert, viz. : that priests
once ordained can marry afterwards. And with this statement agrees the Sixth Synod, in
which it was decreed that if any of the clergy should wish to lead a wife, he should do so
before receiving the Subdiaconate, since aftei^wards it was by no means lawful ; nor was
there given in the Sixth Synod any liberty to priests of leading wives after their priesting,
as you assert. Therefore from the beginning of the newborn Church it is clearly seen that
at no time it was permitted to a priest to lead a wife after his priesting, and nowhere, where
this was attempted, was it done with imjDunity, but the culprit was deposed from his priest-
hood."

CANON VII.

Since we have learned that in some churches deacons hold ecclesiastical offices, and
that hereby some of them with arrogaucj and license sit daringly before the presby-
ters : we have determined that a deacon, even if in an office of dignity, that is to saj,
in whatever ecclesiastical office lie may be, is not to have his seat before a presbyter,
except he is acting as representative of his own patriarch or raetroj^olitan in another
city under another superior, for then he shall be honoured as filling his ])lace. But if
anyone, possessed with a tyrannical audacit}', shall have dared to do such a thing, let
him be ejected from his peculiar rank and be last of all of the order in whose list he is
in his own church ; our Lord admonishing us that we are not to delight in taking the
chief seats, according to the doctrine which is found in the holy Evangelist Luke, as put
forth by our Lord and God himself. For to those who were called lie taught this para-
ble : " When ye are bidden by anyone to a marriage sit not down in the highest room
lest a mor(i honourable man than thou shall have been bidden by him ; and he who
bade thee and him come and say to thee : Give this man place, and thou begin with
shame to take the lowest room. But ^A\en thou art bidden, sit down in the lowest
place, so that when he who bade thee cometh he may say to thee, Friend go up higher :
then thou shalt have worshi]) in the presence of them that sit with thee. For avIioso-
ever exaltetli himself shall be abased, and he that humbletli himself shall be exalted."
But the same thing also shall be observed in the remaining sacred orders; seeing that
we know that spiritual things are to be preferred to worldly dignity.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII. Van Espen point out that this canon is a re-

A deacon in the execution of his office, if he ^'^^^^^'^^ "^ the XVIII. Canon of Nice which

shall have occasion to sit in the presence of pres- punishes presumptuous deacons not only with

hyters, shall taJcc the lowest place unless he be the 1<^^^ ^^ '"''"'^^ "^ t^'^^^' f^i'^^'^e, Init also with ex-

rcpresentalive of the Patriarch or bishop. . P"l«io" fi''^'" their ministry.

Van Espen well remarks that the Fathers
Balsamon, Zonaras, anil following them of this synod had in. mind not only the pres-

' Thisj letter is found in full iu the Addenda to the Appendix at the end of the seventh volume of Burnet's History of the Refor-
mation (London. Orr A Co., 1S.J0. p. cxlviij.).


QUINISEXT. A.D. G92 369


ervatioii of the distiiictiou between deacons I Beveridge gives a list of these quasi ecclesi-
and presbyters, but also between those in | astical dignitaries as follows : Magnus OEcoiio-


ecclesiastical orders and those enjoying secu-
lar dignities with regax'd to ecclesiastical
mattei's, but who were not to gain therefrom
ecclesiastical precedence. This is what is
meant by the last clause of the canon.


nius, Magno Sacello Prsepositus, Magnus
Vasoruni Gustos, Chartophylax, Parvo Sacello
Prsepositus, Primus Defensor.


CANON VIII.

Since we desire that in every point the things Avliich have been decreed by our holy
fathers may also be established and confirmed, we hereby renew the canon which orders
that synods of the bishops of each province be held every year where the bishop of the
metropolis shall deem best. But since on account of the incursions of barbarians and
certain other incidental causes, those who preside over the churches cannot hold synods
twice a year, it seems right that by all means once a year — on account of ecclesiastical
questions which are likely to arise — a synod of the aforesaid bishops should be holden
in every province, between the holy feast of Easter and October, as has been said above,
in the place which the Metropolitan shall have deemed most fitting. And let such
bishops as do not attend, when they are at home in their own cities and are in good
health, and free from all unavoidable and necessary business, be fraternally reproved.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII. the bishops of Quinisext are called " Fa-

Whenever it is impossiUe to hold two siinods a thers."
year, one at least shall he celebrated, between East- j "^^^ Espen.

er and tJie month of October. What at first was only allowed on account

of necessity, little by little passed into gen-
This canon under the name of the " Sixth eral law, and at last was received as law, that
Synod " is referred to in Canon VI. of the once a year there was to be a meeting of the
Seventh Ecumenical Council (II. Nice), and provincial synod.

CANON IX.

Let no cleric be permitted to keep a " public house." For if it be not permitted
to enter a tavern, much more is it forbidden to serve others in it and to carry on a trade
which is unlawful for him. But if he shall have done any such thing, either let him
desist or be deposed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon IX. | Compare with this canon liv. of the Apos-

Tf clerics are forbidden to enter public houses, ! ^olic Canons ; xxiv. of Laodicea ; and xliij. of
much more are they forbidden to keep them. Let j the Synod of Carthage.^
them, either give tJiem up or be deposed. '

CANON X.

A BISHOP, or presbyter, or deacon who receives usury, or what is called hecatostce^
let him desist or be deposed.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon X.
A bishop, presbyter, or deacon who takes
usury shall be deposed unless he stops doing so.

' It is curious that Balsamon quotes this canon at xl., i.e., the Latin numbering and not the Greek which he himself uses in his
scholia.


See notes on canon XVI. of Nice, and the
Excursus thereto appended.


370


QUINISEXT. A.D. «^02


CANON XI.

Let no one in the priestly order nor any layman eat the unleavened bread of the
Jews, nor have any familiar intercourse witli them, nor summon them in illness, nor re-
ceive medicines from tli(Mn,n(n- batlie with them ; but if anyone^ shall take in hand to do
so, if he is a cleric, let him be deposed, but if a layman h't him be cut olf.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.


Jewish unleavened bread is to he refused. Who-
ever even calls in Jcivs as physicians or bathes
with them is to be deposed.

Van Espen.

Theodore Balsamon is of opinion that this
canon does not forbid the eating of unleav-
ened bread ; but that what is intended is the
keeping of feasts in a Jewish fashion, or in
sacritices to use unleavened bread {aziimes),
and this, says Balsamon, on account of the
Latins who celebrate their feasts with azymes.

Canon Ixix. [i.e., Ixx.] of those commonly
called Aj^ostolic forbids the obseiwance of


festivals with the Jews ; and declares it to be
unl:iwf\d to receive iiiaiiuscvd;i fi-om tliem, but
by this canon all familiar intercourse with
them is forbidden.

I "While there can be no doubt that in all the
' Trullan canons there is an imdercurreut of
hostility to the "West, yet in this canon I can
see no such si)irit, and I thiidc it has been
read into it by the greater bitterness of later
times. This seems the more certain from the
fact that there is notliing new whatever in the
provision with respect to the passover bread,
ride canons of Laodicea xxxvij. and xxxviij.
' This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Can-
onici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
xxviij., can. xiii.'


CANON XII.

Moreover this also has come to our knowledge, that in Africa and Libya and in
other ])laces the most God-beloved bishops in those parts do not refuse to live with
their wives, even after consecration, thereby giving scandal and offence to the people.
Since, therefore, it is our particular care that all things tend to the good of the flock
placed in our hands and committed to us, — it has seemed good that henceforth nothing
of the kind shall in any way occur. And we say this, not to abolish and overthrow
what tilings were established of old by Apostolic authority, but as caring for the health
of the people and their advance to better things, and lest the ecclesiastical state should
suffer any reproach. For the divine Apostle says : " Do all to the glory of God, give
none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God, even as
I ])lease all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit but the ]n-ofit of many, that
thev may be saved. Be ye imitators of me even as I also am of Christ." But if any
shall have been observed to do such a thing, let him be deposed.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.


AlthoKffh if has been decreed that wives are
not to be cai<t forth, nevertheless that toe mai/
counsel for the brtler, we (five command that no
one ordained a bishop shall any longer live with
his loife.

Aristenus.

The fifth Apostolic canon allows neither
bishop, presbyter, nor deacon to cast forth his

• Van Espen pays that in his copy of Gratian this canon is as-
Biirned to the VHth Synod. Such is not the case in the edition
in Mjgm.''8 Patrologia Latina, where the reference is given as


wife under pretext of ]iiety ; and assigns pen-
alties for any that shall do so, and if he will
not amend he is to be deposed. But this
canon on the other hand does not permit a
bishoji even to live witli liis wife after his conse-
ci-ation. But by this cliange no contempt is
meant to be poured out upon what had been
established Ity A])()stolic authority, but it was
made through care for the peoples health and
for leading on to better things, and for fear

exVJ. Spnodo. e. Tl., and Judmornm is found in the text in-
stead of "the eorum of which Van Espcn complains.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


371


that the sacerdotal estate might suffer some


wrong.


Van Espen.

{In Can. vL Ajjost.)

In the time of this canon [of the Apostles
so called] not only jDresbyters and deacons,
but bishops also, it is clear, were allowed by
Eastern custom to have their wives ; and
Zonaras and Balsamon note that even until
the Sixth Covincil, commonly called in Trullo,
bishops were allowed to have their wives.

(The same on this canun.)
But not only do they command [in this
canon] that bishops after their consecration
no longer have commerce with their own
wives, but further, they prohibit them even
to presume to live with them.

Zonaras.
When the faith first was born and came


forth into the world, the Ajiostles treated
with greater softness and indulgence those
who embraced the truth, which as yet was
not scattered far and wide, nor did they exact
from them perfection in all respects, but
made great allowances for their weakness
and for the inveterate force of the customs
with which they were surrounded, both among
the heathen and among the Jews. But now,
when far and wide our religion has been prop-
agated, more strenuous efforts were made to
enforce those things which pertain to a higher
and holier life, as our angelical worship in-
creased day by day, and to insist on by law a
life of continence to those who were elevated
to the episcopate, so that not only they should
abstain from their wives, but that they should
have them no longer as bed-fellows ; and not
only that they no longer admit them as
sharei's of their bed, but they do not allow
them even to stop under the same roof or in
the house.


CANON XIII.

Since we know it to be handed down as a rule of the Roman Church that those who
are deemed worthy to be advanced to the diaconate or presbyterate should promise no
longer to cohabit with their wives, we, preserving the ancient rule and apostolic perfec-
tion and order, will that the lawful marriages of men who are in holy orders be from this
time forward firm, by no means dissolving their union with their wives nor depriving
them of their mutual intercourse at a convenient time. Wherefore, if anyone shall
have been found worthy to be ordained subdeacon, or deacon, or presbyter, he is by no
means to be ])rohibited from admittance to such a rank, even if he shall live with a law-
ful wife. Nor shall it be demanded of him at the time of his ordination that he promise
to abstain from lawful intercourse with his wife : lest we should affect injuriously mar-
riage constituted by God and blessed by his presence, as the Gospel saitli : " What
God hath joined together let no man put asunder; " and the Apostle saith, " Marriage
is honourable and the bed unde filed ; " and again, "Art thou bound to a wife? seek
not to be loosed." But we know, as they who assembled at Carthage (with a care for
the honest life of the clergy) said, that subdeacons, who handle the Holy Mysteries,
and deacons, and presbyters should abstain from their consorts according to their own
coarse [of ministration]. So that what has been handed down through the Apos-
tles and preserved by ancient custom,' we too likewise maintain, knowing that there is
a time for all things and especially for fasting and prayer. For it is meet that they
who assist at the divine altar should be absolutely continent when they are handling
holy things, in order that they may be able to obtain from God what they ask in
sincerity.

If therefore anyone shall have dared, contrary to the Apostolic Canons, to deprive
any of those who are in holy orders, ]iresbyter, or deacon, or subdeacon of cohabita-
tion and intercourse wdth his lawful wife, let him be deposed. In like manner also if
any presbyter or deacon on pretence of piety has dismissed his wife, let him be excluded
from communion ; and if he persevere in this let him be deposed.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.


NOTES.

ordained deacon or preshyter shoidd pid away


Although the Bomans tvish that everyone


his wife, we -wish the marriages of deacons and
presbyters to continue valid and firm.


372


QUIN1SP:XT. A.D. G92


Fleury.

{H.E., Livre XL., chap. 1.)
What is said in this canon, that the council
of Carthage orders j^riests to abstain from
their wives at prescribed periods, is a mis-
understanding of tlie decree, caused eitlier
by luahce or by ignorance. This canon is one
of those adopted by the Fifth Council of
Cartilage held in the year 400, and it is
decreed that subdeacons, deacons priests,
and bishops shall abstain from their wives,
following the ancient statutes, and shall be as
though they had them not. The Greek ver-
sion of this canon has rendered the Latin
words irriora statuta by these, idious Jiorous,
which may mean " fixed times " : for the
translator read, following another codex,
propria for priora. Be this as it may, the
Fathers of the Trullan council supposed that
this obliged the clergy only to continence at
certain fixed times, and were not willing to
see that it included bishops as well.

Van Espen.

Although the Latin Church does not dis-
approve,' as contrary to the law of the Gospel
the discipline of the Greeks which allows the


use of marriage to presbyters and deacons,
provided it was contracted l)efore ordination ;
yet never has it approved this canon which
with too great zeal condemns the opposite
custom, and rashly assigns great errors to the
Roman Church.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Cationici, Gratian's JJccrctain, Pars I., Dist.
XXXL, c. xiij.

Antonius Augustinus in his proposed
emendations of Gratian says {Lib. I. (//«/. de
emend. Graf., c. 8.): "This canon can in no
way be received ; for it is written in oi')posi-
tion to the celibacy of the Latin jiriests, and
openly is against the lioman Church." But
to me the note which Gratian appends seems
much more learned and true: "This how-
ever must be understood as of local applica-
tion ; for the Eastern Church, to which tlie VI.
Synod prescribed tliis rule, did not receive a
vow of chastity from the ministers of the
altar." It may be well to Udte here that by
the opinion of most Latin casuists the obli-
gation to chastity among the Roman clergy
rests upon the vow and not upon any law of
the Church binding thereto. This evidently
was the opinion of Gratian.


CANON XIV.

Let the canon of our holy God-bearing Fathers be confirmed in this particular
also ; that a presbyter be not ordained l)efore he is thirty years of age, eyen if be be a
very worthy man, but let liim be kept back. For our Lord Jesus (Christ was baj^tized
and began to teach when he was thirty. In like manner let no deacon be ordained
before he is twenty-five, nor a deaconess before she is forty.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.


A preRhyter tJiirfi/ years of age, a deacon
twenty-five, and a deaconess forty .

Compare Canon XL of Neocsesarea.

It may be interesting to note here that by
the law of the Roman Commi;nion the canon-
ical ages are as follows :

A subdeacon must have completed his
twenty-tirst year, a deacon his twenty-second,
a priest his twenty-fourth, and a bishop his
thirtieth. None of the inferior clergy can
hold a simple benefice before he has begun
his fourteenth year. Ecclesiastical dignities.


such as Cathedral canonries, cannot be con-
ferred on any who have not finished the
twenty-second year. A benefice to which is
attached a cure of souls can be given only
to one who is over twenty-four, and a diocese
only to one who has completed his thirtieth
year. [Vide Ferraris, BiUiothcca Prompta.)

In the Anglican Communion the ages are,
in England, for a bishop " fully thirty years
of age," for a priest twenty-four, and for a
deacon twenty-three : - and in the United
States, for a bishop thirty years of age, for a
priest twenty-four, and for a deacon twenty-
one.


' Clement VIIT made a decree in conformity with tliiR canon
that a Greek presbj-ter who wan married kIimII alj-'tain from his
Vvife for a week or three days befon- he offered tlie sacrifice of
the mass. Canst. 33, in Bull. Horn. (cit. Van Etipeu I. c.)


' A faculty is allowed for earlier ordination, but since 1804
only to be granted by the .Vrchbishop of Canterbury. This lim-
itation is, however, only of ParUameutary sanction (44 Geo. III.,
ch. 43).


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


373


CANON XV.

A SUBDEACON is Dot to be ordained under twenty years of age. And if any one in
any grade of the priesthood shall have been ordained contrary to the prescribed time
let him be deposed.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.
Tliose shall he chosen as Subdeacons tvho are
twenty years of age.


This age seems first to have been fixed by
the Second Council of Toledo ' {circa, a.d.
535) iu its first canon.


CANON XVI.

Since the book of the Acts tells us that seven deacons were appointed by the Apos-
tles, and the synod of Neocsesarea in the canons which it put forth determined that
there ought to be canonically only seven deacons, even if the city be very large, in
accordance with the book of the Acts ; we, having fitted the mind of the fathers to the
Apostles' words, find that the}^ spoke not of those men who ministered at the Mysteries
but in the administration which pertains to the serving of tables. For the book of the
Acts reads as follows : " In those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied,
there arose a murmuring dissension of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their
widows were neglected in the daily ministrations. And the Twelve called the multitude
of the disciples with them and said. It is not meet for us to leave the word of God and
serve tables. Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among you seven men of good report
full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we
will give ourselves continually unto prayer and unto the ministry of the word. And the
saying pleased the whole multitude : and they chose Stephen a man full of faith and of
the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas,
and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch : whom they set before the Apostles."

John Chrysostom, a Doctor of the Church, interpreting these words, proceeds thus :
" It is a remarkable fact that the multitude was not divided in its choice of the men, and
that the Apostles were not rejected by them. But we must learn what sort of rank they
had, and what ordination they received. Was it that of deacons ? But this office did
not yet exist in the churches. But was it the dispensation of a presbyter ? But there
was not as yet any bishop, but only Apostles, whence I think it is clear and manifest
that neither of deacons nor of presbyters was there then the name." ~

But on this account therefore we also announce that the aforesaid seven deacons
are not to be understood as deacons who served at the Mysteries, according to the
teaching before set forth, but that they were those to whom a dispensation was en-
trusted for the common benefit of those that were gathered together, who to us in this
also were a type of philanthropy and zeal towards those who are in need.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


Whoever affirms that the number of deacons
should be seven according to the saying of the
Acts, should know that the reference in that pas-
sage is not to Deacons of the Mysteries but to such
as serve tables.

Van Espen here reminds us that this is, as


Zouaras calls attention to in his scholion on
this place, a correction rather than an inter-
pretation of the XVth Canon of Neocsesarea,
and Balsamon also says the same. The only
interest that the matter possesses is that a
canon which had been received by the Fourth
Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon) should re-
ceive such treatment from such an assembly
as the Synod in Trullo.


' It IS curious that so learned a scholar as the late Henry Brad-
shaw in his article '■ Subdeacon" in Sm'th & I'heetham's D cVon-
ary of Christ. Antiq. should give the date of this synod as 447.
Hefele fixes it at 5i\ or 531. Baronius, Sinius. Labbe, and many
others at 531. A very ancient MS. assigns it to the year 565 of the
Spanish era, i.e. 52T, and this is the date Cardinal de Aguirre


adopts, and is also the one given to the council by the editors of
LWrt lie Verifier les dates.

2 I have not followed the Oxford translation, which seems to
me to have reversed the point. In a foot-note to that translation
(Chrysostom on Acts, Part I., p. 199) will be found a translation
of this canon.


3;4


QUINISEXT. A.I). i;'J2


CANON XVII.

Since clerics of different churches have left their own churches in which they were
ordained and betaken themselves to other bishops, and without the consent of their
own bishoj) have been setth'd in other churches, and thus they liave proved themselves
to be insolent and disobetlii'ut ; we decree tliat from tlu^ month of January of the })ast
lYth Indiction uo ckuic, of whatsoever grade he be, shall have power, without letters
dimissory of his own bishop, to be registered in tlie clergy list of another church. "Who-
ever in future shall not have ol)served this rule, but shall have brought disgrace u])on
himself as well as on the bishoj) who ordained him, let him be deposed together with
him who also received him.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII. I This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

Whoever receives and ordains a nandering \ Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa
cleric shall he deposed together loith him ^/«<6' , XXI., Quajst., ii. can, j.
xvickedhj ordained.

CANON XVIII.

Those clerics who in consequence of a barbaric incursion or on account of any other
circumstance have gone abroad, we order to return again to their churches after the
cause has passed away, or when the incursion of the barbarians is at mi end. Nor are
they to leave them for long without cause. If anyone shall not have retnrned accord-
ing to the direction of this jjresent canon — let him be cut olt" until he shall return to his
own church. And the same shall be the punishment of the bishoi:) who received him.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.


^Mloever has emigrated on account of an
invasion of the barbarians, shall return to the
Church to ichose clergi/ he belongs as soon as the
incursion ceases. Bat if he shall not do so, he
shall be cut off together with him to ivhom he
has gone.

Balsamon.

The Fathers are worthy of great praise.
For having regard to the honour of the ec-
clesiastical order and of each l)is]iop, tliey
have decreed that clergymen, wlio from just
and valid causes have gone forth without
letters dimissory from those who ordained
them, should return to their own clergy as


soon as the cause which drove them forth
ceases ; and that they should not be enrolled
on the clergy list of any other church. But
whosoever cannot be jiersuaded to return is
to be cut oft', as well as the bishop who de-
tains him. But someone will say, If a bisji-
op who does such a thing is cut oflf by his
Metropolitan ; and likewise if a ^letropolitan
spurns this canon lie is punished by the Patri-
arch. But if an autocejilialous archbisliop or
a Patriarch other than the Patriarch of Con-
stantinople (for he has a faculty fordoing so)
shouhl be convicted of a breach of this Canon,
by whom would he be cut oft"? I suppose by
the Supreme Pontiff' (oio^at our Trapd tuv fxti^o-


CANON XIX.

It behoves those who preside over the churches, every day l)ut especially on Lord's
days, to teach all tli<^ clergy and i)eo])le words of ])iety and of right religion, gathering
out of holy Scri])ture meditations and determinations of the truth, and not going beyond
the limits now fixed, nor varying from the tradition of the Goil-b(>aring fathers. And if
any controversy in regard to 8cri])ture shall have been raised, let them not interpret it
otherwise than as the lights and doctors of the church in their writings have ex])oun(led
it, and in these let them glory rather than in composing things out of their own heads,
lest through their lack of skill '~ they may have d(>])arteil from what was fitting. For

' Can this meaa the Pope ? 'I have iolluwcd the reading antipta^.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


375


through the doctrine of the aforesaid fathers, the people coming to the knowledge of
what is good and desirable, as well as what is useless and to be rejected, will remodel
their life for the better, and not be led by ignorance, but applying their minds to the
doctrine, they will take heed that no evil befall them and work out their salvation in
fear of impending punishment.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.

The preJdtrii of tlie Church, C)<pcciaUy vjwn
Lord's days, shall teach doctrine.

Van Espen.

How great an obligation of preaching rests
upon bishops, the successors of the Apostles,
is evident from the words of St. Paul, " Christ
sent me not to baptize but to preach" (1 Cor.
i., 17), and his chief adjuration to Timothy
though Jesus Christ and his coming, was
" Preach the Word " (2 Tim. ii. 4.) For this
reason the fathers formerly called the epis-
copate the preaching-office [offichim j^redicatio-
nis), as is evident from the profession of Adel-
bert Morinensis, and the form of pi-ofession
of a future Archbishop. Both of these will
be found in Labbe, appendix to Tom. VIII.,
of his Concilia.


Council o> Trent,
{Sess. v., c. 2.)

The preaching of the Gospel is the chief
work of bishops.

Convocation of Canterbury, a.d. 1571.

(Car-dwell. Synodalia, Vol. I., p. 126.)

The clergy will be careful to teach nothing
in their sermons to be religiously held and
believed by the people except what is agree-
able to the doctrine of the Old and New Testa-
ment, and what the Catholic Fathers and An-
cient Bishops have collected out of the same.'

Council of Trent.
{Sess. IV.)
No one shall dare to interpret the Holy
Scripture contrary to the unanimous consent
of the fathers.


CANON XX.

It shall not oe lawful for a bishop to teach publicly in any city which does not be-
long to hi in. If any shall have been observed doing this, let him cease from his epis-
copate, but let him discharge the office of a presbyter.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.


Balsamon and Zonaras think that the Bishop
is not to be deposed from his Episcopate, but
only shorn of his right of executing the Epis-
copal functions, so that he will virtually be
reduced to a presbyter. Aristenus, on the
other hand, considers the deposition to be
real and that this canon creates an exception
The meaning of this canon is most obscure, to Canon XXIX. of Chalcedon.


The hisliop of one city shall not teach publicly
in another. If he shall be shotvn to have done so
he shall be deprived of the episcopate and shall
perform the functions of a presbyter.


CANON XXI.

Those wdio have become guilty of crimes against the canons, and on this account
subject to complete and perpetual deposition, are degraded to the condition of laymen.
If, however, keeping conversion continually before their eyes, they willingly deplore the
sin on account of which they fell from grace, and made themselves aliens therefrom,
they may still cut their hair after the manner of clerics. But if they are not willing to
submit themselves to this canon, they must wear their hair as laymen, as being those
Avho have preferred the communion of the world to the celestial life.

' It is not generally known that this evident citation of Canon XIX. of the Quinisext Council forms part of the action enforcing
the XXXIX. Articles of the Church of England.


376


QUIKISEXT. A.D. 692


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.
Whoever is already deposed and reduced to the
latj estate, if he shall repent, let him continue de-
posed but be shorn. But if other aise, he must
let his hair grow.


Beveridge


wishes to read


who have be-
come canouically guilty of crimes," sub-
stituting Kai'oiiKws for KavovtKots, in accord-
ance with the Bodleian and Amerbachiaii
codices.


CANON XXII.

Those who are ordained for money, whether bishops or of any rank whatever, and
not bv examination and choice of life, we order to be deposed as well as those also who
ordained them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.

Whoever is ordained for pay shall be deposed
together with his ordainer.

Van Espen.

The present canon orders to be deposed
not only the one simoniacally ordained, but
also his ordainer, ordering that ordinations


should take place on account, not of money,
but of the excellence of the examination
stood hj the candidate and on account of his
uprightness of life. And it evidently takes
it for granted that, where money has been
used, examination, excellence of life, and
consideration of merit enter but little into
the matter, or at least are paid no atten-
tion to.


CANON XXIII.

That no one, whether bisliop, presbyter, or deacon, when giving the immaculate
Communion, shall exact from him who communicates fees of any kind. For grace is
not to be sold, nor do we give the sanctification of the Holy Spirit for money ; but to
those who are worthy of the gift it is to be communicated in all simplicity. But if any
of those enrolled among the clergy make demands on those he communicates let him be
deposed, as an imitator of the error and wickedness of Simon.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.


Whoever shall demand an obolus or anything
else for giving the sjwtless communion shall be
deposed.


This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars. II., Causa
I., Qu£est. I., can. 100, attributed to the VI.
Synod. Ivo reads, "From the Sixth Synod,
III. Constantinople."


CANON XXIV.

No one who is on the priestly catalogue nor any monk is allowed to take part in
horse-races or to assist at tiieatrical re]iresentations. 13ut if any clergym;in be called to
a marriage, as soon as the games begin let him rise up and go out, for so it is ordered by
the doctrine of our fathers. And if any one shall be convicted of such an oflfence let
him cease therefrom or be deposed.

NOTES. •


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.
A clergyman or monk shall be deposed who
goes to horse-races, or does not leave nuptials
before the players are brought in.


Van Espen.
Scarcely ever were these plays exhibited
without the introduction of something con-
trary to honesty and chastity. As Lupus


QUmiSEXT. A.D. G92 377


here notes, the woi'd " obscene " has its deri- fathers," the Synod understands the doctrine

vation from these " scenic " rej^resentations. of the fathers of the synod of Laodicea, which

Rightly therefore has it been forbidden by in its canon liv. condemned the same abuse,
the sacred canons that the clergy should wit-
ness any such plays. Compare the canon given in the Corpus

In the second part of this canon by the Juris Cannnid, Gratian's Decretmn, Pars I.,

words "ordered by the doctrine of our Dist. XXXIV., can. xix.

CANON XXV.

Moreover we renew the canon wliick orders that country {aypotKiKa<i) parishes and
those which are in the provinces {ey')(^copiov^) shall remain subject to the bishops who
had possession of them ; especially if for thirty years they had administered them with-
out opposition. But if within thirty years there had been or should be any controversy
on the point, it is lawful for those who think themselves injured to refer the matter to
the provincial synod.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV.
Rurnl and out of town parishes held for thirty
years may be retained. But within that time
tliere may he a controversy.


Compare notes on Canon XVII. of Chal-
cedon.


CANON XXVI.

If a presbyter has through ignorance contracted an illegal marriage, while he still
retains the right to his place, as we have defined in the sacred canons, yet he must
abstain from all sacerdotal work. For it is sufficient if to such an one indulgence is
granted. For he is unfit to bless another who needs to take care of his own wounds, for
blessing is the imparting of sanctification. But how can he impart this to another who
does not possess it himself through a sin of ignorance ? Neither then in public nor in
private can he bless nor distribute to others the body of Christ, [nor perform any other
ministry] ; but being content with his seat of honour let him lament to the Lord that
his sin of ignorance may be remitted. For it is manifest that the nefarious marriage
must be dissolved, neither can the man have any intercourse with her on account of
whom he is deprived of the execution of his priesthood.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI. ignorance, he shall cease from his priesthood

A priest tvho has fallen info an illicit mar- ! but shall still have his place among the pres-
riage and been deposed, may still hare his seat, but ' hyters. But such an illegitimate marriage.


only when he abstains for the future from his
wickedness.

Aristenus.
If any presbyter before his ordination had


on account of which he was deprived of the
Sacred Ministry, must be dissolved.

Van Espen.
The sacred canon to which the Sjiiod here


married a widow, or a harlot, or an actress, refers is number xxvij. of St. Basil in his
or any other woman such as are forbidden, in Canonical Epistle to Amphilochius.

CANON XXVII.

None of those who are in the catalogue of the clergy shall wear clothes unsuited to
them, either while still living in town or when on a journey : but they shall wear such
clothes as are assigned to those who belong to the clergy. And if any one shall violate
this canon, he shall be cut off for one week.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVII.
A clergyman must not wear an unsuitable dress eitJier tvhen travelling or ivhen at Mme. Should
he do so, he shall be cut off for one week.


378


QUmiSEXT. A.D. G92


CANON XXYIII.


Since we understaud that i» several clnirclies pjrapes are brought to the altar, accord-
ing to a custom wliich has long prevailed, and the iniiiisters joined this with the unbloody
sacrifice of the oblation, and distributed both to the })eople at the same time, we decree
that no priest shall do this for the future, but shall administer the oblation alone to the
people for the cpuckening of their souls and for the remission of their sins. But with
regard to the ollering of grapes as first fruits, the priests may bless them a})art [from
the offering of the oblation] and distribute them to such as seek them as an act of thanks-
giving to him who is the Giver of the fruits by which our bodies are increased and fed
according to his divine decree. And if any cleric shall violate this decree let him 1)6
deposed.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVIII.


Grapes arc by some joined irith the unhhodii
sacrifice. It is hereb// decreed that no one shall
for the future dare to do this.

Van Espen.

Similar blessings of fruit, and particnlai'ly
of grai^es, are found in more recent rituals as
well as in the ancient Greek Euchologions I
and the Latin Rituales. In the Sacramentary
of St. Gregory will be found a benediction of
gra2)es on the feast of St. Sixtiis.

Cardinal Bona says (Be Rcb. Liturg., Lil). II., j
cap. xiv.), that immediately before the words
Semper bona crcas, sanctificas, etc., if new fruits
or ?Lwy other things adapted to human use
were to be blessed, they were wont in former
times to be placed before the altar, and there
to be blessed by the priest ; and when the


benediction was ended Avitli the accustomed
words "Through Christ our Lord," there was
added the following prayer: "Perquem hjec
omnia, etc.," which words are not so much to
be referred to the bod}' and blood of Christ, as
to the things to be blessed, which God contin-
ually creates by renewing, and we ask that
they ma}' be sanctified by his benediction to
our use.

But in after ages when the fervour of the
faithful had grown cold, that the mass might
not be too long, they were separated and yet
the prayer remained which, as said to-day over
the consecrated sjDecies alone, can hardly be
understood.

This canon is found in a shortened form
in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Pars. III., De
Consecrat., Dist. II., can. vj.

Compare Canon of the Apostles number iv.


CANON XXIX.


A Canon of the Synod of Carthage says that the holy mysteries of the altar are not
to be jx'ifornied but by men who are fasting, except on one day in the year on which
the Supper of the Lord is celebrated. At that time, on account perhajis of certain occa-
sions in those places useful to th<^ Church, even the holy Fathers themselves made use
of this dispensation. ]^>ut since nothing leads us to abandon exact observance, we decree
that the A])()stolic and Patristic tradition shall be followed ; and define that it is not
right to break the fast on the fifth feria of the last week of Lent, and thus to do dishon-
our to the whole of Lent.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX. ' urek of Lent, and so the u-hole of Lent be dis-

Sonie of the Fathers after they had supped on , honoured,
the day of the Divine Supper made the offeriny.^ \

Hnwerer, it has seemed yood to the synod that Zonaras remarks that the " Apostolic and
this should not be done, and that the fast should Patristic tradition " is a reference to canon
not be broken upon the fifth feria'^ <f the last u\^ „f the Apostolic Canons and to canon I.

of Laodicea. See notes on this last canon.


I.e., of tbc Mass.


" Maandy Thursday.


QUmiSEXT. A.D. 693 379


CANON XXX.

Willing to do all things for the edification of the Church, we have determined to
take care even of priests who are in barbarian churches. Wherefore if they think that
they ought to exceed the Apostolic Canon concerning the not putting away of a wife
on the pretext of piety and religion, and to do beyond that which is commanded, and
therefore abstain by agreement with their wives from cohabitation, we decree they
ought no longer to live with them in any way, so that hereby they may afford us a per-
fect demonstration of their promise. But we have conceded this to them ou no other
ground than their narrowness, and foreign and unsettled manners.

NOTES. ,

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX. j I do not think that this explanation of

Those priests who are in churches among //le Fleury's can be sustained, and it would seem

barbarians, if with consent they have abstained that Van Espen is more near the truth when

from commerce with their tvives shall never after- I he says : " Some priests in barbarous coun-

wards have any commerce with them in any way. tries thought they should abstain after the

Latin custom even from wives taken before

r LEUKY. ordination. And although this was contrary

(Hist. EccL, Liv. XL., chap. 1.) to the discipline of the Greeks, and also to

" Priests who are among the barbarians," Canon V. of the Apostles, nevertheless the

that is to say, it would seem, in Italy and in Fathers thought it might be tolerated, pro-

the other countries of the Latin rite. " Their vided such priests should also not live any

narrowness and foreign and unsettled man- longer with their wives." There seems no

ners," that is to say that according to them it reason to introduce anti-Roman bitterness

is an imperfection to aspire after perfect con- where it is not already found.

tinence. '

CANON XXXI.

Clekics who in oratories which are in houses offer the Holy Mysteries or baptize,
we decree ought to do this with the consent of the bishop of the place. Wherefore if
any cleric shall not have so done, let him be deposed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXL 1 Commentarius Theologico - canonico - criti-

Thou mayest not offer in an oratory in a pri- cus De ecclesiis, earum reverentia, etasylo atque

vate house without the consent of the bishop. concordia saccrdotii, et imperii, auctore Josepho

Aloysio Assemani. Accesserunt tractatus cl.
On this whole subject the reader is referred j virorum I). Josephi de Bonis, De Oratoriis
to the curious and most interesting volume Puhlicis ; ac. R. P. Fortunati a Brixia De Ora-
publislied by Venantius Monaldini of Venice, toriis Domesticis, in supplementum celeberrimi
in 1765. I cannot better give its scope than operis Joannis Baptistse Gattico De Oratoriis
by copying out its title in full. I Domesticis, et usu altaris portatilis.

CANON XXXII.

Since it has come to our knowledge that in the region of Armenia they offer wine
only on the Holy Table, those who celebrate the unbloody sacrifice not mixing water
with it, adducing, as authority thereof, John Chrysostom, a doctor of the Church, who
says in his inter]iretation of the Gospel according to St. Matthew :

" And wherefore did he not drink water after he was risen again, but wine? To
pluck up by the roots another Avicked heresy. For since there are certain who use
water in the Mysteries to shew that both when he delivered the mysteries he had given
wine and that when he had risen and was setting before them a mere meal without mys-


380


QFIXISEXT. A.D. 092


teries, he used wine, ' of tlic fruit,' saitli he, ' of the vine.' But a vine produces wine,
not water." * And from this they think the doctor overthrows the admixture of water in
the holy sacrifice. Now, lest on the point from this time forward they be held in igno-
rance, we open out the orthodox opinion of the Father. For since there Mas an ancient
and wicked heresy- of the Hydroparastatiio (ij'., of tliosc wlio offered water), who instead
of wint' used water in their saerilice, this tUvine, confuting the detestable teaching of
such a heresy, and showing that it is directly opposed to Apostolic tradition, asserted
that which has just been quoted. For to his own church, Avhere the pastoral adminis-
tration had been given him, he ordered that water mixed with wine should be used at the
unbloody sacrifice, so as to shew forth the mingling of the blood and water which for
the life of the whole world and for the redemption of its sins, was poured forth from
the precious side of Christ our Redeemer ; and moreover in every church where spii'-
itual light has sinned this divinely given order is observed.

For also James, the Inother, according to the fiesh, of Christ our God, to whom the
throne of the church of Jerusalem first was entrusted, and Basil, the Archbishop of the
Church of Caesarea, whose glory has spread through all the world, when they delivered
to us directions for the mystical sacrifice in writing, declared that the holy chalice is
consecrated in the Divine Liturgy with water and Avine. And the holy Fathers who as-
sembled at Carthage })rovided in these express terms : " That in the holy Mysteries
nothing besides the body and blood of the Lord be offered, as the Lord himself laid
down, that is bread and wine mixed with water." Therefore if any bishop or presbyter
shall not perform the holy action according to what has been handed down by the
Apostles, and shall not oifer the sacrifice with wine mixed with water, let him be dej)osed,
as imperfectly shewing forth the mystery and innovating on the things which have been
handed down.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXII.
Chn/sosfom, ichni oirrfhrowincj tJie hcreKj/ of
the Jlifdropitrastatoe, saijs : " When the Lord suf-
fered and rose again he used wine." The Ar-
menians, lajfing hold on this, offer wine alone,
not understanding that Chiy/sostoni himself and
Basd, ti))d James used wine mired with water;
and left the tradition that ive should so make the
offering. Tf therefore, anij one shdl offer irine
alone, or icater alone, and not the mixed [chalice]
let him he deposed.

Van Espen.

Justin IMartyr in his Second Apology, Am-
brose, or wlioever was the author of the books
on the Sacraments (Lib. v., cap. i.), Augustine
and many others make mention of this rite,
and above all St. Cyprian, av1)o wrote a long
epistle on the subject to Cecilius, and seeking ;
tlie reason of the ceremony as a setting forth i
of the luiion of the people, represented by the
water, with Christ, tigured by the wine.

Another signification of this rite St. Au-
gustine ijidicates in liis sermon to Neophytes,
saying: "Take tliis in bread, wliich hung
upon the Ci-oss : Take this in the cup which
poured forth from the side," that is to say ,
blood and water.

Cardinal Bona {Dc Rebus Lit urgieis, Lib. II., '


I cap. ix., n. 3 and 4) refers to many ancient
rituals in which a similar prayer is used to
that found in the Ambrosian rite, which says
as the water is poured in : " Out of the side of
Christ there flowed forth blood and water to-
gether. In the name of the Father, etc."
Bona further notes that " The Greeks twice
mingle water with the wine, once cold water,
when in the prothesis they are preparing the
Holy Gifts, and the Priest pierces the bread
with the holy spear, and says, " One of the
soldiers with a lance opened his side, and im-
mediately there tlowed forth blood and water,"
and the deacon pours in wine and water.
From tliis it is evident that tlie Greeks agree
with St. Augustine's explanation.

For the second time the Greeks mix " hot
water after consecration and immediately be-
fore comiimiiion, the deacon begging from
the priest a blessing upon the warm water ;
and he l)lesses it in these words : ' Blessed be
the fervour of thy Saints, now and ever and
to the ages of ages. Amen.' Then tlie dea-
con pours the water into the chalice, saving:
' The fervour of faith, full of the Holy Spirit.' "
So Cardinal Bona as above.

The tliird reason of this rite is assumed by
some from the fact that Christ is believed
thus to liave instituted this sacrament at the


Chryeos. In Matt. XXVI. 29—1 have taken the Oxford translation, " Library of the Fathers."


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


381


last supper ; and this the synod seems to in- rite was also handed down by the Ajjostles,

timate in the present canon when it says and this is evident from their citing the Lit-

"as the Lord himself delivered." urgy of St. James, which they believed to be

In this case the Greeks suppose that this a genuine work of his.


CANON XXXIII.

Since we know that, in the region of the Armenians, only those are appointed to the
clerical orders who are of priestly descent (following in this Jewish customs) ; and some
of those who are even untonsured are appointed to succeed cantors and readers of the
divine law, we decree that henceforth it shall not be lawful for those who wish to bring
any one into the clergy, to pay regard to the descent of him who is to be ordained ; but
let them examine whether they are worthy (according to the decrees set forth in the holy
canons) to be placed on the list of the clergy, so that they may be ecclesiastically pro-
moted, whether they are of priestly descent or not ; moreover, let them not permit any
one at all to read in the ambo, according to the order of those enrolled in the clergy, un-
less such an one have received the priestly tonsure and the canonical benediction of his
own pastor ; but if any one shall have been observed to act contrary to these directions,
let him be cut off.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIII.

Wlioever is worthy of the priesthood should
he ordained ivhether he is sprung of a pricsthj
line or no. And he that has been blessed unton-
sured shall not read the Holy Scriptures at the
ambo.


Van Espen.

Here not obscurely does the canon join the
clerical tonsure received from the bishop with
the office of Reader, so much so that he that
has been tonsured by the bishop is thought
to have received at the same time the tonsure
and the order of lector.


CANON XXXIV.

But in future, since the priestly canon openly sets this forth, that the crime of con-
spiracy or secret society is forbidden by external laws, but much more ought it to be pro-
hibited in the Church ; we also hasten to observe that if any clerics or monks are found
either conspiring or entering secret societies, or devising anything against bishops or
clergymen, they shall be altogether deprived of their rank.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIV.

If clerics or mo7ilis enter into conspiracies or
fraternities, or plots against the bishop or their
fellow clerics, they shall be cast out of their grade.


This is but a renewal of Canon xviij. of
Chalcedon, which see with the notes.


CANON XXXV.

It shall be lawful for no Metropolitan on the death of a bishop of liis province to ap-
propriate or sell the private property of the deceased, or that of the widowed church :
but these are to be in the custody of the clergy of the diocese over which he presided
until the election of another bishop, unless in the said church there are no clergymen
left. For then the Metropolitan shall protect the property without diminution, handing
over everything to the bishop when he is appointed.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXV.


Wlien the bishop is dead the clergy shall


guard his goods. If, however, no clergyman
remains, the Metropolitan shall taJce charge of
them until another be ordained.


383


QUINISEXT. A.D. G92


Compare Canon xxii. of Chalcedon. This
canon extends the prohibition to Metropoli-
tans as well.

AlUSTENDS.

Neither the clergy nor metropolitan after
the death of the bishop arc allowed to carry


off his goods, but all should be guarded by
the clergy themselves, until another bishoj) is
chosen. But if by chance no clergyman is
left in that church, the metropolitan is to keep
all the possessions undiminished and to return
them to the future bishop.


CANON XXXVI.

Eenewing the enactments by the 150 Fathers assembled at the God-protected and
imperial city, and those of the G30 who met at Chalcedon ; we decree that the see of
Constantinople shall have equal privileges with the see of Old Home, and shall be highly
regarded in ecclesiastical matters as that is, and shall be second after it. After Cou-
stantiuoi)le shall be ranked the See of Alexandria, then that of Antioch, and afterwards
the See of Jerusalem.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVI.

Let the throne of Constantinople be next after
that of Home, and enjoy equal privileges. After
it Alexandria, then Antioch, and then Jerusalem.

Balsamon.

The Fathers here speak of the Second and
Third canons of the Second Synod [i.e. I. Con-
stantinople] and of canon xxviij. of the Fourth
Synod [i.e. Chalcedon]. And read what we
have said on these canons.

Aristenus.

We have explained the third canon of the
Synod of Constantinople and the twenty-eighth
caiaonof tlie Synod of Chalcedon as meaning,
when asserting that the bishop of Constanti-
nople should enjoy equal privileges after the
Konian bishop, that he should l)e placed sec-
ond from the Konian in point of time. So
here too this preposition "after" denotes


time but not honour. For after many years
this throne of Constantinople obtained equal
privileges with the Roman Church ; because
it was honoured by the presence of the Em-
peror and of the Senate.

On this opinion of Aristenus's the reader
is referred to the notes on Canon iij. of I.
Constantinople.

Jl'STINIAN.

{Novella CXXXL, Cajj. ij.)

We command that according to the defini-
tions of the Four Councils the most holy Pope
of Old Rome shall be first of all the priests.
But the most blessed Archbishop of Constan-
tinople, which is New Rome, shall have the
second place after the Holy Apostolic See of
Old Rome.

This canon, in a mutilated form, is found
in the Corpus Juris Cauouici, Gratian's Dccre-
tum, Pars I., Dist. XXII., c. vj.


CANON XXXVII.

Since at different times there have been invasions of barbarians, and therefore very
many cities liave been subjected to the infidels, so that the bishop of a city may not be
able, after he has been ordained, to take ])ossession of his see, and to be settled in it in
sacerdotal order, and so to i)erform and manage for it the ordinations and all things
which by custom apjiertain to the bishop : we, preserving honour and veneration for the
priesthood, and in no wise wishing to em])lov the Gentile injury to the ruin of eccle-
siastical rights, have decreed that those who have been ordained thus, and on account
of the aforesaid cause have not been settled in tlnnr sees, without any prejudice from this
thing may be kept [in good standing] and that they may canonically perform the ordi-
nation of the difterent clerics and use the authority of thcnr office according to the d(>fined
limits, and that whatever administration ])roceeds from them may be valid and legiti-
mate. For tiie exercise of his office shall not l)e circumscribed by a season of neces-
sity when the exact observance of law is circumscribed.


QUINISEXT. A.D. G92


383


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVII.

A bishop who, on account of the incursions of
the barbarians, is not set in his throne, shall have
his own chair of stale, and shall ordain, and
shall enjoy most firmly all the riyhts of the
priesthood.

By Canon XVIII. of Antioch the principle
of this canon was enunciated, that when a


bishop did not take possession of his see be-
cause he could not do so, he was not to be
held responsible or to lose any of his episco-
pal rights and powers, in that case the impos-
sibility arose from the insubordination of the
people, in this from the diocese being in the
hands of the barbarians.

It has been commonly thought that the
Bishops in partibas infideliuni had their origin
in the state of things calling for this canon.


CANON XXXVIII.

The canon which was made by the Fathers we also observe, which thus decreed :
If any city be renewed by imperial authoritj^ or shall have been renewed, let the order
of things ecclesiastical follow the civil and public models.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVIII.

If any city is or shall be renewed by the
Emperor, the ecclesiastical order shall follow
the political and public example.

Van Espen.
The canon of the Fathers which the Synod


wishes observed is XVII of Chalcedon, the
notes on which see.

Here it mvist be noted that by "civil and
public models " is signified the " pragmatic "
or imperial letters, by which the emperors
granted to newly raised up or re-edified towns
the privilege of other cities, or else annexed
them to some Province.


. CANON XXXIX.

Since our brother and fellow-worker, John, bishop of the island of Cyprus, together
with his people in the province of the Hellespont, both on account of barbarian incur-
sions, and that they may be freed from servitude of the heathen, and may be subject
alone to the sceptres of most Christian rule, have emigrated from the said island, by
the providence of the philanthropic God, and the labour of our Christ-loving and pious
Empress ; Ave determine that the privileges which were conceded by the divine fathers
who first at Epliesus assembled, are to be preserved without any innovations, viz. : that
new Justinianopolis shall have the rights of Constantinople and whoever is constituted the
pious and most religious bishop thereof shall take precedence of all the bishops of the
province of the Hellespont, and be elected [?] by his own bishops according to ancient
custom. For the customs which obtain in each church our divine Fathers also took pains
should be maintained, the existing bishop of the city of Cyzicus being subject to the met-
ropolitan of the aforesaid Justinianopolis, for the imitation of all the rest of the bishops
who are under the aforesaid beloved of God metropolitan John, by whom, as custom
demands, even the bishop of the very city of Cyzicus shall be ordained.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIX.


TJie new Justinianopolis shall have the riyhts of
Constantinople, and its prelate shall rule over all
the bishops of the Hellespont to ivhom he has yone,
and he shall be ordained by his own bishop: as
ike fathers of Eyhesus decreed.


Hefele.


Hitherto the bishop of Cyzicus was met-
ropolitan of the province of the Hellespont.
Now he too is to be subject to the bishop of
New- Justinianopolis. What, however, is meant
by " the right of Constantinople " ? It was


384


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


impossible that the Synod should place the
bishop of Justinianopolis iu equal dignity
Avith the patriarch of Constantinople. But
they probably meant to say : " The rights
which the bishop of Constantinople has hith-
erto exercised over the province of the Helles-
l')ont, as chief inctro|)nlitan, fall now to the
bishop of Now-Justiiiiaiiopolis." Or perha2)s
T^e should read, instead of Constantinople
Kwro-Tui'Tti't'wi' 770/\.£(i)s, as thc AinorbachiaH IMS.
has it, and translate : " The same rights which


Constantia (the metropolis of Cyprus) pos-
sessed. New Justinianopolis shall henceforth
have." The latter is the more probable.

Van Espen.

To understand this canon it must be re-
membered that the Metropolis of Cj'prus,
which was formerly called Constantia, when
restored by the Emperor Justinian was called
by his name, New Justinianopolis.


C.\^"ON XL.

Since to cleave to God by retiring from the noi.se and turmoil of life is very benefi-
cial, it beh(jves lis not without examination to admit before the jn'oper time those who
choose the monastic life, but to observe respecting them the limit handed down by our
fathers, in order that we may then admit a prof(;ssion of the life according to God as
for ever firm, and the result of knowledge and judgment after years of discretion have
been reached. He therefore who is about to submit to the yoke of monastic life sliould
not be less than ten years of age, the examination of the matter depending on the de-
cision of the bishop, whether he considers a longer time more conducive for his entrance
and establislinient in th(^ monastic life. For although the great Basil in his holy canons
decreed that she who willingly offers to God and end)races virginity, if she has com-
pleted her seventeenth year, is to be entered in the order of virgins : nevertheless, hav-
ing folloAved the exam])le respecting widows and deaconesses, analogy and ])roportion
being considered, we have admitted at the said time those who have chosen the monas-
tic life. For it is Avritten in the divine Apostle that a widow is to be elected in the
church at sixty years old : but the sacred canons have decreed that a deaconess shall be
ordained at forty, since they saw that the Church by divine grace had gone forth more
powerful and robust and was advancing still further, and they saw the firmness and sta-
bility of the faitld'ul in observing the divine commandments. Wherefore we also, since
we most rightly com]jreliend the matter, appoint the lienedietion of grace to him who is
about to enter the struggle according to God, even as impressing speedily a certain seal
upon him, hereupon introducing him to the not-long-to-be-hesitated-over and declined,
or rather inciting him even to the choice and determination of good.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XL. I ent canon admits him who is not less than

A monk must be ten years old. Even ifthe^.^^^ years and desires to be a monk, but en-
Divinc Basil thought the one shorn should be t^'u^^s the dotcrnnnation of the exact time to
over secenteen. But althoaqh the Apostle or- ^^'^ judgment of the hegumenos, whether he
dains that a widow to be espoused to the Church thmks it more advantageous to increase the
must be sixty, yet the Fathers say a Deaconess age-rcqnircmcnt for the entering and being
is to be ordained at forty, the Church in the established in the married life. But the can-
meamvh lie hariny Imome 'stronger ; so ive place, ^^ lessens the time defined by Basil the
tJie seal on a monk at an earlier aye. Great, because the Fathers thought that the

I Church by divine grace had grown stronger

Aristenus. I since then, and was going on more and more,

The eighteenth canon of Basil the Great and that the faithful seemed firmer and more


orders that she who oflfers herself to the Lord
and renounces marriage, ought to l)e over six-
teen or even seventeen years of age : so that
her promise may be firm and that if she vio-
lates it she may suflfer the due penalties. For,


stable for the observance of the divine com-
mandments. And for the same reason, viz ,
that the Church was growing better, the sacred
canons had lessened the age of deaconesses,
and fixed it at forty years, although the Apos-


says he, children's voices are not to be thought tie himself orders that no widow is to be chos-
of any value in such matters. But the pres- 1 en into the Church under sixty years of age.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692 385


CANON XLI.

Those who in town or in villages wish to go away into cloisters, and take heed for
themselves apart, before they enter a monastery and practise the anchorite's life,' should
for the space of three years in the fear of God snbmit to the Superior of the house, and
fulfil obedience in all things, as is right, thus shewing forth their choice of this life and
that they embrace it willingly and with their whole hearts ; they are then to be exam-
ined by the superior (TrpoeSpo?) of the place ; and then to bear bravely outside the clois-
ter one year more, so that their purpose may be fully manifested. For by this they
will shew fully and perfectly that they are not catching at vain glory, but that they are
pursuing the life of solitude because of its inherent beauty aud honom*. After the com-
pletion of such a period, if they remain in the same intention in their choice of the life,
they are to be enclosed, and no longer is it lawful for them to go out of such a house
when they so desire, unless they be induced to do so for the common advantage, or
other pressing necessity urging on to death ; and then only ^^'ith the blessing of the
bishop of that place.

And those who, without the above-mentioned causes, venture forth of their convents,
are first of all to be shut up in the said convent even against their wills, and then are to
cure themselves with fasting and other afflictions, knowing how it is written that " no
one who has put his hand to the plough and has looked back, is fit for the kingdom of
heaven."

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLI. ! Anchorite life, synods in after-years frequent-

WJwever is about to enter a cloister, let /,/„, b' approved, taught as they Were by experi-

livefor three years in a monastery, and z,,/ore ^^f ^^T-^T ? V""" ^''i*''* *?•^'^'^^*7'*^■
he is shut up let him spend one year more, and o^^t sufficient probation to this solitary life and

so let him be shut up. And he shall not then ^^^''^^^ «^ .^^P^^}^^!.'^^, *^'«^ the common mter-

go forth unless death or the common good (h^- 'tT'^^tZ^^^l^ll^^^Af^TL^^^

mauds.

Van Espen.


of Vannes (about a.d. 465) canon vij., of Agde

chap. Ixxviij., of Orleans the First can. xxij.,

of Frankfort can. xij . , of Toledo the Seventh

This canon, so far as it sets forth the ne- can. v., and the Capitular of Charlemagne To


cessit}' of probation before admission to the ' monks. Chap. ij.


CANON XLII.

Those who are called Eremites and are clothed in black robes, and with long hair
go about cities and associate with the worldly both men and women and bring odium
upon their profession — we decree that if they will receive the habit of other monks and
wear their hair cut short, they may be shut up in a monastery and numbered among the
brothers ; but if they do not choose to do tliis, they are to be expelled from the cities
and forced to live in the desert {ip7]fjbov<i) from whence also they derive their name.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLII.
An eremite dressed in black vesture and not
having his hair cut, unless he has his hair cut


common in the East, and many examples will
be found of the dervishes in the Arabian
Nights and other Eastern tales. The "vaga-


shall be expelled tlie city and be shut up in Ms bond " monks of the West also became a great


monastery.

It may not be irreverent to remark that


nuisance as well as a scandal in the Middle
Ages. The reader will find interesting in-
stances of Sj^anish deceivers of the same sort


this species of impostors always has been | in " Gil Bias " and other Spanish romances

' The Latin adds, " That is, separate and remote from others."


380


QUINISEXT. A.D. 092


CANON XLITI.

It is lawful for every Christian to choose the life of religious discipliue, and setting
aside the troublous surgings of tlu' affairs of this life to enter a monastery, and to be
shaven in the fashion of a monk, without regard to what faults he may have previously
committed. For God our Saviour says : " "Whoso cometh to me, I will in no wise
cast out."

As therefore the monastic method of life engraves upon us as on a tablet the life of
penitence, Ave receive' whoever a])])roaches it" sincerely; nor is any custom to be
allowed to hinder him from fultilling his intention.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIII.


Wlioever flees from the surging billoivs of life
and desires to enter a monastery, shall be alloived
to do so.

ZONARAS.

The greatness or the number of a man's
sins ought not to make him lose hope of
propitiating the divinity by his i)enitence, if


he turns his eyes to the divine mercy. This
is what the canon asserts, and affirms that
everyone, no matter how wicked and nefari-
ous his life may have been, may embrace
monastic discipline, which inscribes, as on a
tablet,' to us a life of penitence. For as a
tablet describes to us what is inscribed upon
it, so the monastic profession writes and
inscribes upon us penitence, so that it
remains for ever.


CANON XLIV.

A MONK convicted of fornication, or who takes a wife for the communion of matri-
mony and for society, is to be subjected to the penalties of fornicators, according to the
canons.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIV.

A monk joined in marriage or committing for-
nication shall pay the penalty of a fornicator.

The punishment here seems too light,
so that Balsamon thinks that this canon only
refers to such monks as freely confess their
sin and desist from it, remaining in their
monasteries ; and that the sterner penalties
assigned to unchaste religious by other synods
(notably Chalcedon, can. xvj., and Ancyra,
can. xix.) are for such as do not confess their
faults but are after some time convicted of
them.


Aristenus.

The monk will receive the same punish-
ment whether he be a fornicator or has
joined himself with a woman for the commun-
ion of marriage.

Van Espen.

It is veiw likely from this canon that the
Monastic vow at the time of this Synod was
not yet an iniprdimenfxm dirimens of matri-
mony, for nothing is said about the dissolu-
tion of the marriage contracted by a monk
althout^h he had gravely sinned in violating
his faith pledged to God.


CANON XLV.

Whereas we understand that in some monasteries of women those who are about
to be clothed witli the sacred habit arc first adorned in silks and garments of ;dl kinds,
and also with gold and jewels, by those who bi'ing them thither, and tliat they thus
approach the altar and are there stiii)ped of such a dis})lay of wealth, and that imme-
diately thereafter the blessing of their habit takes place, and they are clothed with the
black robe ; we decree that henceforth this shall not be done.

For it is not lawful for her who has already of her own free will put away every


' Latin adds "and favour "

' Latin reads, " germanely and sincerely."


' Beveridpe translates <rr\JXr) by columna but I think incor-
rectly. CJ. Liddell and Scott.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692 387


delight of life, and has embraced that method of life which is according to God, and
has confirmed it with strong and stable reasons, and so has come to the monastery, to
recall to memory the things which they had already forgotten, things of this world
which perisheth and passeth away. For thus they raise in themselves doubts, and are
disturbed in their souls, like the tossing waves, turning hither and thither. Moreover,
they should not give bodily evidence of heaviness of heart l)y weeping, but if a few
tears drop from their eyes, as is like enough to be the case, they may be supposed by
those who see them to have flowed fir] fxdXkov on account of their affection (8ta^eo-e&)9,
affectiouem) for the ascetic struggle rather than {r}) because they are quitting the world
and worldly things.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLV.


her, for this is a recalling to her mind the world
she is leaving.
Parents shall mt deck out in silks a daughter [ ^^1^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ ^^ ^^^ .^^e^t day constantly
wJuj has chosen the ^nonastic life, and thus clothe ^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^ profession of Carmelites.

CANON XLVI.

Those women who choose the ascetic life and are settled in monasteries may by no
means go forth of them. If, however, any inexorable necessity compels them, let them
do so with the blessing and permission of her who is mother superior ; and even then
they must not go forth alone, but with some old women who are eminent in the monas-
tery, and at the command of the lady superior. But it is not at all permitted that they
should stop outside.

And men also who follow the monastic life let them on urgent necessity go forth
with the blessing of him to whom the rule is entrusted.

Wherefore, those who transgress that which is now decreed by us, whether they be
men or women, are to be subjected to suitable punishments.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVI. I in no case permitted to her to sjyend the night

A nun shall not go out of her convent ivifhout ' outside. TJie same is the case loith a monk ; he
the consent of her superior, nor shall she go \ cannot go out of the monastery without the con-
alone but with an older one of the order. It is \ ^^^t of the superior.

CANON XLVll.

No woman may sleep in a monastery of men, nor any man in a monastery of
women. For it behoves the faithful to be without offence and to give no scandal, and
to order their lives decorously and honestly and acceptably to God. But if any one
shall have done this, whether he be cleric or layman, let him be cut off.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XL VII. , it is manifest that Justinian here is con-

It is not allowed that a ivoman should sleep in ' demning " double monasteries," in which

a convent of men, nor a man in a monastery of hoth men and women dwelt. And he wishes

women. such to be separated, the men from the

women, and e contra the women from the
The ground covered by this canon is also men, and that each should dwell in separate
found in Justinian's Code, Book xliv.. Of monasteries.

Bishojjs and Clergy. Vide also Novella cxxxiii., j The reader may be reminded of some cu-
chap. V. rious double religious houses in England for

Van Espen. i j^en and women, of which sometimes a woman


From the whole context of Justinian's law ' was the superior of both.


388


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


CANON XL VIII.

The wife of liim "svho is advanced to the Episcopal dignity, shall be separated from
her husband by their mutual consent, and after his ordination and consecration to the
e})iscopate she sliall enter a nionastorv situated at a distance from tlie abode of the
bishop, and there let her enjoy the bishops provision. And if she is deemed worthy
she may be advanced to the dignity of a deaconess.

»

NOTES.


Ancient Epitojie of Canon XLVIII.
She ivho is separated from one about to he
consecrated bishop, shall enter a monastery after


his ordination, situated at a distance from the
See city, and she shall be 2jroiided for by the
bishop.


CANON XLIX.

Renewing also the holy canon, we decree that the monasteries which have been once
consecrated by the Episcopal will, are always to remain monasteries, and the things
which belong to them are to be preserved to the monastery, and they cannot any more
be secidar abodes nor be given by any one to seculars. But if aujtliiug of this kind
has been done already, Ave declare it to be null ; and those who hereafter attempt to do
so are to be subjected to canonical penalties.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX.
Monasteries built u'ith the consent of the bishop
shall not afterwards be turned into secular houses,
nor shall they pass into tfie hands of seculars.

Van Espen.

Tills canon renews canon xxiv. of Chalce-
don. And here it may be obsei-\^e(I that the
canons even of Ecumenical Synods fall into


desuetude little by little, unless the care of
bishops and pastors keeps them alive, and
from the example of this synod it may be seen
how often they need calling back again into
observance.

Nor can there be any doubt that frequently
it would be more advantageous to renew the
canons already set forth by the Fathers, rather
than to frame new ones.


CANON L.

No one at all, whether cleric or layman, is from this time forward to play at dice.
And if any one hereafter shall be found doing so, if he be a cleric he is to be deposed,
if a layman let him be cut off.

NOTES.

This renews canons xlii. and xliij. of the


Ancient Epitome of Canon L.
A layman should not play at dice.


Apostolic canons.


CANON LI.

This holy and ecumenical synod altogether forl)ids those who are called " players,"
and their "spectacles," as well as the exhibition of hunts, and the theatrical dances. If
any one des])ises the present canon, and gives himself to any of the things which are
forbidden, if he be a cleric he shall be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LT. ! Balsamon.

mxoso shall play as an actor or shall attend Some one will encjuire why canon xxiiij.
IheatricaJ representations or hunts shall be cw< . decrees that tliose in lioly orders and monks,
off. Should he be a cleric he shall be dejjosed. I who are constantly attending horse-races, and


QUINISEXT. A.D. G92


389


scenic plays, are to cease or be deposed : but
the present canon says without discrimina-
tion, that those who give themselves over to
such things if clei'gymen are to be deposed,
and if laymen to be cut off. The solution is
this. It is one thing and more easily to be
endured, that a man should be present at a
horse-race, or be convicted of going to see a
play ; and another thing, and one that cannot


be pardoned, that he should give himself over
to such things, and to exercise this continu-
ally as his business. Wherefore those who
have once sinned deliberately, ai-e admonished
to cease. If they are not willing to obey, they
are to be deposed. But those who are con-
stantly engaged in this wickediiess, if they
are clerics, they must be deposed from their
clerical place, if laymen they must be cut off.


CANON LTI.

On all days of the holy fast of Lent, except on the Sabbath, the Lord's day and the
holy day of the Annunciation, the Liturgy of the Presanctified is to be said.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of , Canon LII.


Throughout the whole of Lent except upon the
Lord's da//, the Sabbath, and upon the day of
the Annunciation, the presanctified gifts shall he
offered.

Balsamon.

We do not call the service of the Presancti-
fied the unbloody sacrifice, but the offering
of the previously offered, and of the perfected
sacrifice, and of the completed priestly act.

Van Espen.

The Greeks therefore confess that the
bread once offered and consecrated, is not to
be consecrated anew on another day ; but a
new offering is made of what was before con-
secrated and presanctified : just as in the
Latin Church the consecrated or presanctified
bread of Maundy Thursday is offered on
Good Friday.

The Patriarch Michael of Constantinople is
quoted by Leo Allatius as saying that " none
of the mystic consecratory prayers are said
over the presanctified gifts, but the priest
only recites the prayer that he may be a
worthy communicant."

Some among the later Greeks have been of
opinion that the unconsecrated wine was con-
secrated by the commixture with the con-
secrated bread, and (without any words of
consecration) was transmuted into the sacred
blood,! and with this seems to agree the al-
ready quoted Michael, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, who is cited by Leo Allatius in his
treatise on the rite of the presanctified. " The
presanctified is put into the mystic chalice,
and so the wine which was then in it, is changed
into the holy blood of the Lord." And with
this agrees Simeon, Archbishop of Thessa-


lonica, in his answer to Gabriel of Pentapolis,
when he writes : " In the mass of the Pre-
sanctified no consecration of what is in the
chalice is made by the invocation of the Holy
Spirit and of his sign, but by the participation
and union of the life-giving bread, which is
truly the body of Christ."

From this opinion, which was held by some
of the Greeks, it gradually became the prac-
tice at Constantinople not to dip the bread
in the Sacred Blood, as Michael the patriarch
of this very church testifies. But in the or-
dinary Euchologion of the Greeks it is ex-
pressly set forth that the presanctified bread
before it is reserved, should be dipped in the
sacred blood, and for this a rite is provided.

Leo Allatius's Dissert alio de Missa Prce-
sanctificatorum should be read ; an outline of
the service as found in the Euchologion, and as
rej)rinted by Renaudotius is as follows.

First of all vespers is said. After some
lessons and prayers, including the " Great
Ectenia " and that for the Catechumens, these
are dismissed.

After the Catechumens have departed there
follows the Ectenia of the Faithful. After
which, "Now the heavenly Powers invisibly
minister with us ; for, behold, the King of
Glory is borne in. Behold the mystic saci'i-
fice having been perfected is borne aloft by
angels.

" Let us draw near with faith and love, that
we may become partakers of life eternal.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

'■ Deacon. Let us accomplish our evening
prayer to the Lord.

"For the precious and presanctified gifts
that are offered, let us pray to the Lord.

"That our man-loving God, etc." as in the


> Gterbert makes it quite evident that from about 850 until 1200, I the West. Vide Gerbertus. Vetus Liturgia Allomamca, p. 855
that is from Amalarius until Durand, the same view was held in | et seqq.


390


QUINLSEXT. A.D. Qd2


ordinary liturgy past the Lord's prayer, and
down to the ^ancta Sdnrd,^, which reads as
follows :

Priest. Holy tilings presauctilied l\)r holy
persons.

Choir. One holy, one Lord Jesus Christ, to
the Glory of God the Father — Amen.

Then the Conmiuuioii Hymn and the Com-
munion, and the rest as in the oi'dinary liturgy,
except " this whole evening," is said for "this
whole day," and another i:)rayer is provided
in the room of that beginning " Lord, who
blessest them, etc."'

It is curious to note that on Good Frida}',
the only day on which the Mass of the Pre-
sanctitied is celebrated in the West, its use
has died out in the East, and now it is used
" on the "Wednesdays and Fridays of the first
six weeks of the Great Quadragesima, on the i


Thursdaj'of the fifth week, and on the Mon-
day, Tuesday, and Wednesday of Holy Passion
AA'cek. It may also be said, excepting on
Saturdays and Sundays, and on the Festival
of the Annunciatioii, on other days during the
Fast, to wit, on those of festivals and their
Vigils, and on the Coniinemoration of the
Dedication of the Church."

Symeon, who was bishop of Thessalonica,
and flourished in the early part of the XVth
Century, complains of the general neglect of
the Mass of the Presanctitied on Good Friday
in his time, and says that his church was the
only one in the Exarcdiate tliat tlien retained
it. He as('ril)es tlie disuse to the example of
the Church of Jei-usalem. See the matter
treated at length in his Qucestiones, Iv-lix.
Migne's Vat. Gra'c.

Cf. J. M. Neale Essays on Liturgiulugy, p. 109.


CANON LIII.

W^HEREAS the spiritual relationship is greater than fleshly afiiuity ; and since it lias
come to our knowledge that in some places certain persons who become sponsors to
children in holy salvation-bearing baptism, afterwards contract matrimony with their
mothers (being widows), we decree that for the future nothing of tliis sort is to be done.
But if any, after the })resent canon, shall be observed to do this, they must, in the first
place, desist from this unlawful marriage, and then be subjected to the penalties of
fornicators.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LIII.
Goflfafhrrs cannot be permitted to be married
ivith the mother of their godchildren. If ang one
is so joined, let him do penance after separation.

Johnson.

{Cterggman's Vade 3Iccuv\.)

The imperial law forbade the adopter
parent to marry his or her adopted son or
daughter ; for the godchild was thought a
sort of an adopted child. See Justin., Institut., |
Lib. I., Tit. X.

CANON


Van Espen however refers, and to my mind
with greater truth, to Justinian's law (xxvj of
the Cod. de JS'iijjtiis) which forbids the mar-
riage of a man with his nurse or with whoever
received him from the font, "because," saj's
the law, " nothing can so incite to parental
affection, and therefore induce a just prohibi-
tion of marriage, than a bond of this sort by
which, througli God's meditation, their souls
are bound together."


LIV.


The divine scriptnn^s plainly teach us as follows, " Thou shalt iK^t apin'oach to any
that is near of kin to thee to uncover their nakedness." Basil, th<' bearer-of-God, has
enumerated in his canons some marriages which are prohibited and has passed over the
greater part in silence, and in both these ways has done us good service. For by
avoiding a number of disgraceful names (lest by such words he should pollute his dis-
course) he included ini])uritios under general t(>rnis, by which course he shewed to us
in a general way the marriages which are foi'biddeu. 13ut since by such silence, and
because of the difficulty of understanding what marriages are prohibited, the matter
has become confused; it seemed good to us to set it forth a little more clearly, decree-
ing that from this tinui forth he who shall marry with tli(> daughter of his father; or a
father or son with a mother and daughter ; or a father and son with two girls who are

• The English reader is referred to G. V. Shanii. Eucholorjp, and I J. M. Neale's Introduction to the HUtory of the Holy Orthodox
The Boole of Heeds, for excellent translations of the Greek ofHces ; | Eastern Church will, of course, be consulted.


QUIXISEXT. A.D. G92 391


sisters ; or a mother and daughter with two brothers ; or two brothers with two sisters,
fall under the canon of seven years, provided they openly separate from this unlawful
union.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV. I riage of a son and his fatJier ; neither a mother

and a daughter with tivo brothers ; nor brothers
Thou shalt not permit the marriage of a son of . ivith two sisters. But should ani/thing of this


a brother to the daughter of a brother; nor with a
daughter and her mother shall tliere be tJie mar-


sort Jmve been done, together ivith separation,
penance shall be done for seven years.


CANON LV.

Since we understand that in the city of the Romans, in the holy fast of Lent they
fast on the Saturdays, contrary to the ecclesiastical observance which is traditional, it
seemed good to the holy synod that also in the Church of the Romans the canon shall
immovably stand fast which says : " If any cleric shall be found to fast on a Sunday or
Saturday (except on one occasion only) he is to be deposed ; and if he is a layman he
shall be cut off."

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LV. , this is one of those canons which the Roman

The Romans fast the Sabbaths of Lent Tliere- ^^^^'^^ ^^^^^^ received.
fore this Synod admonishes that upon these days \ Zonaras.

the Apostolical canon is of force. 'mi i ^ i • i i i ^ ^i •

■^ The synod took m hand to correct this

The canon quoted is LXVL of the Apos- ' J^:^^!^^^? /^'^f H ^^ the Latins ; but until this
tolic Canons. , *^"^f. ^^^^ have arrogantly remained m their

I pertinacity, and so remain to-day. IS or do
V AN iiiSPEN. they heed the ancient canons which forbid

The Fathers of this Synod thought that fasting on the Sabbath except that one,, to
this canon of the Apostles was edited by the wit the great Sabbath, nor are they affected
Apostles themselves, and therefore they seem by the authority of this canon. Moreover
to have reprobated the custom of the Roman the clerics have no regard for the threatened
Church of fasting on the Sabbath more bit- deposition, nor the laymen for their being
terly than was right. Whence it happens cut off.

CANON LVI.

"We have likewise learned that in the regions of xA.rmenia and in other places certain
people eat eggs and cheese on the Sabbaths and Lord's days of the holy lent. It seems
good therefore that the whole Church of God which is in all the world should follow one
rule and keep the fast perfectly, and as they abstain from everything which is killed, so
also should they from eggs and cheese, which are the frait and produce of those animals
from which we abstain. But if any shall not observe this law, if they be clerics, let them
be deposed ; but if laymen, let them be cut off.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI. i although they did not fast on the Sabbaths

Armenians eat eggs and cheese on the ^«;,. , and LoixVs days of Lent, nevertheless they ab-

baths in Lent. It is determined that the lohole framed on them from flesh food ; and it was

world should abstain from these. If not let the relieved by them that abs menc^ from flesh

•^ food involved also necessarilv abstinence trom


offender be cast out.

Van Espen,
This canon shows that the ancient Greeks,


all those things which have then- origin from
flesh. This also formerly was observed by
the Latins in Lent, and in certain regions is
known still to be the usage.


392


QUINISEXT. A.D. G92


CANON LYII.

It is not right to ofler honey and milk on the altar.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non LYII. of the African code, also canon xxviij. of this

No one should offer honeij or milk at the altar, synod. The Greeks apparently do not recog-
nize the exception specified in tlie canon of
See canon iij. of the Apostles, canon xxviij. i the African Code.


CANON LVIII.

None of those who are in the order of laymen may distribute the Divine Mysteries
to himself if a bishop, presbyter, or deacon be present. Vnit whoso shall dare to do such
a thin<2[, as acting contrary to what has been determined sliall be cut ol'f for a week and
thenceforth let him learn not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVIII.

A layman shall not communicate himself.
Should he do so, let him be cut off for a week.

Van Espen.
It is well known that in the first centuries


houses ; and that at home they received it at
their own hands. It is evident that this was
Avliat was done by the Anchorites and monks
who lived in the deserts, as may be seen proved
by Cardinal Bona. (De Itcbus Liturg.,'Lih. II.,
cap. xvij.). From this domestic communion it


it was customary that the Holy Eucliarist is easily seen how tlie abuse arose which is
should be taken back by the faithful to their \ condemned in this canon.


CANON LIX.

Baptism is by no means to be administered in an oratory A\hicli is within a house ;
but they who are about to be held worthy of the spotless illumination are to go to a
Catholic Church and there to enjoy this gift. But if any one shall be convicted of not
observing what we have determined, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, if a layman let
him be cut off.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LIX.
In oratories built in houses they shall not cele-


brate baptism. Whoever shall not observe this, if
a cleric he shall be deposed, if a layman he shall
be cut off.


CANON LX.

Since the Apostle exclaims that he who cleaves to the Lord is one spirit, it is clear that
he who is intimate with his [i.e. the Lord's] enemy becomes one by his athnity with him.
Thcn^fore, those who ju-etend they are possessed by a devil and by their depravity of
manners feign to manifest their form and ap])earance ; it seems good by all means that
they should be punished and that they should be subjected to afflictions and hardships
of the same kind as those to which they who are truly demoniacally possessed are justly
subjected with the intent of delivering them from the [work or rather] energy of the devil.


NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon LX.
Vnxoever shall pretend to be j)osscssed l)y a
devil, shall endure the penance of demoniacs.


Zonaras says in his scholion that even in
his day people made the same claim to dia-
bolical possession.


QlimiSEXT. A.D. G92


393


CANON LXI.

Those who give themselves up to soothsayers or to those Avho are called hecaton-
tarchs or to any such, in order that they may learn from them what things' they wish to
have revealed to them, let all such, according to the decrees lately made by the Fathers
concerning them, be subjected to the canon of six years. And to this [penalty] they also
should be su})jected who carry about '~ she-bears or animals of the kind for the diversion
and injury of the simple ; as well as those who tell fortunes and fates, and genealogy,
and a multitude of words of this kind from the nonsense of deceit and imposture. Also
those who are called expellers of clouds, enchanters, amulet-givers, and soothsayers.

And those who persist in these things, and do not turn away and flee from pernicious
and Greek pursuits of this kind, w^e declare are to be thruKt o^^t of the Church, as also
the sacred canons say. " For what fellowship hath light with darkness? " as saith the
Apostle, "or what agreement is there between the temple of God and idols? or what
part hath he that believeth with an infidel ? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? "

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXI.

Whoever shall deliver himself over to a heca-
toniarch or to devils, so as to learn some secret, he
shall be put under i^enance for six years. So too
those who take around a hear, who join themselves
tvith those tvho seek incantations and drive away
the clouds, and have faith in fortune and fate,
shall be cast out of the assembly of the Church.

Hefele.

According to Balsamon (in Beveridge, Sy-
nod., Tom. I., p. 228) old people who had the
reputation of special knowledge [were called


" hecatontarchs"]. They sold the hair [of these
she bears and other animals] as medicine or for
an amulet. Cf Balsamon and Zonaras ut supra.

St. Chrysostom in his Homilies on the Statutes
explains, in answer to certain who defended
them on this ground, that if these incanta-
tions are made in the name of Christ they ai'e
so much the worse. The Saint says, " More-
over I think that she is to be hated all the
more who abuses the name of God for this
purpose, because while professing to be a
Christian, she shows by her actions that she
is a heathen."


CANON LXII.

The so-called Calends, and what are called Bota and Brumalia, and the full assembly
which takes place on the first of March, we wish to be abolished from the life of the
faithful. And also the public dances of women, which may do much harm and mis-
chief. Moreover we drive away from the life of Christians the dances given in the
names of those falsely called gods by the Greeks whether of men or women, and which
are performed after an ancient and un-Christian fashion ; decreeing that no man from
this time forth shall be dressed as a woman, nor any woman in the garb suitable to men.
Nor shall he assume comic, satyric, or tragic masks ; nor may men invoke the name of
the execrable Bacchus when they squeeze out the wine in the presses ; nor when pour-
ing out wine into jars [to cause a laugh ^], practising in ignorance and vanity the
things which proceed from the deceit of insanity. Therefore those w^ho in the future
attempt any of these things which are written, having obtained a knowledge of them,
if they be clerics we order them to be deposed, and if laymen to be cut off.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXII.


Let these be taken aivaij from the lives of the
faithful, viz. : the Bota, and the Calends, and the
Brumalia, and salutations in honour of the gods,


and comic, safi/ric and tragic mask.% and the in-
vocation of Bacchus at the wine press, and the
laughing at the wine jars. 'l]nioever shall persist
in these after this canon shall be liable to give an
account.


' Bev. reads 6ti.


' Bev. reads sTrK^epo/nevous.


3 Not found in Mansi,


394 QUINISEXT. A.D. G92


On the Calends see Du Cange {Glossnriinn superstitions will be found iu Balsamon's
in loc). The Bota were feasts iu honour of scholion, to which the curious reader is re-
Pan, the Brumalia feasts in honour of Bac- fenced. "Van Espen also has some valuable
chus. Many particulars with regard to these notes on the Kalends of January.

CANON LXIII.

We forbid to be pul)licly read in Church, histories of the martyrs which have been
falsely })ut together by the enemies of the truth, iu order to dishonour the martyrs of
Christ and iuduce unbelief among those who hear tlieui, but we order that such books
be given to the Hames. But those who accept them or a])ply their mind to them as
true we anathematize.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIII. I tyrs." There have been martyrs, both royal

Mart urologies made up hy the ethnics (EWrj and plebeian, in much later times whose lives
vwiv) shall not be published in church. liave been made ridiculous and whose mem-

ory has been rendered hateful to tlie ignorant
T\'hat is condemned is false histories of people by so-called " histories " which might
true martyrs, not (as Johnson erroneously well have i-eceived the treatment ordered by
supposes) " false legends of pretended mar- i the canon.

CANON LXIV.

It does not befit a layman to dispute or teach publicly, thus claiming for himself
authority to teach, but he should yield to the order appointed by the Lord, and to
open his ears to those who have received the grace to teach, and be taught by them di-
vine things; for in one Church God has made " different members," according to the
word of the Apostle : and Gregory the Theologian, wisely interpieting this passage,
commends the order in vogue with them saying : ^ " This order brethren we revere, this
we guard. Let this one be the ear ; that one the tongue, the hand or any other mem-
ber. Let this one teach, but let that one learn." And a little further on : " Learning
in docility and abounding in cheerfulness, and ministering with alacrity, we shall not
all be the tongue wliicli is the more active member, not all of us A])Ostles, not all ]>ro])li-
ets, nor shall we all interpret." And again : " Why dost thou make tliyst-lf a shepherd
when thou art a sheep? Why become the head when thou art a foot? Why dost
thou try to be a commander when thou art enrolled in the number of the soldiers ? "
And elsewhere : " Wisdom orders. Be not swift in words ; nor compare thyself with the
rich, being poor ; nor seek to be wiser than the wise." But if any one be found weaken-
ing the present canon, he is to be cut off for forty days.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIV. restriction is limited to the solemn and imb-

A laifman shaU not teach, for all are notproph- lie preaching and announcing of the Word of

ets, nor all aiioxtles. God, which is restricted to bishops, and only

by special and express license given to the

Zonaras points out that this canon refers other clergy, and refers to his own treatment

only to public instruction and not to private, of the subject In jure Eccles., Tom I., part 1,

Van Espen further notes that in the West this tit. xvj., cap. viij.

CANON LXV.

The fires wliich are lighted on the new moons by some before their shops and
houses, upon wliich (according to a c(u-tain ancient custom) they are wont foolishly and
crazily to leap, we order henceforth to cease. Tlierefore, whosoever shall do such a
thing, if he hv, a cleric, let him l)e deposed ; but if he be a layman, let hiui be cut off.

' X4yotv in Beveridge's text.


QUIN18EXT. A.D. G92


395


For it is written iu the Fourth Book of the Kings " And Manasses built an altar to the
whole host of heaven, in the two courts of the Lord, and made his sons to pass through
the fire, he used lots and augurs and divinations by birds and made ventriloquists [or
pythons '] and multiplied diviners, that he might do evil before the Lord and provoke

him to anger." ^

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXV. I Lupin remarks that the fires kindled on

' certain Saints' days are almost certainly re-
Tliejires which were made iqion the neiv moons [mains of this heathen practice. These fires
at the worlishops are condemned and those ivho . are often accompanied with leaping, drinking,
leaped upon them. \ and the wrestling of young men.


CANON LXVI.

From the holy day of the Kesm-rection of Christ our God until the next Lord's day,
for a whole week, in the holy churches the faithful ought to be free from labour, re-
joicing in Christ with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; and celebrating the
feast, and applying their minds to the reading of the holy Scriptures, and delighting in
the Holy Mysteries ; for thus shall we be exalted with Christ and together with
him be raised up. Therefore, on the aforesaid days there must not be any horse

races or any public spectacle.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVI.

The faithful shall every one of them go to church
during the whole tveek after Easter.

Van Espen.

It is certain that the whole of Easter week
was kept as a feast by the whole Church both
East and West ; and this Synod did not in-
troduce this custom by its canon, but adopted
this canon to ensure its continuance.

Here we have clearly set forth the Christian


manner of passing a feast-day, viz., that the
faithful on those days did give themselves up
to " Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs,"
from which the divine office which we call to-
day canonical [i.e., chiefly Mattins and Ves-
pers] are made up ; and hence we understand
that all the faithful ought to attend the choir-
offices, which Avas indeed observed for many
centuries, as I have shewn in my Dissertation
on the Canonical Hours, cap. III., § 1, and
therefore it was called " public " [or common]
prayer.


CANON LXVIL

The divine Scripture commands us to abstain from blood, from things strangled, and
from fornication. Those therefore who on account of a dainty stomach prepare by any
art for food the blood of any animal, and so eat it, we punish suitably. If anyone
henceforth venture to eat in any way the blood of an animal, if he be a clergyman, let
him be deposed ; if a layman, let him be cut off.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVII.

A cleric eating blood shall be deposed, but a
layman shall be cut off.

Van Espen.

The apostolic precept of abstaining
blood and from things strangled " for
ages, not only among the Greeks but also
among the Latins, was observed in manv
churches, but little by little and step by step


" from
some


it died out in the whole Church, at least in
the Latin Church, altogether.

In this the Latin Church followed the
opinion of St. Auf^ustine, Contra Faustuni
iManichceiun, Lib. XXXIL, cap. xiij., where he
teaches at great length that the precept was
given to Christians only while the Gentile
j Church was not yet settled. This passage of
Augustine also proves that at that time Africa
did not observe this precept of the Apostles.


Only in the Latin.


2 n. Kgs. xxl. 5 & 6.


396


QUINISEXT. A.D. 092


CANON LXVIII.

It is unlaAvful for anyone to corrupt or cut up a book of the Old or New Testament
or of our holy and approved preachers and teachers, or to give them up to the traders
in books or to tliose \v]io are called ])t'rfuinors, or to liand it over for destruction to any
other like persons : unless to be sure it has been rendered useless either ])\ bookworms,
or by water, or in some other way. He who henceforth shall be obx rved to do such a
thing shall be cat off for one year. Tjikewise also he who buys such books (unless he
keeps them for his own use, or i^ives tlieiu to another for his benefit to be preserved)
and has attempted to corrupt them, let him be cut off.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVIII.


TJwu sluilt not destroy nor hand over copies of \
the Divine Scriptures to be destroyed unless they
are absolutely useless.


Van Espen.
(Foot-note.)
I think tliat this canon was directed against
certain Nestoriaii and Eutychian heretics,
who, that they might find some patronage of
their errors from the Holy Scriptures, dared
in the sixth century most infamously to cor-
rupt certain passages of the New Testament.


CANON LXIX.

It is not permitted to a layman to enter the sanctuary (Holy Altar, Gk.), though, in
accordance with a certain ancient tradition, the imperial power and authority is by no
means prohibited from this Avhen he wishes to offer his gifts to the Creator.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of C.vnon LXIX.

No layman except tlie Emperor shall go up to
tlie altar.

Van Espen.

That in the Latin Church as well as in the
Greek for many centuries it was the constant
custom, ratified by various councils, that lay-
men are to be excluded from the sanctuary
and from the place marked off for the priests
who are celebrating the divine mysteries, is
so notorious as to need no proof, and the
present canon sliows that among the Greeks
the laity were not admitted to the sacrarium
even to make offerinj^s.

The Synod makes but one exception, to
wit, the Emperor, who can enter the rails of
the holy altar by its permission '• when he
Tvishes to offer his gifts to the Creator, ac-
cording to ancient custom."

Not without foundation does the Synod
claim " ancient custom " for this ; for long


before, it is evident, it was the case from the
words of the Emperor Theodosius the Young-
er. See also Theodoret [H. E., lib. v., cap.
xvij.).

In the Latin Church, not only to emperors,
kings, and great princes but .also to patrons
of churches, to tojiarchs of places, and even
to magistrates, seats have been wont to be
assigned honoris causa within the sanctuary
or choir, and it has been contended that these
are properly due to such persons.

It is evident from Balsamon's note that the
later Greeks at least looked upon the Em-
peror as being (like the kings of England and
France) a jyrrsoim mixta, sharing in some
degree the sacerdotal character, as being
anointed not merely with oil, but with the
sacred chrism. Vide in this connexion J.
Wickliam Legg, The Sacriuy of the Enylish
Kinqs, in " The Archseological Journal,"
March, 1894.


CANON LXX.

"Women are not permitted to s])eak at tin; time of the Divine Liturgy ; but, accord-
ing to the word of Paul the Apostle, " let them be silent. For it is not permitted to
them to s])eak, but to be in subjection, as the law also saith. But if they wish to learn
anything let them ask their own husbands at home."


QUINISEXT. A.D. 092


397


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXX.
Women arc not permitted to speak in church.

"Let your women keep silence in the


churches ; for it is not permitted unto them
to speak," is the passage referred to. I. Cor.
xiv. 34.


CANON LXXI.

Those who are taught the civil laws must not adopt the customs of the Gentiles,
nor be induced to go to the theatre, nor to keep what are called Cylestras, nor to wear
clothing contrary to the general custom ; and this holds good when they begin their
training, when they reach its end, and, in short, all the time of its duration. If any
one from this time shall dare to do contrary to this canon he is to be cut off.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXI.


Wfiocvcr devotes himself to the study of law,
uses the manner of the Gentiles, going to the
theatre, and rolling in the dust, or dressing differ-
ently to custom, shall be cut off.

Liddell and Scott identify KaXtarpa with
KaXivSrjSpa, which they define as "a place for
horses to roll after exercise," and note that it


is a synonym of dXivSrjSpa. But it is interest-
ing to note that d\ivr](rL<; is "a rolling in the
dust, an exercise in which wrestlers rolled on
the ground."

Hefele says that Balsamon and Zonaras
have not been able rightly to explain what
we are to understand by the forbidden " Cy-
lestras," but I think Johnson is not far out
of the way when he translates "nor to meddle
with athletic exercises."


CANON LXXII.

An orthodox man is not permitted to marry an heretical woman, nor an orthodox
woman to be joined to an heretical man. But if anything of this kind appear to have
been done by any [we require them] to consider the marriage null, and that the mar-
riage be dissolved. For it is not fitting to mingle together what should not be min-
gled, nor is it right that the sheep be joined Avitli the woK, nor the lot of sinners with
the portion of Christ. But if any one shall transgress the things which we have
decreed let liim be cut off. But if any who up to this time are unbelievers and are not
yet numbered in the flock of the orthodox have contracted lawful marriage between
themselves, and if then, one choosing the right and coming to the light of truth and
the other remaining still detained by the bond of error and not willing to behold with
steady eye the divine rays, the unbelieving woman is pleased to cohabit with the
believing man, or the unbelieving man with the believing woman, let them not be
separated, according to the divine Apostle, " for the unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, and the unbelieving wife by her husband."

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXII.

A marriage contracted loith heretics is void.
But if they ham made the contract before [conver-
sion] let them remain \united] if they so desire.

Perhaps none of the canons of this synod
present greater and more insolvable difficul-
ties than the present. It has been for long
centuries the tradition of the Church that
the marriage of a baptized Christian with an
uubaptized person is null, but this canon
seems to say that the same is the case if the


one party be a heretic even though baptized.
If this is what the canon means it elevates
heresy into an impjedimentum dirimens. Such
is not and never has been the law of the
West, and such is not to-day the practice of
the Eastern church, which allows the mar-
riage of its people with Lutherans and with
Eoman Catholics and never questions the va-
lidity of their marriages. Van Espen thinks
" the Greek commentators seem " to think
that the heretics referred to are unbaptized ;
I do not know exactly why he thinks so.


398 QUINISEXT. A. I). 092


CANON LXXIII.

Since the life-giviug cross has shewn to us Salvation, we should be careful that we
render due honour to that by which we were saved from the ancient fall. Wherefore,
in niind, in word, in feeling giving veneration (TrpoaKvvrjaiv) to it, we command that the
figure of the cross, which some have placed on the floor, be entirely nnioved there-
from, lest the trophy of the victory won for us be desecrated by the trampling under
foot of those who walk over it. Therefore those who from this j)resent represent on the
pavement the sign of the cross, we decree are to be cut oil".

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIII. of the intellect, of the words, and of the

If there is a cross upon a pavement it must be sense," i.e., the cross is to be venerated with

removed. the interior cultus of the soul, is to be ven-

t erated with the exterior culture of praise.
This canon defines that to the image of the and also with sensible acts, such as kissings,
cross is to be " given veneration (Trpoo-KuvTjo-ts) bowings, etc.

CANON LXXIV.

It is not permitted to hold what are called agapa3, that is love-feasts, in the Lord's
houses or churches, nor to eat within the house, nor to spread couches. If any dare to
do so let him cease therefrom or be cut off.


This is a renewal of canon xxviij., of Lao
dicea, on which canon see the notes.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIV.
Afjapce arc not to be held in fhe rJnirches, nor
shall beds be put up). Whoso refuse to give up
these, let them be cut off.

CANON LXXV.

We will that those whose office it is to sing in the churches do not use undisciplined
vociferations, nor force nature to shouting, nor adopt any of those modes which are in-
congruous and unsuitable for the church : but that they offer the psalmody to God, who
is the observer of secrets, with great attention and compimction. For the Sacred
Oracle taught that the Sons of Israel were to be pious.'

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXV. I chanting or the reading of the psalter was the

T T . •/. ,. ,. , , ■ .'more edifving, concludes, " when the nsalms

Inordinate vociferation of the psalms is not are chanted with a voice and most suitable
alotvcd, nor he that adopts things unsmted to modulation (liquida voce et convenient issima

t/ie cfiurchrs. j ? <• \ t • ai i ii ■ l

modutationc), 1 recognize tliat there is great

utility in the practice," and further on he

adds that singing is to be the rather approved.


This question of the character of church
usic was one early discussed among Chris
ans, and (long before the time of this synod)
St. Augustine, in debating as to whether the , (Confess., Lib. x., cap. xxxiij.).


music was one early discussed among Chris- j because " by the delight given to the ears the
tians, and (long before the time of this synod), ' infirm soul is worked up to pious aspii-ations."


CANON LXX\^.

It is not right that those who are responsible for reverence to churches should place
within the sa(;r(!d bounds an eating place, nor offer food there, nor make other sales.
For God our Saviour teaching us when he was tabernacling in the flesh commanded not

' The Latin adds, " and holy."


QUmiSEXT. A.D. G92 399

to make his Fatlier's house a house of merchandize. He also poured out the small coins
of the money-changers, and drave out all those who made common the temple. If,
therefore, anyone shall bo taken in the aforesaid fault let him be cut off.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVI.


A public house should not he established
within the sacred precincts ; and it is wrong to sell
food there ; and ivhosoever shall do so shall be
cut of. *


Both Balsamon and Zonaras remark that
this cauon refers to the vestibule of the
church and to the rest of the sacred iuclosure,
and not to the interior of the church proper,
for there no one would ever think of having a
shop.


CANON LXXVII.

It is not right that those who are dedicated to religion, whether clerics or ascetics,'
should wash in the bath with women, nor should any Christian man or layman do so.
'For this is severely condemned by the heathens. But if any one is caught in this thing,
if he is a cleric let him be deposed ; if a layman, let him be cut oflf.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVII.

A Christian man shall not bathe ivith women.
Shoidd a cleric do so he is to be deposed, and a
layman cut off.


This is a renewal of the XXXth canon of
Laodicea. It will be noted, as Zonaras re-
marks, that the monks must be counted
among the laymen who are to be cut off, since
they have no clerical character or tonsure.


CANON LXXVIII.

It behoves those who are illuminated to learn the Creed by heart and to recite it to
the bishop or presbyters on the Fifth Feria of the Week.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVIII.
He that is illuminated is to recite (aTrayyeAAcTU))
ike faith on the fifth feria of the week.


This is a renewal of canon xlvi. of Lao-
dicea.


CANON LXXIX.

As we confess the divine birth of the Virgin to be without any childbed, since it
came to pass without seed, and as we preach this to the entire flock, so we subject to
correction those who through ignorance do anything which is inconsistent therewith.
AVherefore since some on the day after the holy Nativity of Christ our God are seen
cooking ae/xiSaXlv, and distributing it to each other, on pretext of doing honour to the
puerperia of the spotless Virgin Maternity, we decree that henceforth nothing of the
kind be done by the faithful. For this is not honouring the Virgin (who above thought
and speech bare in the flesh the incomprehensible AVord) when we define- and describe,
from ordinary things and from such as occur with ourselves, her ineffable parturition.
If therefore anyone henceforth be discovered doing any such thing, if he be a cleric let
him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIX.


Whoever after the feast of the Mother of God


shall prepare o-c/AiSiXtv (semilam) or anything
else on account of what is called puerperia, let
him be cut off.


> The Latin adds " that is to say ' Exercisers,' (Exercitatores) or monks." • The Latin adds "and measure."


400


QUIXISEXT. A.D. 692


As the Catliolic Church has always tauglit
the Yirgiu-birth as well as tlie Yirgin-coucei)-
tion of our Blessed Lord, and has affirmed i
that Mai-y was ever-viri;:in, even after she had
brought forth the incarnate Son, so it follows
necessarily that there could be no childbed I
nor puerperal ilux. It need hardly be le-
niarked here that besides other texts that of
the prophet is considered as teaching thus
much, '• Behold the Virgin (Iki alma) shall
conceive and l)ear a son," she that "bare" as ,
well as she that " conceived " being a virgin.
Some commentators have taken irrLXuxtia for
the afterbirth, but Christian Lupus, as Van
Esjjeu notes, has pointed out that the early
fathers seem to have recognized that the Vir-
gin did have the " afterbirth," and this St. Je-
rome exj)ressly teaches in his book. Contra
llehid'mnt.

The Greeks, however, understood it as I
have translated, and the witness of Zonaras
will be sufficient. The words Ao;^os, /'\.o;(atos and •


the like all signify "lying in," "a place of ly-
ing in," and Liddell and Scott say that the
latter word is used of " bearing down like
heavy ears of corn," which would well express
the labour pains.

Zonaras.

This canon teaches that the parturition of
the holy Virj^in was without any childbed.
For cliildlted {puerpcriuDi) is the emission of
tilt 1(1 tus accompanied by pain and a tiux of
blood : but none of us ever believed that the
Mother of God was subjected to sufferings of
this soi't, for these are the consequents of
natural concej>tion, but her conceijtion was
suj^ernatural ; and by the Holy Spirit it was
brought to pass that she was not subjected to
those evils which rightly are attached to nat-
ural parturition.

On this canon should be read the extensive
treatment of Asseman {Bib. Juris Orient., Tom.
v., mi. 193 c't seqq.)


CANON LXXX.

If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or any of those who are enumerated in the
list of the clergy, or a layman, has no very grave necessity nor difficult business so as
to keep him from church for a very long time, but being in town does not go to chiu'ch
on three consecutive Sundays — three weeks — if he is a cleric let him be deposed, but if
a layman let him be cut off,

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXX.
If fmjione tvifhout the constraint of nrccsf^itti


This is a renewal of canon xi. of Sardica
(xiv. according to the numbering of Diony-


leaves his church for three Lord's days, he shall , ^^"^ Exiguus.)
he deprived of communion.

CANON LXXXI.

Whereas we have heard that in some places in the hymn Trisagion there is added
after " Holy and Immortal," " Who was crucitio^d for us, have mercy upon us," and
since this as being alien to piety was by the ancient and holy Fathers cast out of the
hymn, as also the violent heretics wlio inserted these new words were cast out of the
Church ; we also, confirming the things which were formerly piously established by our
holy Fathei's. anathematize those who after this ])r<*S(Mit decree allow in church this or
any otlier addition to the most sacred hymn; but if imh^ed he who has transgressed is
of the sacerdotal order, we command that he be deprived of his priestly dignity, but if
he be a layman or monk let him be cut ofi".

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXI. Fullo, and although indeed it was capable of

Wxocver adds to the himn Trisagion these >^ K<^«>d meaning, if the Avhole liymn was un-

vords " Mlio wast crucified " shall be deemed derstood as being addressed to Christ, and

heterodox. altlioui^h this was admitted by very many of

the orthodox, yet as it was chietly used l)y the

The addition of the phrase condemned by Monophysites and with an undoubtedly he-

this canon was probably made first by Peter retical intention, it was finally ousted from this


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


401


position and its adherents were styled Theo-
paseliites. From all tLis it came about that
by 518 it was a source of disagreement among
the Catholics, some affirming the expression,
as looked at by itself, to be a touchstone of
orthodoxy. The Emperor Justinian tried to
have it approved by Pope Hormisdas, but un-
successfully, the pontiff only declaring that it
was unnecessary, and even dangerous. Ful-
geutius of Kuspe and Dionysius Exiguus had
declared it orthodox. Pope John II. almost
came to the point of approving the phrase
" one of the Trinitj- suffered," nor did his suc-
cessor Agapetus I. speak any more definitely
on the point, but the Fifth Ecumenical Coun-
cil directly approved the formula.

But this, of course, did not touch the point


of its introduction into the Trisagion or,
more accurately, of the introduction of the
words " who was crucified for us."

It should have been noted that at a Home
Synod in 478, Peter Fullo had been deposed
for the insertion of this clause, because he in-
tended to imply that the true God had suf-
fered death upon the cross. This sentence
was a confirmation of one already pronounced
against him by a synod held at Antioch
which had raised a man, Stephen by name, to
its ejiiscopal throne.

Such is the history of a matter which, while
it seemed at first as of little moment, yet for
many years was a source of trouble in the
Church. ( Vide Hefele, Histoni of the Councils,
Vol. Ill, pp. 454, 457 ; Vol. IV., p. 26.)


CANON LXXXII.

In some pictures of the venerable icons, a lamb is painted to which the Precursor
points bis finger, which is received as a type of grace, indicating beforehand through the
Law, our true Lamb, Christ our God. Embracing therefore the ancient types and
shadows as symbols of the truth, and patterns given to the Church, we prefer " grace
and truth," receiving it as the fulfilment of the Law. In order therefore that " that
which is perfect " may be delineated to the eyes of all, at least in coloured expression,
we decree that the figure in human form of the Lamb who taketh away the sin of the
world, Christ our God, be henceforth exhibited in images, instead of the ancient lamb,
so that all may understand by means of it the depths of the humiliation of the Word of
God, and that we may recall to our memory his conversation in the flesh, his passion
and salutary death, and his redemption which was wrought for the whole world.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXII.

Thou shall not paint a lamb for the type of
Christ, but himself.

As from this canon, a century earlier than
the iconoclastic controversy, the prevalence
of pictures is evident, so from the canon of
the same synod with regard to the venera-
tion due to the image of the cross (number


Ixxiii.), we learn that the teaching of the
Church with regard to relative worship was
the same as was subsequently set forth, so
that the charge of innovating, sometimes rash-
ly brought against the Seventh Ecumenical
Council, has no foundation in fact whatever.

This canon is further interesting as being
the one cited by more than one Pope and
Western Authority as belonging to " the
Sixth Synod."


CANON LXXXIIL

No one may give the Eucharist to the bodies of the dead ; for it is wTitten " Take
and eat." But the bodies of the dead can neither " take " nor " eat."


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIII.

The Sacraments must not be given to a dead
bodi/.

This is canon iv. of the Council of Hippo,


in the year 393. (Vide Hefele, Vol. II, p.
397.) The earlier canon includes baptism
also, in its prohibition. This is canons xviii.
and XX. of the African code, according to the


Greek numbering.


402 QUIXISEXT. A.D. (i()2


CANON LXXXIY.

FoLLOWiXG the canonical laws of the Fathers, we decree concerning infants, as often
as they arc I'oimd without trusty witnesses who say that they are undoubtedly l)a})tized ;
and as often as they are thoinselvcs una])le on acc-onnt of their age to answer satisfac-
toril}' in respect to the initiatory mystery given to them ; that they ought without any
offence to be baptized, lest such a doubt might deprive them of the sanctitication of
such a puritication.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIV. This is canon VII., of the Sixth Council of

Carthage, ( Vide Hefele, 7/c'.s/. of the CoiniriJs,

WJtoever do not l-noiv nor can 2)>'ove bi/ docti- \Yo\. II., p. 424); and Canon Ixxv., of the

nicnts that they Juice been baptized, let them be African code (to which Balsamon attributes

christened. j this canon), by the Greek numbering, (Ixxii.

1 by the Latin).

CANON LXXXV.

We have received from the Scriptures that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word shall be establislied. Therefore we decree that slaves who are manumitted
by their masters in the presence of three witnesses shall eujo}' that honour ; for they
being present at the time will add strength and stability to the liberty given, and they
will bring it to pass that faith will be kept in those things which they now witness were
done in their presence.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non LXXXV.

A slave manumitted bij his master before two tvilnesses shall be free.

CANON LXXXYI.

Those who to the destruction of their own souls procure and bring up harlots, if
they be clerics, they are to be [cut off* and] deposed, if laymen to be cut off".

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVI. I The brackets enclose the reading of Herve-

; tus. But Zonaras had this same text, and
Whoever gathers together Mrlots to tJie ruin of therefore it may be safely followed instead of
souls, shall be cut off. that of Balsamon, as edited by Beveridge.

CANON LXXXVII.

Site who has left her husband is an adulteress if sli(> has come to another, accord-
ing to the holy and divine Basil, wlio has gathered this most excellently from the
prophet Jeremiah : " If a woman has become another man's, her husband shall not
return to her, but being defiled she shall i-emain defiled;" and again, "He who has an
adult(U-ess is senseless and im])ious." If therefore she appears to have departed from
her husband without reason, he is deserving of pardon and she of punishment. And
pardon shall be given to liim that he may be in communion with the Church. But he
who leaves the wife lawfully given him, and shall take another is guilty of adultery by
the sentence of the Lord. And it has been decretnl by our Fathers that they who are
such nuist be " weepers " for a year, " hearers " for two years, " prostrators " for three
years, and in the seventh year to stand with the faithful and thus be counted worthy of
the Oblation [if with tears they do penance.]


QUINISEXT. A.D. 092


403


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVII.

She ivho goes from her husband lo another man
is an adulteress. And he ivho from his wife
goes to anotlier woman is an adulterer according
to the tvord of the Lord.


Compare with this canon Iviij. of St. Basil.


The words in brackets are found in Beveridge,
but were lacking in Hervetus's text.

Johnson.

Here discipline is relaxed ; formerly an
adulteress did fifteen years' penance. See
Can. Bas., 58. No wonder if in 20(i years*
time from St. Basil, the severity of discipline
was abated.


CANON LXXXVIII.

No one may drive any beast into a church except perchance a traveller, urged thereto
by the greatest necessity, in default of a shed or resting-place, may have turned aside
into said church. For unless the beast had been taken inside, it would have perished,
and he, by the loss of his beast of burden, and thus without means of continuing his
journey, would be in peril of death. And we are taught that the Sabbath was made
for man : wherefore also the safety and comfort of man are by all means to be placed
first. But should anyone be detected without any necessity such as we have just men-
tioned, leading his beast into a church, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, and if a
layman let him be cut off.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVII^.
Cattle shall not be led into the holy halls, unless the greatest necessity comj^els it.

CANON LXXXIX.

The faithful spending the days of the Salutatory Passion in fasting, praying and com-
punction of heart, ought to fast until the midnight of the Great Sabbath : since the
divine Evangelists, Matthew and Luke, have shewn us how late at night it was [that
the resurrection took place], the one by using the words oi|re aajS^drcov, and the other
by the words opSpov ^aSea.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIX.
On the Great Sabbath the fast must be continued until midnight.


CANON XC.

We have received from our divine Fathers the canon law that in honour of Christ's
resurrection, we are not to kneel on Sundays. Lest therefore we should ignore the
fulness of this observance we make it plain to the faithful that after the priests have
gone to the Altar for Vespers on Saturdays (according to the prevailing custom) no one
shall kneel in prayer until the evening of Sunday, at which time after the entrance for
compline, again with bended knees we offer our prayers to the Lord. For taking the
night after the Sabbath, which was the forerunner of our Lord's resurrection, we begin
from it to sing in the spirit hymns to God, leading our feast out of darkness into light,
Tind thus during an entire day and night we celebrate the Resurrection.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XC. Van Espen.

From the evening entrance of tJie Sabbath until No doubt the synod by the -words " we
the evening entrance of the Lord's day there must have received from the divine Fathers," re-
be no kneeling. i ferred to canon xx. of the Council of Nice.


404 QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


For many centuries this custom was pre-
served even in the Latin Church ; and the
custom of keeping feasts and whole days
generally from evening to evening is believed


by them from the Jews. At the end of the
Vllltii Century the Synod of Frankfort de-
clared in its xxj. canon, that " the Lord's
day should be kept from evening to even-


to have been an ApostoHc tradition, received i ing."

CANON XCI.

Those who give drugs for procuring abortion, and those who receive poisons to kill
the foetus, are subjected to the penalty of murder.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCL 1 of murder. And we pay no attention to the

^noecer gives or receives medicine to produce ' subtile distinction as to whether the fatus was

abortion is a homicide. formed or unformed. And l)y this not only

I is justice satisfied for the child that should
See Canon XXI. of Ancyra, and Canon IL have been born, but also for her who pre-
of St. Basil ; to wit, " She who purposely de- pared for herself the snares, since the women
stroys the foetus, shall suffer the punishment i very often die who make such experiments."

CANON XCII.

The holy synod decrees that those who in the name of marriage carry off women
and tliose who in any way assist tln^ ravishers, if they be clerics, they shall lose their
rank, but if they be laymen they shall be anathematized.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCII.
Tliose ivho run (iivay with teamen, and those
tvho assist and give a hand, if they be clerics
they shall be deposed, if laymen they shall be
anathematized.


YkTiJ ESPEN.

This canon simply renews and confirms
Canon xxvij of Chalcedou.


CANON XCIII.

If the wife of a man who has gone away and does not appear, cohabit with another
before she is assured of the death of the first, she is an adulteress. The wives of sol-
diers who have married husbands who do not appear are in the same case ; as are also
they who on account of the wanderings of their husbands do not wait for their return.
But the circumstance here has some excuse, in that the suspicion of liis death becomes
very great. But she who in ignorance has married a man who at the time was deserted
by his wife, and then is dismissed because his first wife returns to him, has indeed com-
mittt^d fornication, lint through ignorance ; therefore she is not pioveiited from marry-
ing, l)ut it is better if she remain as slie is. If a soldier shall return after a long time,
and find his wife on account of his long absence has been united to another man, if he
so wishes, he may receive his own wife [back again], pardon being extended in consid-
eration of their ignorance both to her and to the man who took her homo in second
marriage.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIII. ■ Compare in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gra-

A ivoman u-hoivhen her husband does not f»rw tian's Ihrrrtam, Pars IL, Causa xxxiv., Qua^st.

vp, lirfore she is certain he is dead, takes another I- J^'^"! H- Epistle of St. Leo to Nicetas.

commits adultery. But ivhen the man rd^ms Also compare of St. Basil's canons xxxj.,

he may receive her again, if he so elects. \ xxxvj., and xlvj.

» " The evening and the morning were the first day."— Cten. i. 6.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


405


CANON XCIV.

The canon subjects to penalties those who take heathen oaths, and we decree to them
excommunication.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIV.

Wlwet'Cr uses Gentile oaths, is worthy of pun-
ishment, for he is cut off.

The reference is to canon Ixxxj. of St. Ba-
sil's canons.


Van Espen.
Teiiullian {J)e Idolatria, cap. xx.) supposes
that to swear by the false gods of the Gentiles,
contains in itself some idolatry, an opinion
shared by St. Basil, comparing those using
such oaths with them who betrayed Christ,
and who are partakers of the talk of devils.


CANON XCY.

Those who from the heretics come over to orthodoxy, and to the number of those
who should be saved, we receive according to the following order and custom. Ari-
ans, Macedonians, Novatians, who call themselves Cathari, Ai-isteri, and Testareskaide-
catitse, or Tetradit?e, and Apollinarians, we receive on their presentation of certificates
and on their anathematizing every heresy which does not hold as does the holy Apos-
tolic Church of God : then first of all we anoint them with the holy chrism on their fore-
heads, eyes, nostrils, mouth and ears ; and as we seal them we say — " The seal of the
gift of the Holy Ghost."

But concerning the Paulianists it has been determined by the Catholic Church that
they shall by all means be rebaptized. The Eunomeans also, who baptize with one im-
mersion ; and the Montanists, who here are called Phrygians; and the Sabelliaus, who con-
sider the Son to be the same as the Father, and are guilty in certain other grave matters,
and all the other heresies — for there are many heretics here, especially those who come
from the region of the Galatians— all of their number who are desirous of coming to the
Orthodox faith, we receive as Gentiles. And on the first day we make them Christians,
on the second Catechumens, then on the third day we exorcise them, at the same time
also breathing thrice upon their faces and ears ; and thus we initiate them, and we
make them spend time in church and hear the Scriptures ; and then we baptize them.

And the Manich?eans, and Valentinians and Marcionites and all of similar heresies
must give certificates and anathematize each his own heresy, and also Nestorius, Eu-
tyches, Dioscorus, Severus, and the other chiefs of such heresies, and those who think
with them, and all the aforesaid heresies ; and so they become partakers of the holy
Communion.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCV.
Thus we adtnit those converted from the here-
tics. We anoint icith the holy chrism, upon the
brow, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears, Arians,
Macedonians, Novatians {who are called Cathari),
Aristerians (who are called Quartadecimans or
Tetraditce), and Apollinarians tchen they anathe-
matize every heresy ; and sign them ivith the
cross as we say, " The Seal of the gift of the
Holy Ghost. ' Amen. "

Compare with this Canon vij. of Laodieea,
and the so-called vijth. canon of the First
Council of Constantinople.

The text I have translated is that ordinarily
given, I now present to the reader Hefele's
argument for its worthlessness.


Hefele.

This text is undoubtedly false, for (a) the
baptism of the Gnostics was, according to the
recognized ecclesiastical principle, invalid,
and a Gnostic coming into the Church was
required to be baptized anew ; (h) besides,
it would have us first to require of a Gnostic
an anathema on Nestorius, Eutyches, etc.
More accurate, therefore, is the text, as it is
given by Beveridge. and as Balsamon had it,
to the effect that : "In the same way (as the
preceding) are the Manichseans, Valentinians,
Marcionites, and similar heretics to be
treated {i.e., to be baptized anew) ; but the
Nestorians must (merely) present certificates,
and anathematize their heresy. Nestorius,
Eutyches, etc." Here we have only this mis-


40C


QFTXISF.XT. A.D. G92


take, that the Nestorians must anathema-
tize, among others, also Eutyclies, which they
wouhl certainly have done very willingly.
At the best, we must suppose that there is a
gap in the text, and that utter, •* all of similar
heresies," we must add " the later heretics
must present certificates and anathematize
Nestorius, Eutyches, etc."

There seems but little doubt that whatever


may be the truth in the matter, the early theo-
logians and fathers held that even thougli the
external rite of Holy Baptism might be validly
performed by schismatics and heretics, yet
that by it the person so baptized did not re-
ceive the Holy Ghost, and this opinion was
not confined to the East, but was also preva-
lent in the West. Vidr Rupertus, De JJivinis
OJficiis, Lib. X., Cap. xxv.


CANON XCVI.

Those who hj baptism have put on Christ liave professed that they will copy Ins
manner of life which he led in tlie flesh. Tlio.se therefore who adorn and arrange their
hair to the detriment of those who see them, that is by cunningly devised intertwinings,
and by this means put a bait in the way of unstable souls, we take in hand to cure
paternally with a suitable punishment : training them and teacliing them to live soberly,
in order that having laid aside the deceit and vanity of material things, they may give
their minds continually to a life which is blessed and free from mischief, and have their
conversation in fear, pure, [and holy ^] ; and thus come as near as possible to God
through their purity of life ; and adorn the inner man rather than the outer, and that
with virtues, and good and blameless manners, so that they leave in themselves no
remains of the left-handeduess of the adversary, liut if any shall act contrary to the
present canon let him be cut off.

NOTES.

the golden dve, see the scholion of Zonaras.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVI.

Whoever firisf vj) flirir hair into arthtic pla'it?i
for the destrnction of the beholders are to be cut off.

For the intricate manner of dressing the
hair used in the East, and for a description of \ canon in another shape. '


Van Espen remarks that the curious care for
somebody else's hair in the form of wigs, so
prevalent with many laymen and ecclesiastics
of his dav, is the same vice condemned bv the


CANON XCVII.

Those who have commerce with a wife or in any other manner without regard thereto
make sacred places common, and treat them with contempt and thus remain in them, we
order all such to be expelled, even from the dwellings of the catechumens which are in the
venerable temples. And if any one shall not observe these directions, if he be a cleric
let him be deposed, but if a la3man let him be cut oti".


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVII.


I Zonaras.

! In the name of holv places, not the church

Whoever in a trmple has commerce icith his itself but the adjoining and dependent build-

wife and remains there out of contempt, shall be jngg are intended such as those which are

expelled even from the Catechumens. If any one called the " Catechumena. " For no one would

shall not observe this he shall be deposed or cut off. be audacious enough to wish to cohabit with

I his wife in the very temple itself.


CANON XCVIII.

He who brings to the intercourse of marriage a M'oman who is betrothed to another
man who is still alive, is to lie under the charge of adultery.


' These words only in the Latin.

' It is curious to uoti- that so preat was tlip rare of the clergy for
their wigs thut the very .«lmpe of the vestuicut;' was changed so as


not to disturb Hu'm, and the surplices were slit all the way down
the frniit, as they continue in some places even down to our own
daj-8. after the original cause had long passed away.


QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


407


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVIII.


He is an adulterer who takes one espoused to
some one else.


Aristenus's commentary on this canon is
2a0T/s. A more extraordinary estimate of it
could hardly be made. So far from the mean-
ing being " perspicuous," as the Latin transla-
tion has it, the meaning seems to be past find-
ing out ; for, as Van Esi:)en remai'ks, a man
who sins with a betrothed woman is certainly


not an "adulterer." He tries therefore to in-
troduce the idea that though he is not an
adulterer, yet he is to be punished as if he
were. But the Greek hardly seems patient of
this meaning, and the Ancient Epitome says
in so many words that he is an adulterer.

On account of this difficialty some have sup-
posed that the espousals here mentioned were
not defifturo but de proesenti, and that there-
fore it was the case of stealing a real wife of
another man. But this explanation also is
involved in many difficulties.


CANON XCIX.

We have further learned that, in the regions of the Armenians, certain persons boil
joints of meat within the sanctuary and offer portions to the priests, distributing it
after the Jewish fashion. Wherefore, that we may keep the church uudefiled, we
decree that it is not lawful for any priest to seize the separate portions of flesh meat
from those who offer them, but they are to be content with what he that offers pleases
to give them ; and further we decree that such oflering be made outside the church.
And if any one does not thus, let him be cut off.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCTX.


There are some ivho like the Jews cook meat
in the holy places. Whoever permits this, or
receives aught froDi ihem, is not Jit to he priest.
But if any one should of his own free choice
offer it, then he might receive as much as the


offerer chose to give him, provided the offer were
made outside the church.

A similar Judaizing superstitious custom
was also found in the West, of which Wala-
frid Strabo gives an account in the IX. Cen-
tury {De Rebus Ecclesiasticis, cap. xviii.).


CANON C.

" Let thine eyes behold the thing which is right," orders Wisdom, " and keep
thine heart with all care." For the bodily senses easily bring their own impressions
into the soul. Therefore we order that henceforth there shall in no way be made
pictures, whether they are in paintings or in what way so ever, which attract the eye
and corrupt the mind, and incite it to the enkindling of base pleasures. And if any
one shall attempt to do this he is to be cut off.

Ancient Epitome of Canon C.
Pictures which induce impurity are not to he painted. Whoso shall transgress shall be cut off.


CANON CI.

The great and divine Apostle Paul with loud voice calls man created in the image
of God, the body and temple of Christ. Excelling, therefore, every sensible creature, he
who by the saving Passion has attained to the celestial dignity, eating and drinking
Christ, is fitted in all respects for eternal life, sanctifying his soul and body by the
participation of divine grace. Wherefore, if any one wishes to be a participator of the
immaculate Body in the time of the Synaxis, and to ofler himself for the communion,


408 QUINISEXT. A.D. 692


let him draw near, arrangin» his bands in the form of a cross, and so let him receive
the communion of j^race. But such as, instead of their hands, make vessels of f^old or
other materials for the reception of the divine ^ift, and by these receive the immaculate
communion, we by no moans allow to come, as ])roferriiij^f inanimate and inferior matter
to the ima^e of God. But if any one shall be fouud iiiipartin;^ the immaculate Com-
munion to those who bring vessels of this kind, let him be cut otf as well as the one
Avho brings them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CI. I gant and insolent bearing, were preferred to

JMioevcr comes to recei-ve the Eucharist Jwlds
his hioids in the form of a cross, <ind takes it
icith his mouth ; whoever shall prepare a recep-
tacle of gold or of any otJier material instead of
his h(i)i(l, shall be cut off.


the poor.

St. Cyril of Jerusalem.

(Catcches. Mystagof]. v. ')

When tliou goest to receive communion go

not with thy wrists extended, nor with thy

-p fingers separated, but placing thy left hand

as a throne for thy rifjht, which is to receive
At first, perchance, this was invented from go ^^-eat a King, and in the hollow of the


pious feelings, because the hand which came
in contact with base and unwortliy things
was not worthy to receive the Lord's body,
but, as time went on, piety was turned to the
injury of tlie soul, so that those who did


palm receive the body of Christ, saying. Amen.

Vide also St. John Damascene, I)c Fide
Orthodoxa^ lib. iv., cap. xiv. On the whole
matter cf. Card. Bona, De Rebus Lit., lib. ii..


this when they came to receive with an arro- 1 cap. xvij., n. 3.

CANON CII.

It behoves those who have received from God the power to loose and bind, to
consider the quality of the sin and the readiness of the sinner for conversion, and to
ai)ply medicine suitable for the disease, lest if he is injudicious in each of these res]iects
he should fail in regard to the healing of the sick man. For the disease of sin is not
simple, but various and multiform, and it germinates many mischievous offshoots, from
which much evil is diffused, and it proceeds further until it is checked by the power of
the physician. Wherefore he avIio professes the science of S])iritual medicine ought first
of all to consider the disposition of him who has sinned, and to see whether he tends
to health or (on the contrary) provokes to himself disease by his own behaviour, and to
look how he can care for his manner of life during the interval. And if he does not resist
the physician, and if the ulcer of the soul is increased by the a])])lication of the imposed
medicaments, then let him mete out mercy to him according as he is worthy of it. For
the whole account is between God and him to whom the pastoral rule has been deliv-
ered, to lead back the wandering sheep and to cure that which is wounded by the
serpent ; and that he may neither cast them down into the precipices of despair, nor
loosen the bridle towards dissolution or contempt of life ; but in some way or other,
either by means of sternness and astringency, or by greater softness and mild medicines,
to resist this sickness and exert himself for tlie healing of the ulcer, now examining the
fruits of his repentance and wisely managing the man who is called to higher illumi-
nation. For we ought to know two filings, to wit, tlu; thiiigs which belong to strictness
and those which Ix-iong to custom, antl to follow the traditioual form in the case of
those who are not fitted for the highest things, as holy Basil teaches us.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CII.

The character of a sin must be cnnsidcrcd from idl points and conversion expected. And sn Id
mercy be meted out.


Oxford Tran&latlon, p. 279.


THE CANONS OF THE SYNODS OF SARDICA, CARTHAGE,
CONSTANTINOPLE, AND CARTHAGE UNDER ST. CYP-
RIAN, WHICH CANONS WERE RECEIVED BY THE COUN-
CIL IN TRULLO AND RATIFIED BY 11. NICE.


IX'lT.ODT'CTOllY NOTE.

I have placed the canons of Sardica and those of Carthage and those of the Council
held at Constantinople under Nectarius and Thcophilus, and that of the Council of Car-
thage under St. Cyprian, immediately after the Council in Trnllo, because in the second
canon of that synod tli^y are for the lirst time mentioned l)y name as being accepted by the
Universal Church.


THE COUNCIL OF SARDICA.

A.D. 343 OK 344.

Emperors. — Constantius and Contans.
Popt;.— Julius I.

Elenchus.


Introduction on the date of the synod.
Note on the text of the canons.
The Canons ivith the Ancient Epitome and
Notes.


Other Acts of the Synod.
Excursus as to this synod's claim to ecu-
menical character.


INTRODUCTION ON THE DATE OF THE COUNCIL.

(Hefele, Hist. Councils, Vol. II., pp. 86 et seqq.)

Our inquiries concerning the Synod of Sardica must begin with a chronological exami-
nation of the date of this assembly. Socrates and Sozomen place it expressly in the year
347 A.D., with the more precise statement that it was held under the Consuls Rufinus and
Eusebius in the eleventh year after the death of Constantine the Great, therefore after the
22d of May, 347, according to our way of reckoning.

This was the most general view until, rather more than a hundred years ago, the learned
Scipio Maffei discovered at Verona, the fragment of a Latin translation of an old Alexan-
drian chronicle (the Historia Acephala), and edited it in the thii'd volume of the Osservazioni
Litterarii in 1738. This fragment contains the information that on the 24th Phaophi
{October 21), under the Consuls Constantius IV. and Constans II., in the year 346, Athana-
sius had returned to Alexandria from his second exile. As it is universally allowed, how-
ever, as we shall presently show more clearly, that this return certainly only took place
about two years after the Synod of Sardica, Mausi hence saw the necessity of dating this
synod as early as the year 344. In this he is confirmed by St. Jerome, in the continuation
of the Eusebian chronicle, who, in accordance with the Historia Acephala, has assigned the
return of St. Athanasius to the tenth year of the reign of the Emperor Constantius, in 346.

Many learned men now followed Mansi, the greater number blindly ; others, again, sought
to contradict him, at first the learned Dominican, Mamachi ; then Dr. Wetzer (Professor at
Freiburg) ; and latterly, we ourselves in a treatise, " Controversen iiber die Synode von
Sardika," in the Tilhinger Theol. Quartalschrift, 1852. Soon after there was a fresh discovery.
Some of the Paschal Letters of St. Athanasius, which until then were supposed to be lost,
were discovered in an Egy^^tian monastery, with a very ancient preface translated into
Syriac, and were published in that language by Cureton in London, and in the year 1852 in
German by Professor Larsow, at the Grey Friars Convent, in Berlin.

Among these Festal Letters, the nineteenth, intended for Easter 347, and therefore com-
posed in the beginning of that year, had been re-written in Alexandria, as the introduction
expressly states. This confirms the statement of the Historia Acephala, that Athanasius was
already returned to Alexandria in October, 346, and confirms the chief points of Mansi's
hypothesis ; while, on the other hand, it unanswerably refutes, by Athanasius' own testi-
mony, the statements of Socrates and Sozomen (which, from their dependence on each other,
only count as one), with reference to the date 347.

As we said, Mansi placed this Synod in the year 344 ; but the old preface to the Festal
Letters of St. Athanasius dates it in the year 343, and in fact we can now only hesitate be-
tween the dates 343 and 344. If the preface were as ancient and as powerfully convincing
as the Festal Letters themselves, then the question concerning the date of the Council of Sar-
dica would be most accurately decided. As, however, this j^reface contains mistakes in
several places, especially chronological errors — for instance, regarding the death of Constan-
tine the Great — we cannot unconditionally accept its statement as to the date 344, but can
only do so when it corresponds with other dates concerning that time.

Let us, at all events, assume that Athanasius came to Rome about Easter, 340. As is
known, he was there for three whole years, and in the beginning of the fourth year was
summoned to the Emperor Constans at Milan. This points to the summer of 343. From
thence he went through Gaul to Sardica, and thvis it is quite possible that that Synod might
have begun in the autumn of 343. It probably lasted, however, until the spring ; for when
the two envoys, Euphrates of Cologne, and Vincent of Capua, who were sent by the Synod
to the Emperor Constans, arrived in Antioch, it was already Easter 344. Stephen, the


X'X


--iZ


44 I:


-> ss ^


sec iXC

3J ^CCi


,.--c .._: '-^ m tie- Ar■- —
- m ^aai- > -£ ^t4 T-

■^ji ifcsc Si i.'jii.iLi;? r»: S4i«S. Ai jKL^ru- ^:l \.< "
Wi see ii>:z: zitr rj ^ ---^ .j%,^ : .. . .

T-'-^ * ^ - ~ ' tie TiTrdi^'e. "v . . . ' - ~ i -■• * - ^ . ..^ > > :, _

■ r is "s:!}:" esss* 'sr t>>^ TTesi "yrii lie : ^.jw»rru«:rc\. rer3s»M. tic ",

"t«ir fJji- "W3J5 3>:x. ss tp? reJrir^ srrrai'aj^n&jj ■? ■ f i-"

SrZLriJiC. is P^fZfrTw»7C«rJi? xiir "r^fCL- r "_:•! re S r_~- tutty-sr ?jni: . '

AsCiirOKS rif Ga;^*. "^tls ifi?c«rseii. frrci. "^•~>= bcscj^cs^f seTSLjctszL T^ir? sir?w~ T^-^s

3-ir^ TTrt^ Aiz:ir*^~iai S"^^!*-! zc ^3»I' : r? T'TrE: i2i - -~ • '- ~_ -—Z ait to TZt ~ r-; " _ _ ■

Tjt.T-T -r-i.-r>C:t— i-TT rf Zj1£: S'f^z*^^ liSitScr ■:•>: r _ . 3 frr w^ zio . _ - . zceser - ■


i^Sir l^tT. lai "TUE "ziB Srm*! lif Si.rl5:a uluss irrr>x?-g?-Tp- :-trrr r<:


5^«: rz oy rzz ~


CaVOXSl


1


T'TtJ- Caajnis :€ :^:r.riaa Sari^ KULe lr-v~i to 'BIS Iw<(Sl hi Greei x&i Tif»^^ __ - - _ - ~ -
•=FT-: aiaiii ■«*» ■m* rr'ir^a." -vile jciisrs. SEOii. e* WiLdi 'ir^.-flL -A^r jLir^iKwwrSw p. IT '

trrtrt.- -.THgT- -vsn 3in: *si*r5€ii i^n xiiE ^ttt. nl T" "sriZ. ila*: t«r tb^Z vr* rear iz. zirr.
**'-tr^ r^ier^ji r^ r?r>i- Orseis te :t Z _ . "^^^irr fcr tee O^'eeeIlI zx _ ; .

anura. sr?- «cira;:3fti zjl lie coij rr tie Gr^ek Caaj:^ Lt-w.


THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL OF SARDICA.


The holy synod assembled iu Sardica from various provinces decreed as follows.

{Found in Greek in John of Constantinople' s collection of the sixtJi century and sev-
eral other 3ISS. Found also in the tvorks of the Greek scholiasts. Found in Latin in the
Prisca, in Dionysius Exiguus, and in Isidore, genuine and false.)

CANON I.

{Greek)

Hosius, bishop of the city of Corduba, said : A prevalent evil, or rather most mis-
chievous corruption must be done away with from its very foundations. Let no
bishop be allowed to remove fi-om a small city to a different one : as there is an
obvious reason for this fault, accounting for such attempts ; since no bishop could ever
yet be found who endeavoured to be translated from a larger city to a smaller one. It
is therefore evident that such persons are inflamed with excessive covetousness and are
only serving ambition in order to have the repute of possessing greater authority. Is it
then the pleasure of all that so grave an abuse be punished with great severity ? For
I think that men of this sort should not be admitted even to lay communion. All the
bishops said : It is the pleasure of all.

{Latin.)
Bishop Hosius said : A prevalent evil and mischievous corruption must be done
away with from its foundation. Let no bishop be allowed to remove from his own city
to another. For the reason of such attempts is manifest, since in this matter no bishop
has been found who would remove from a larger city to a smaller one. It is therefore
evident that these men are inflamed with excess of covetousness, and are serving ambi-
tion and aiming at the possession of power. If it be the pleasure of all, let so great an
evil be punished right harshly and sternly, so that he who is such shall not even be ad-
mitted to lay communion. All with one accord answered : Such is our pleasure.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I.


No bishop is to l)e found passing fj^om, a smaller
to a greater city. If anyone shoidd move from
an humble to a more important see, he shall he
excommunicated through his whole life as proud
and grasping.

Van Espen.

{Dissert, in Synod. Sard., § 11.^)

What Peter de Marca sajs {De Concordia
Sacerdotii et Imp., Lib. V., cap. iv.), "Hosius
presided over " this council as legate of the
Roman bishop, rests upon no solid founda-
tion, and no trace of any such legation is
found in Athauasius or in any of the other


writers who treated of this synod. Moreover
such a thing is contrary to the form of sub-
scription used. For of those who signed the
first is Hosius, and Athauasius designates
him simply as " from Spain," without any ad-
dition ; and then next he mentions " Julius of
Rome, by Archidamus and Philoxenus, his
presbyters," etc. What is clearer than that,
by the testimony of Athauasius, Julius was
present by these two presbyters only, and
that they only were his legates or vicars, who
in his room were present at this synod ?

The first part of this canon is found in the
Corpus Juris Canonici ; Raymuud's Decretales,
De Glericis non residentibus, Cap. ii.


CANON II.

{Greek.)
Bishop Hosius said : But if any such person should be found so mad or audacious
as to think to advance by way of excuse an affirmation that he had brought letters from

1 The whole of this Dissertation is worthy of careful study.


416


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


the people [laity], it is plain that some few persons, corrupted by bribes and rewards,
could have got up an uproar in the church, deinautliiii^, forsooth, the said man for
bishop. I think then that practices and devices of such sort absolutely must be pun-
ished, so that a man of this kind be deeiiu'd unworthy even of lay communion in ex-
tremis. Do ye therefore make answer whether tliis sentence is approved by you. They
[the bishops] answered : AVhat has been said is approved of.

{Latin.)

BiSHor HosKTs said : Even if any such ])erson should show himself so rash as per-
haps to alk'i^e as an excuse and affirm tliat he has received letters from the peojjle, inas-
nnich as it is evident that a few persons coulil have been corrupted by rewards anil
bribes — [namely] persons who do not hold the pure faith — to raise an uproar in the
church, and seem to ask for the said man as bishop ; I judge that these frauds must l)e
condemned, so that such an one should not receive even lay communion at the last. If
ye all approve, do ye decree it. The sjTiod answered : We approve.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II.


If ay^yonc shall pass from one eifi/ to another,
and shall raise up seditions, tickling the j^cople
and he assisted bi/ them in raising a disturbance,
he shall not he allowed communion even when
dying.

V.\N ESPEN.

To understand this canon aright it must be
remembered that in the first ages of the
Church the people were accustomed to have a
share in the election of their bishop ; and he
whom the people demanded was usually or-
dained their bishop.

Aristenus.
This [penalty] is something unheard of and
horrible, that he should not be deemed worthy
of coniinuniou even at the hour of death ; for
it is a provision found nowhere else imposed
by any canon, nor inflicted upon any sin.

Van Espen.

The Greek author Aristenus [in the above
remarks] probably has not erred from the
truth when he asserts that to no crime was
this penalty attached, if he refers to the East-
ern Churches ; for Morinus himself (in the


three crimes of idolatry, murder, and adul-
tery were thus punished : that is, that to those
who admitted any one of these, reconciliation
was denied even at his death, "and this," says
Morinus, " I think no one can deny, who is at
all versed in the testimony of the ancients on
this point."

Hefele.
The addition in the Latin text, qui sinceram
fidem nan habcnt, is found both in Dionysius
Exiguus and in Isidore and the Prisca, and its
meaning is as follows : " In a town, some few,
especially those who have not the ti-ue faith,
can be easily bribed to demand this or that
person as bishop." The Fathers of Sardica
l^lainly had here in \\e\\ the Arians and their
adherents, who, through such like machina-
tions, when they had gained over, if onl}- a
small party in a town, sought to press into
tlie bishoprics. The Synod of Antioch more-
over, in 341, although the Eusebians, properly
speaking, were dominant there, had laid down
in the twenty-first canon a similar, only less
severe, rule.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Raymond's Decretales, cap. ii., De
electione, but with the noteworthy addition


xixth chapter of the ixth book, De Peniientia), "unless he shall have repented." These words
confesses that tliis penalty was never attached do not occur in the other Latin versions, and
to any crime among the Easterns : neverthe- 1 Hefele thinks them to have been added by
less in some Churches in the first ages the ] Raymond of Peunaforte.


CANON III.

(Greeh.)

Bishop Hosiub said : This also it is necessary to add, — that no bishop pass from his
own province to another i)rovince in which there are bishops, unless indeed he be called
by his brethren, that we seem not to close the gates of charity.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 3U


417


And this case likewise is to be provided for, that if iu any province a bishop has some
matter a^^ainst his brother and fellow-bishop, neither of the two should call in as arbiters
bishops from another province.

But if perchance sentence be given against a bishop in any matter and he supposes
his case to be not unsound but good, in order that the question may be reopened, let us,
if it seem good to your charity, honour the memory of Peter the Apostle, and let those
who gave judgment write to Julius, the Inshop of Rome, so that, if necessary, the case
may be retried by the bishops of the neighbouring provinces and let him appoint arbiters ;
but if it cannot be shown that his case is of such a sort as to need a new trial, let the
judgment once given not be annulled, but stand good as before.

(Lafhi.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also it is necessary to add,— that bishops shall not pass
from their own province to another province in which there are bishops, unless perchance
upon invitation from their brethren, that we seem not to close the door of charity.

But if iu any province a bishop have a matter in dispute against his brother bishop,
one of the two shall not call in as judge a bishop from another province.

But if judgment have gone against a bishop in any cause, and he think that he has
a good case, in order that the question may be reopened, let us, if it be your pleasure,
honour the memory of St. Peter the Apostle, and let those who tried the case write to
Julius, the bishop of Bome, and if he shall judge that the case should be retried, let that
be done, and let him appoint judges; but if he shall find that the case is of such a sort
that the former decision need not be disturbed, what lie has decreed shall be confirmed.

Is this the pleasure of all ? The synod answered. It is our pleasure.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

No hishop, iinless called thereto, shall pass to
another city. Moreover a hishop of the province
tvho is engaged in any litigation shall not appeal
to outside bishojys. But ifBome hears the cause,
even outsiders may be present.

Van Espen.
Accordiug- to the reading of Dionysius and
Isidore, as well as of the Greeks, Balsamou,
Zonaras and Aristenus, as also of Hervetus
the i:)rovision is that bishops of one province
shall not pass to another in which there are
NOT bislioj^s.

Zonaras.

Not only are bishops prohibited from chang-
ing their cities, and passing from a smaller to
a larger one, but also from passing from one
province to another iu which there are bishops,
for the sake of doing any ecclesiastical work
there unless they are called by the bishops of
that jDroviuce.

On the phrase " if it pleases you " the fol-
lowing from St. Athanasius is much to the
point (cit. by Pusey, Councils, p. 148). "They
[i.e., the Council of Nice] wrote concerning;
Easter, ' It seemed good ' as follows : for it
did then seem good, that there should be a
general compliance ; but about the faith they


wrote not ' It seemed good,' but ' Thus believes
the Catholic Church ' ; and thereupon they
confessed how the faith lay, in order to shew
that their sentiments were not novel, but
apostolic,"

TiLLEMONT.

This form is very strong to shew that it was
a right which the Pope had not had hitherto.

Van Espen.

Peter de Marca (De Concordia SacerdotH et
Imperii, Lib. VII., Cap. iij., § 8) says that Ho-
sius here proposed to the fathers to honour
the memory of St. Peter that he might the
more easily lead them to consent to this new
privilege ; for, as De Marca has proved, the
right here bestowed upon the Roman Pontiff
was clearly unknown before.

It has been urged that the mention of the
jDope by name, intimates clearly that the j^ro-
vision of these canons of an appeal to Rome
was of a purely temporary character ; and
some famous authors such as Edmund Richer,
of the Sorbonne, have written in defence of
this view, but Hefele quotes with great force
the words of the learned Protestant, Spittler
{Critical Examination of the Sardican Decisions.
Spittler, Siimmtlichen Werken, P. viij., p.
129 sq.).


418 SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


Spittler.


Hefele.


It is said that these Sardican decisions were According to the Greek text, and that of
simply provisional, and intended for the pros- Dionysius, those who liad pronounced the
ent necessity ; because Athanasius, so hardly first judgment were to write to Rome ; and
pressed by the Arians, could onl}- be rescued Fuchs rif^htly adds, that they were to do this
by authorizing an appeal to the Bishop of j at the desire of the condemned. But, accord-
Rome for a final judgment. Richer, in his ing to Isidore and the Piisca, the right or the
History of Die General Coumils, has elaborately duty of bringing the affair Ix-fore Rome, also
defended this opinion, and Horix also lias de- V)elonged to the neighbouring bishojjs. I
clared in its favour. But would not all secure believe that the last interpretation has only
use of the canons of the councils be done away arisen through a mistake, from a comment
with if this distinction between provisional , belonging to the next sentence being inserted
and permanent synodal decisions were ad- in the wrong place. It only remains to be
mitted? Is there any sure criterion for dis- remarked here, that Isidore and the Frisca
tinguishing those canons which were onl}' to i have not the name Julio, . . . But Har-
be provisional, from the others which were i douin's conjecture, that instead of Julio, per-
made for all future centuries? The Fathers haps //// maybe read, is entirely gratuitous,
of the Synod of JSardica express themselves contrary to the Greek text, and plainly only
quite generally ; is it not therefore most ar- a stratagem against the Gallicans.
bitrary on our part to insert limitations? It

is beyond question that these decisions were This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
occasioned by the very critical state of the Cunonici, Gratian's Ikcrctum, Pars II., Causa
affairs of Athanasius ; but is everything only VI., Qusest. iv., Canon j. 7, in Isidore's ver-
pi'ovisional that is occasioned by the circum- sion. Dionysius's version is quite wrong as
stances of individuals ? In this way the most given by Justellus and in the ^Munich edition,
important of the ancient canons might be set changing the negative into the affirmative in
aside. 1 the phrase ne unus de duobus.

CANON IV.

(Greek.)

Bishop Gaudentius said : If it seems good to you, it is necessary to add to this
decision full of sincere charity which thou bast pronounced, that ^ if any bishop be
deposed by the sentence of these neighbouring bishops, and assert that he has fresh
matter in defence, a new bishop be not settled in his see, unless the bishop of Home
judge and render a decision as to this.

{Latin.)

Bishop Gaudentius said : It onglit to be added, if it be your pleasure, to this sen-
tence full of sanctity which thou luist pronounced, that — when any bishop has been
deposed by the judgment of those bishops who have sees in neighbouring places, and
he [the bishop deposed] shall announce that his case is to be examined in the city of
Rome — that no other bishop shall in an}' wise be ordained to liis see, after the appeal of
him who is apparently deposed, unless the case shall have been determined in the
judgment of the lloman bishop.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon IV. I " neighbours " of this canon are the same os

If a bishop has been deposed and affirms that^^^ "neighbours" of the preceding canon
he has an excuse to urge, unless Rome has judffcd (number iij.) and that the meaning of this
the case, no bisJwp shall he appointed in his room, canon therefore is— If the court of second ins-
Far he might treat the decree with scorn either tance, consisting of the bishops of the neigh-
through his nuncios or by his letters. bouring province, has pronounced the accused

guilty, lie still has one more appeal to a third

There are two distinct understandings court, viz., Rome. This is the view taken by

of this canon. The one view is that the the Greeks, Zonaras and Balsamon, by the

' At this point begins the Greek text as given in Bev.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344 419


Ballerini, Van Espen, Palma, Walter, Natalis have tlone so in clearer and more express
Alexander and many others. terms, and not only have, as it were, smuggled

In direct opposition to this is the view that in the whole point with the secondary ques-
there is no third but only a second appeal tion, as to " what was to be done with the
mentioned by the canon. The supporters of bishop's see."

this interpretation are Peter de Marca, Tille- 3. Farther, that it is quite devoid of proof
mont, Dupin, Fleury, Remi Ceillier, Neander, that the expression "neighbouring bishops"
Stolberg, Eehhorn, Kober, and with these He- is identical with "Bishops in tlie neighbour-
fele sides and states his reasons for doing so. hood of the said Province," that, indeed this

j identification is throughout unwarrantable
Hefele. 1 and wrong, and it is far more natural to un-

There must be added to the reasons of the derstand by the neighbouring bishoj^s, the
connexion of this canon with the preceding, coniprovincials, therefore the court of first
the course of events, etc.: instance.

1. That it certainly would be very curious 4. That by this interpretation we obtain
if in the third canon mention was made of clearness, consistency, and harmony in all
the apjieal to Eome as following the judg- three canons.

ment of the court of first instance ; in the 5. That the word TraAir in the fourth canon
fourth, after that of the court of second presents no difficulty ; for even one who has
instance; and again in the fifth, after the only been heard in the court of fii'st instance
judgment of the court of first instance. 1 may say he desires again to defend himself,

2. That if the S^-nod had really intended to ^ because he has already made his first defence
institute a court of third instance, it would ; in the court of first instance.

CANON V.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said : Decreed, that if any bishop is accused, and the bishops of
the same region assemble and depose him from his office, and he appealing, so to
speak, takes refuge with the most blessed bishop of the Eoman church, and he be
willing to give him a hearing, and think it right to renew the examination of his case,
let him be pleased to write to those fellow-bishops who are nearest the province that
they may examine the particulars with care and accuracy and give their votes on the
matter in accordance with tlie word of truth. And if any one require that his case be
heard yet again, and at his request it seem good to move the bishop of Rome to send
presbyters a latere, let it be in the power of that bishop, according as he judges it to be
good and decides it to be right — that some be sent to be judges Avith the bishops and
invested with his authority by whom they were sent. And be this also ordained. But
if he think that the bishops are sufficient for the examination and decision of the matter
let him do what shall seem good in his most prudent judgment.

The bishops answered : What has been said is approved.

{Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : Further decreed, that if a bishop is accused, and the bishops
of that region assemble and depose him from his office, if he Avho has been dej^osed
shall appeal and take refuge with the bishop of the Roman church and wishes to be
given a hearing, if he think it right that the trial or examination of his case be renewed,
let him be pleased to write to those bishops who are in an adjacent and neighbouring
province, that they may diligently inquire into all the particulars and decide according
to the word of truth. But if he who asks to have his case re-heard, shall by his en-
treaty move the Bishop of Rome to send a presbyter a latere it shall be in the power of
that bishop to do what he shall resolve and determine upon ; and if he shall decide that
some be sent, who shall be present and be judges with the bishops invested with his
authority by Avhom they were appointed, it shall be as he shall choose. But if he
believe that the bishops suffice to give a final decision, he shall do what he shall de-
termine upon in his most wise judgment.


420 SAKDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon V. were sent by the Komaii bishop from his side

(a late ft') or the bisli()[)s who Avero iii)pointed,
[Lackiug.J ought, together witli the bishops of the prov-

ince who had given the former sentence, to
This Canon is vij. of Isidore s collection. ^^-^^ ^ j^.^^j^ judgment and declare their sen-
tence. And tliis Hincmar of llheims was the
Van Espen. ^^.^^ ^^ notice in his letters in the name of

Here there is properly speaking no pro- Charles the Bald sent to John VIII.
vision for " ai^peal," which entirely suspends

[i.e. by the canon lawj the execution and This view is suj^ported with his accustomed
effect of the tirst sentence ; but rather for a learning and acumen by Du Pin, Be Antiqxia
revision of judgment . . . . ; those Avho I Eccl. DiatipUna, Diss. II., Ca]). I., Sec. 3.

CANON VI.

{Greeh)

Bishop Hosirs said : If it happen that in a province iu which there are very many
bishops one l)ishop should stay away and by some negligence should not come to the
council and assent to the appointment made by the bishops, but the people assemble
and pray that the ordination of the bishop desired by them take place — it is necessary
that the bishop who stayed away should first be reminded by letters from the exarch of
the province (I mean, of course, the bishop of the metrojwlis), that the people demand
a pastor to be given them. I tliink that it is well to await his [the absent bishop's] ar-
rival also. But if after summons by letter he does not come, nor even write in reply,
the wish of the people ought to l)e complied with.

The bishops from the neighbouring provinces also should be invited to the ordina-
tion of the bishop of the metropolis.

It is positively not permitted to ordain a bishop in a village or petty town, for
which even one single presbyter is sufficient (for there is no necessity to ordain a bishop
there) lest the name and authority of bishop should be made of small account, but the
bishops of the province ought, as before said, to ordain bishops in those cities in w^hich
there were bishops previously ; and if a city should be found with a population so large
as to be thought worthy of an episcopal see, let it receive one.

Is this the pleasure of all ? All answered : It is our pleasure,

{Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : If it shall have happened, that in a province in which there
have been very many bishops, one [i.e,, but one] bishop remains, but that he by negli-
gence has not chosen [to ordain] a bishop, and the people have made apjdication, the
bishops of the neighbouring province ought first to address [by letter] the bishop who
resides in that province, and show that the people seek a ruler [i,e,, pastor] for them-
selves and that this is right, so that the}' also may come and with him ordain a bishop.
But if he refuses to acknowledge their written communication, and loaves it unnoticed,
and writes no reply, the people's request should be satisfied, so that bishops should
come from the neighljouring province and ordain a bishop.

But permission is not to be given to ordain a bishop either in any village, or in an
unimportant city, for which one presbyter suftictis, lest the name and authority of bishop
grow cheap. Those [bishops] who are invited from another province ought not to or-
dain a bishop unless in the cities which have [previously] had bishops, or iu a city
which is so important or so populous as to be entitled to have a bishop.

Is this the pleasure of all ? The synod replied : It is our pleasure.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


421


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


If the bishops were present when the 2^eo2>le
were seeking for a bishojt, caul one was away, let
that one be caUed. Bat if he is tviUimj to an-
swer the call neither by letter nor in person, let
him be ordained tvhom they desire.

When a Mctrojjolifan is apijointed the neigh-
hour imj bishops are to be sent for.

In a little city and town, for which one pres-
byter suffices, a bishop is not to be appointed.
But if the city be very popidous, it is not unfit-
tiny to do so.

The second portion of this canon is entirely
lacking in the Latin. The Greek scholiasts,
Zonaras, Balsamon, and Aristenus, under-
stand this to mean " that ' at the appointment
of a metropolitan the bishops of the neioh-
bouring- provinces shall also be invited,' prob-
ably to give greater solemnity to the act," so
says Hefele. And to this agree Van Espen,
Tillemont, and Herbst.


The first part in the Greek and Latin have
different meanings ; the Greek text contem-
plating the case of one bishop stopping away
from a meeting of bishops for an election to
fill a vacancy ; the Latin text the case of there
being only one bishop left in a province (after
war, pestilence, or the like). This second
meaning is accepted by Van Espen, Christian
Lupus and others. Moreover, it would seem
from Elodoard's History of the Church of
Bheims ( Geschiehte der Bheimser Kirehe, Lib.
III., c. 20 [a book I have never seen] ) that
the Galilean Church acted upon this under-
standing of this canon. It is that also of
Gratian.

Between the Latin and the Greek text
stands the interpretation of Zonaras, which is
that if a province once having many bishops


has by any contingency only one left besides
the Metropolitan, and he neglects to be present
at the consecration of the new bishops, he is
to be summoned by letter of the Metropolitan,
and if he does not then come, the consecra-
tions are to go on without him. With this
explanation Harmenopulus also agrees, add-
ing further that the Metropolitan might alone
consecrate the bishoj^s, resting his argument
on the words to iKavov k.t.X.

Some scholars have supposed that neither
the present Greek nor the present Latin text
represent the original, but that the Greek
text is nearest to it, but must be corrected by
an ancient Latin version found by Maffei in a
codex at Verona. The Ballerini have devoted
careful attention to this point in their notes
to the Works of St. Leo the Great (Tom. iii.,
p. xxxij. 4). It would seem that this might
be the canon quoted by the fathers of Con-
stantinojile in 382, and if so, it would seem
that they had a Greek text like that from
which the Verona version was made.

Van Espen.
The fathers of Sardica [in the second part
of this canon, which is Canon VII. by the
Latin computation] decreed two things : first,
that where the people justly asked for a Pas-
tor to be ordained for them, their demand
should be complied with ; but where the peo-
j)le insisted upon having a bishop ordained
for a village or little city, for which one jDres-
byter was all that was needed, no attention
should be paid to their demands, lest the
name and authority of a bishoj^ should become
despicable.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P, I., Distinc.
Ixv., c. ix.


CANON VII.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosrus said : Our importunity and great pertinacity and unjust petitions
have brought it about that we do not have as much favour and confidence as we ought
to enjoy. For many of the bishops do not intermit resorting to the imperial Court,
especially the Africans, who, as we have learned from our beloved brother and fellow-
bishop, Gratus, do not accept salutary counsels, but so despise them that one man
carries to the Court petitions many and diverse and of no possible benefit to the Church,
and does not (as ought to be done and as is fitting) assist and help the poor and the
laity or the widoAvs, but is intriguing to obtain worldly dignities and offices for certain
persons. This evil then causes enfeeblement {better, murmuring {read rovSpva/jLov or
TovSopvafiov)], not without some scandal and blame to us. But I account it quite


4^>> SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


proper for u bishop to give assistiiuee to oue oppressed by some one, or to a widow
suffering injustice, or, again, an orj)lian robbed of his estate, always provided that these
persons have a just cause of petition.

If, then, beloved brethren, this seems good to all, do yo decree that no bishop shall
go to the imperial Coiut except those whom our most pious emperor may sunnuon by
his own letters. Yet since it often happens that persons condemned for their offences
to deportation or banishment to an island, or who have received some sentence or
other, beg for mercy and seek refuge with the Church [/.'■., take sanctuary], such per-
sons are not to be refused assistance, but pardon should be asked for tliem without
delay and without hesitation. If this, then, is also your pleasure, do ye all vote
assent.

All gave answer : Be this also decreed.


o*^


(Latin.)

Bishop Hosrus said: Importunities and excessive pertinacity and unjust petitions
have causeil us to have too little favour or confidence, while certain bishops cease not
to go to the Court, especially the Africans, who (as we have learned) spurn and con-
temn the Siilutary counsels of our most holy brother and fellow-bishop, Gratus, so that
they not only bring to the Court many and diverse petitions (not for the good of the
Church nor, as is usual and right, to succour the poor or widows or orphans i, but even
seek to obtain worldly dignities and offices for certain persons. This evil therefore
stirs up at times not only murmurings, but even scandals. But it is proper that
bishops should intercede for persons suffering from violence and oppression, afflicted
widows and defrauded orphans, provided, nevertheless, that these persons have a just
cause or petition.

If, then, brethren dearly beloved, such be your pleasure, do we decree that no
bishops go to the Court except those who may have been invited or summoned by
letters of the God-fearing emperor. But since it often happens that those who are
suffering from injustice or who are condemned for their offences to deportation or ban-
ishment to an island, or, in short, have received some sentence or other, seek refuge
with the mercy of the Church, such persons should be succoured and ])ardon be
begged for them without hesitation. Decree this, therefore, if it be your pleasure.

All said : It is our pleasure and be it decreed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non VII. I called them to their presence in urgent and

Wien an orphan, tvidoiv, and other desolate nionieutous eases, and kept them with them.

persons are oppressed by force let the bishop nice Justiman, the emperor, m his ymeh (Chap-

them succour and approach the Emperor; but ter II.) defines that no one of the God-beloved

through a pretext of this kind let him not be a bishops shall dare to be absent anv more

hanger on of the camp, but rather let him send ^^^"^ ^''^ ^^}^<^^^^ ^^,^' "^ 7^°J^ .^'^^^•' ^"^^ ""'^'^^

a deacon ^"^^ exception, " unless lie does so on account

V\N EspEN °^ ^^ imperial jussio ; in this case alone he

mi ,11 /„ / , ^ • shall be held to be without blame."

ine '• salutary counsels [salutaria con-

silia) here seem 'to be synodical admonitions, q^ ^his whole matter of bishops interced-
as Zonaras notes ; and these might well be ■ f^^. e^UpHts. and especially for those con-
ascribed to Gratus the bishop ot Carthage, ^i^°,,^^,^ ^^J ,|^^^tli, see St. Augustine {Epi^t.
because many of the African synods were 153 ad Macedonium).
held under his presidency and direction. j ^y-^^ ^^-^ ^^^^^ '^^^, ^^ compared Canon

* * * * * * * YII. of the Council of Rheinis in A.D. 630.
Nothincr is more noteworthy than how from
the first princes summoned bishops in coun- This canon is found in part in the Corpus

sel with regard to affairs touchiuf^ either the Juris Canonici, Gratiau's Decrctum, P. II.,

estate of the Church or of the Realm ; and Causa xxiij., Quctst. viij., c. xxviij.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


423


CA^^ON VIII.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also let your sagacity determine, that ^ — inasmuch as this
was decreed iu order that a bishop might not fall under censure by going to the
Court — that if any have such petitions as we mentioned above, they should send these
by one of their deacons. For the person of a subordinate does not excite jealousy,
and what shall be granted [by the Emperor] can thus be reported more quickly.

All ansAvered: Be this also decreed.

{Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also your forethought should provide for — inasmuch as
ye have made this decree in order that the audacity of bishops might not labour [o/-,
be observed] to go to Court. Whosoever therefore shall have or receive petitions such
as we have mentioned above, let them send these [each] by a deacon of his, because
the person of a minister is not an object of jealousy, and he will be able to report more
quickly what he has obtained.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.
[Lacking.]

Van Espen.

This decree is threefold. First, that the
bishop in going to Court should not fall un-
der suspicion either at Court or of his own
people that he was approaching the Prince


to obtain some cause of his own. Second,
according to the interpretation of Zouaras,
" that no one should be angry with the Min-
ister or Deacon who tarried in camp, as the
bishop had departed thence." And third,
that the Minister could carry away what he
had asked for, that is (according to Zonaras),
the letters of the Emperor pardoning the
fault, or such like other matters.


CANON IX.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also, I think, follows, that,^ if in any province whatever,
bishops send petitions to one of their brothers and fellow-bishops, he that is in the
largest city, that is, the metropolis, should himself send his deacon and the petitions,
providing him also with letters commendatory, writing also of course in succession to
our brethren and fellow-bishops, if any of them should be staying at that time in the
places or cities in which the most pious Emperor is administering public affairs.

But if any of the bishops should have friends at the Court and should wish to make
requests of them as to some proper object, let him not be forbidden to make such re-
quests through his deacon and move these [friends] to give their kind assistance as his
desire.

But those who come to Home ought, as I said before, to deliver to our beloved brother
and fellow-bishop, Julius, the petitions which they have to give, in order that he may
first examine them, lest some of them should be improper, and so, giving them his
own advocacy and care, shall send them to the Court.

All the Bishops made answer that such was their pleasure and that the regulation
was most proper.

{Latin.)

This also seems to follow, that from whatever province bishops shall send petitions
to that brother and fellow-bishop of ours who has his see in the metropolis, he [the
metropolitan] should dispatch his deacon with the petitions, providing him with com-
mendatory letters of like tenour to our brethren and fellow-bishops at that time resi-


' Here the Greek text begins as given by Bev.


^ Here the Greek text in Bev. begins.


424


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


dent in those regions and cities in which the fortunate and blessed Emperor is ruling
the State.

If however a bishop who seeks to obtain some petition (a -worthy one, that is) has
friends in the palace, he is not for1)id(h'n to make his requi'st tlirongh his deacon and
to advise tiiose who, he knows, can kimllj intercede for him in his absence.

X. But let those wlio come to Rome, deliver, as before said, to our most holy
brother and fellow-bishop, the bishop of the Roman church, the ]>etitions which they
bear, that he also may examine wlu^tlKU' they are worthy and just, and let him give dili-
gence and care that they be forwarded to the Court.

All said that such was their pleasure and that the regulation was proper.

Bishop Alypius said : If they have incurred the discomforts of travel for the sake
of orphans and widows or any in distress and having cases that are not unjust, they
will have some good reason [for their journeyj ; but now since they chiefly makt^
requests which cannot be granted without envy and reproach, it is not necessary for
them to go to Court.

NOTE.


Ancient Epitome of Canox IX.

If one hroflter sends to ((notJifT, let the Metro-
politan furiifji the nuncio ivith letters; and let
him write to the bishops, ivho have the matter in
hand, to protect the nuncio.

Here the Latin is not only a translation
but an interpretation of the Greek text, for it
distinctly says that every bishop shall send
the petition he intends to jDreseut at court
first to his Metropolitan, who shall send it in.
This is not clearly in the Greek, and yet the
Greek Commentators find it there.

Christian Lupus.

Tlie authority of the bishop alone is not
sufficient to send a deacon to Court, there
must be added the judgment of the Metro-
politan who shall examine the petition, ap-
prove, sign, and commend it, not only to the
Prince, but also to the bisliop in whose dio-
cese he may happen to be.

Hefele.

Zonaras, Balsamou, and Aristenus ex-
plained this canon somewhat differently,
thus : " If a bishop desires to send his peti-
tions addressed to the Emperor to the bishop
of the town where the Emperor is staying, he


shall first send them to the Metropolitan of
that province (accordino- to Aristenus, his own
Metropolitan) and the latt(?r shall send his
own deacon with letters of recommendation
to the bishop or bishojjs who may be at court."
This difference rests upon the various mean-
ings of " to the brother and fellow-bishop " in
the beginning of the canon. We understand
by this his own Metropolitan, and treat the
words : o iv rfj /x€i^oi/t k. t. a., as a more exact
definition of " feUow-bishop," and the parti-
ciple Tuyx^ivwv as equivalent to Try^aiet, and
make the principal clause begin at auros- kuI
Tov SiaKovov. Beveridge translated the canon
in the same way. Zonaras and others, on the
contrary, understood by " fellow-bishop," the
bishop of the Emperor's residence for the
time being, and regai-ded the words 6 ec rrj
fjL€Ll()r] K.T.A. not as a clearer definition of what
had gone before, but as the principal clause,
in the sense of " then the Metropolitan shall,"
etc. According to this interpretation, the
woi'ds conveying the idea that the bishop
must have recourse to the Metropolitan are
entirely wanting in the canon.

The first part of this Canon is the last part
of Canon IX. of the Latin. The last part is
Canon X. of the Latin, but the personal part
about Alypius is omitted from the Greek.


CANON X.

(Greeh)

Bishop Hosius said : This also I think necessary.' Ye should consider with all
thoroughness and care, that if some rich man or professional advocate be desired for
bishop, he be not ordained until he have fulfilled the ministry of reader, deacon, and
presbyter, in order that, passing by promotion through the several grades, he may


' Here the Greek begins (reading dec for ii'a and tf crdfeo-ffai for eferd^oiTo) according to Beveridge.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344 425


advance (if, that is, he be found worthy) to the height of tiie episcopate. And he shall
remain in each order assuredly for no brief time, that so his faith, his reputable life,
his steadfastness of character and considerateness of demeanour may be well-known,
and that he, being deemed worthy of the divine sacerdotal ofhce [sacerdotium, i.e., the
episcopate], may enjoy the highest honour. For it is not fitting, nor does discipline or
good conversation allow to proceed to this act rashly or lightly, so as to ordain a bishop
or presbj^ter or deacon hastily ; as thus he would rightly be accounted a novice, especi-
ally since also the most blessed Apostle, he who was the teacher of the Gentiles, is seen
to have forbidden hasty ordinations ; for the test of [even] the longest period will not
unreasonably be required to exemplify the conversation and character of each [candi-
date] .

All said that this was their pleasure and that it must be absolutely irreversible.

(Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also I think it necessary for you to consider most care-
fully, that if perchance some rich man or professional advocate or ex-official be desired
for bishop, he be not ordained until he have fultilled the ministr}' of a reader and the
office of deacon and presbyter, and so ascend, if he have shown himself worthy, through
the several grades to the height of the ej)iscopate. For by these promotions which in
any case take a considerable length of time can be tested his faith, his discretion, his
gravity and modesty. And if he be found worthy, let him be honoured with the divine
sacerdotal office [i.e. the episcopate]. For it is not fitting, nor does order or discipline
allow, that one be rashly or lightly ordained bishop, presbyter or deacon, who is a
no\dce, especially since also the blessed Apostle, the teacher of the Gentiles, is seen
to have expressly forbidden it. But those [should be ordained] whose lite has been
tested and their merit approved by length of time.

All said that this was their pleasure.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon X, i of difficult causes, who being bound up in

No Icmnjer, teacher, or gentleman (TrAowto?) forensic disputes and strifes, may be presumed
shall be made a bishop tvit'hout passing through to be little fitted for the priesthood, and there-


the holy orders. Nor shall the space of time
between the orders be made too brief, that there
may be a. better proof of his faith and good con-
versation. For otherwise he is a neophyte.

This is Canon XIII. of Dionysius, Isidore,
and the Prisca.

Van Espen.

By Srholasticas de foro ["professional advo-
cate "] must be understood an eloquent pleader


fore to need a more strict examination.

The Synodal approbation is lacking in
Dionysius as given by Justellus, as well as in
that of the Roman Code, but is found in
Labbe's rej^rint of Dionysius and Isidore.

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P. I., Dist. Ixj.,
c. X.


CANON XI.

{Greeh)

Bishop Hosius said : This also we ought to decree, that ' when a bishop comes
from one city to another city, or from one province to another province, to indulge
boastfulness, ministering to his own praises rather than serving religious devotion, and
wishes to prolong his stay [in a city] , and the liishop of that city is not skilled in teach-
ing, let him [the visiting bishop] not do despite to the bishop of the place and attempt
by frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen his repute (for this device is wont to
cause tumults), and strive by such arts to solicit and wrest to himself another's throne,

' Here begins the Greek test, according to Bev.


426 SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


not scrupling to abandon the church committed to him and to procure transhitiou to
another. A delinite limit of time should therefore be set in such a case, especially since
not to receive a bishop is accounted the part of rude and discourteous persons. Ye
remember tlmt in former times our fathers decreed that if a layman were staying in a
city and should not come to divine worship for three [successivej Sundays [that isj, for
three [full] weeks, he should be repelled from communion. If then this has been de-
creed in the case of laymen, it is neither needful, nor fitting, nor yet even expedient
that a bishop, unless he has some grave necessity or diiHcult business, should be very
long absi^nt from his own church and distress the })eople committeil to hiui-
All the bishops said : We decide that this decree also is most proper.

(Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also ye ought to determine. If a bishop comes from
one citv to another city, or from his own province to another province, and serving am-
bition rather than devotion, wishes to remain resident for a long time in a strange city,
and then (as it perchance hapi)ens that the bishop of the place is not so practised or so
learned as himself) he, the stranger, should begin to do him despite and deliver fre-
quent discourses to disparage him and lessen his rejiuto, not hesitating by this device to
leave the church assigned him and remove to that which is another's — do ye then [in
such a case] set a limit of time [for his stay in the city J, because on the one hand to re-
fuse to receive a bishop is discourteous, and on the other his too long stay is mis-
chievous. Provision must be made against this. I remember that in a former coun-
cil our brethren decreed that if any layman did not attend divine ser^'ice in a city
in which he was staying three Sundays, that is, for three weeks, he should be deprived
of commimion. If then this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is far less law-
ful and fitting that a bishoj), if there be no grave necessity detaining him, should be ab-
sent from his church longer than the time above written.

All said that such was their pleasure.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XI.
A bishop ivhen called in by another bishop, if


Van Espen.
To understand this canon it must be again


he that called him is unskilled, mioit not be too remembered that in the first ages of the Church
assiduous in preaching, for this ivould be indcc- bishops were wont to be appointed at the de-
orous to the unlearned bishop, and an attack mand of the people ; wherefore whoever were
t(pon his bishopric. And both improper. With- going around after the episcopate, were ac-
out grave necessity it is undesirable for a bishop , customed to solicit the hearts of the people,

and to make it their study to win their affec-
tions.


to he absent from his church.

This is Canon XIV. of the Latin.


CANOX XII.


{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said : Since no case should be left unprovided for, let this also be
decreed.' Some of our brethren and fellow bishops are known to possess very little
private property in the cities in which they are placed as bishops, but have great
possessions in other places, vvith Avhich they are, mcn-eover, able to help the poor. I
think then permission should be given them, if they are to visit their estates and
attend to the gathering of the hai'vest, to pass three Sundays, that is, to stay for three
weeks, on their estates, and to assist at divine worship and celebrate the liturgy in the
nearest church in which a presbyter holds service, in order that they may not be seen
to be absent from worship, and in order that they may not come too frequently to the

' Here begins the Greek text according to Bev.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 ok 344 427

city in which there is a bishop. In this way their private afiairs will suffer no loss
from their absence and they will be seen to be clear from the charge of ambition and
arrogance.

All the bishops said : This decree also is approved by us.

{Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : Since no case should be left unprovided for [let this also be
decreed]. There are some of our brother-bishops, who do not reside in the city in
wdiich they are appointed bishops, either because they have but little property there,
while they are known to have considerable estates elsewhere, or, it may be, through
affection for kith and kin and in complaisance to these. Let this much be permitted
them, to go to their estates to superintend and dispose of their harvest, and [for this
purpose] to remain over three Sundays, that is, for three weeks, if it be necessary, on
their estates ; or else, if there is a neighbouring city in which there is a presbyter, in
order that they may not be seen to pass Sunday without church, let them go thither, so
that [in this way] neither wdll their private affairs suffer loss from their absence, nor
will they, by frequent going to the city in which a bishop is resident, incur the sus-
picion of ambition and place-seeking. All said that this was approved by them.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XII. for while the last canon decrees that no bishop

If a bishop has possessions outside his diocese, ': is to be absent from his diocese for more than

and visits them, let him be careful not to remain three Lord's days, without grave necessity, in

there more than three Lord's daijs. For thus his this canon a certain modification is introduced


oivnflocJiiviU be enriched by him, and lie himself
will avoid the charge of arrogance.

This is Canon XV. of the Latin.

Van Espen.
As Balsamon notes, this canon is an appen-


with regard to certain bishops.

Hefele.

According to the Latin text of Dionysius,
it is : " Some bishops do not reside in their
Cathedral town, etc." Isidore and the Prisca,
however, are nearer the Greek text, as in-


dix to that which goes before, and the context stead of resident they more rightly read possi-
of the canon indicates this clearly enough ; dent.


CANON xin.

(Greek.)

Bishop Hositjs said : Be this also the pleasure of all. ' If any deacon or presbyter
or any of the clergy be excommunicated and take refuge with another bishop w^ho
knows him and who is aware that he has been removed from communion by his owti
bishop, [that other bishop] must not offend against his brother bishop by admitting
him to communion.^ And if any dare to do this, let him know that he must present
himself before an assembly of bishops and give account.

All the bishops said : This decision will assure peace at all times and preserve the
concord of all.

{Lafi7i.)

Bishop Hosius said : Be this also the pleasui-e of all. If a deacon or presbyter or
any of the clergy be refused communion by his own bishop and go to another bishop,
and he with whom he has taken refuge shall know that he has been repelled by his own
bishop, then must he not grant him communion. But if he shall do so, let him know
that he must give account before an assembly of bishops.

All said : This decision will preserve peace and maintain concord.

1 Here begins the Greek text according to Bev., and ends at the asterisk.


428 SAUDICA. A.D. 343 ok 344


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XEQ.


Whoso knowingly admits to communion one


Van Espen.

The present canon agrees with Canon V.
of Nice and with Canon IV. of Autioch, on


excommunicated by his own bishop is not with- -vvliicli canons see the notes. The Synod's
out blame. approbation of this canon is fonnd in Diony-

sius, Isidore, and in the Roman Codex a/Jud
This is Canon XVI. of the Latin. Hervetus ; but it is lacking from Balsamon

I and Zonaras.

CANON XIV.

{Greek)

Bishop Hosk^s said : I must not fail to s]ieak of a matter which constantly urgeth
me.^ If a bishop be found quick to anger (which ought not to sway such a man), and
he, suddenly moved against a presbyter or deacon, be minded to cast him out of the
Church, provision must be made that such a one be not condemned too hastily [or read
d^coov, if innocent] and deprived of communion.

All said : Let him that is cast out be authorized to take refuge with the bishop of
the metropolis of the same province. And if the bishop of the metropolis is absent,
let him hasten to the bishop that is nearest, and ask to have his case carefully exam-
ined. For a liearing ought not to be denied those who ask it.

And that bishop who cast out such a one, justly or unjustly, ought not to take it ill
that examination of the case be made, and his decision confirmed or revised. But,
until all the particulars have been examined with care and fidelity, he who is excluded
from communion ought not to demand communion in advance of the decision of his
case. And if any of the clergy who have met [to hear the case] clearly discern arro-
gance and pretentiousness in him, inasmuch as it is not fitting to suffer insolence or
unjust censure, they ought to correct such an one with somewhat harsh and grievous
language, that men may submit to and obey commands that are proper and right. For
as the bishop ought to manifest sincere love and regard to his subordinates, so those
who are subject to him ought in like manner to perform the duties of their ministry in
sincerity towards their bishops.

(Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : I must not fail to speak of a matter which further moveth me.
If some bishop is joerchance quick to anger ( which ought not to be the case) and,
moved hastily and violently against one of his ])resbyters or deacons, be minded to
cast him out of the Church, provision must be made that an innocent man be not con-
demned or deprived of communion.

Therefoii^ let him that is cast out be authorized to appeal to the neighbouring
bishops and let his case be heard and examined into more diligently. For a hearing
ought not to be denied one who asks it.

And let that bishop who cast him out, justly or unjustly, take it patiently that the
matter is discussed, so that his sentence may either be approved by a number [of
judges] or else revised. Nevertheless, until all the ]>articulars shall be examined with
care and fidelity, no one else ought to presume to admit to communion him who was
excluded therefrom in advance of the decision of his case. If, however, those who
meet to hear it observe arrogance and pride in [such] clergy, inasmuch as it surely is
not fitting for a bishop to suffer wrong or insult, let them correct them with some
severity of language, that they may obey a bishop whose commands are proper and
right. For as he [the bishop] ought to manifest sincere love and charity to his
clergy, so his ministers ought for their part to render unfeigned obedience to their
bishop.

• The Greek text of Bev. begins here.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


■k-M


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.
One condemned out of anger, if he asks for as-
sistance, should be heard. But until [he shall
have asked for ^] the assistance let him remain
excomm unicated.

This is Canon XVII. of the Latin version.

Van Espen.
This canon is intended especially to aid
presbyters, deacons, and other clerics, who
have been excommunicated precipitately and
w^ithout just cause, or suspended by their own
bishop in his anger and fury. . . . The
canon, moreover, admonishes that the bishop
with regard to whose sentence the dispute
has arisen shall patiently consent to the dis-


cussion of the matter de novo, whether his
decision be sustained by the majority or
emended.

And let bishops and other prelates who
have spiritual jurisdiction over the clergy
note this, who cannot bear witli equanimity
that a word should be said against their de-
cisions, but exact a kind of blind obedience,
even frequently with great conscientious
suffering to their very best ecclesiastics ; and
in such cases as do not promptly and blindly
obey them, the clergy are traduced as rebels
and eve-n a patient hearing is refused to them.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canon id, Gvatisin's Dec return, P. II., Causa XL,
Q. iij., c. iv.


[After Canon XIV.]


CANON XVIII. {Of the Latin.)

*

Bishop Januarius said : Let your holiness also decree this, that no bishop be al-
lowed to try to gain for himself a minister in the church of a bishop of another city and
ordain him to one of his own parishes.

All said : Such is our pleasure, inasmuch as discord is apt to spring from contentions
in this matter, and therefore the sentence of us all forbids anyone to presume to do

NOTE.


Van Espen.

It is manifest that these two canons [xviii.
of the Latin and xv. of the Greek], contain
the resolution of the same case, and therefore
it is that the Greeks keep only the former


which contains the decree of the synod, made
on Hosius's motion, the suggestion having
been made by Jauuarius the bishop : which
suggestion makes the first of these canons.
[I.e. Latin canon xviij.]


CANON XV.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said : And let us all decree this also, that ^ if any bishop should
ordain to any order the minister of another from another diocese without the consent
of his own bishop, such an ordination should be accounted invalid and not confirmed.
And if any take upon themselves to do this they ought to be admonished and corrected
by our brethren and fellow-bishops.

All said : Let this decree also stand unalterable.

{Latin.)

Bishop Hosius said : This also we all decree, tliat if any [bishop] should ordain the
minister of another from another diocese without the consent and will of his own
bishop, his ordination be not ratified. And whoever shall have taken upon himself to
do this ought to be admonished and corrected by our brethren and fellow-bishops.


' This is the understanding of Beveridge's Latin. I should have I
supposed the words to be supplied were " the reception of." 1


" The Greek text of Bev. begins here.


430


SAKDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.
If one places a foreign minister ivithout the
knowlcdye of his oicn bishop in (iny grade (l/x^a^-
/u-ov, in aliqiio grdda), he has indeed made the
apjwintment, hut it is loithout force.

This is Canon XIX. in tlie Latin.

Hefele.
Fuclis, in his Bihliothel: der Kirrhenversamm-
tangrn (Pt. II., p. 123, note 125), thinks he
has discovered a difference between this can-
on and the exchisively Latin one preceding it,
in that tlie hitter supposes the case of a
bisliop ordaining a foreign cleric, over whom
he has no jurisdiction, to a higher grade,
with the view of retaining him for his own
diocese ; while the other — fifteenth or nine-
teenth canon — treats of a case wliere such an
ordination takes pLace without the ordaining
l)ishop intending to keep the person ordained
for his own diocese. Van Espen is of another
opinion, and maintains that both canons ob-
viouslv refer to one and the same case, for
which reason the Greek text has only inserted


one of them. It is certain that the text of
both canons, as we have it, does not clearly
indicate the difference conjectured by Fuchs,
but that it may easily be found there.

Van Espen.

If the reading of all the Latins and Greeks
is decisive, this canon only treats of the ordi-
nation of those already ministers or clerics,
and so the Greek commentators Balsanion,
Zonaras, and Aristenus understood it, as is
evident from their annotations. But Gratus,
Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of Africa, in
the First Synod of Carthage testitied tliat in
this canon it was decreed, that without the
licence of his own bishop, a layman of another
diocese was not to be ordained, and this inter-
pretation or rather extension of the Canon,
was received everywhere, as is demonstrated
h\ the fifty-sixth of the African Code.

This together with Canon XIX. of the

Latin text are found as one in the Corpus

Jirri'i Canon ici (Gratian's Decretum, P. I.,
Dist. Ixxj.), c. j.


CANON XVI.

(Greek.)

Bishop AiiTius said : Ye are not ignorant how important and how large is the metro-
politan city of Thessalonica. Accordingly presbyters and deacons often come to it from
other provinces and, not content with staying a short time, remain and make it their
permantnit place of residence, or are compelled with difficulty and after a very long de-
lay to return to their own churches. A decree should l)e made bearing on this matter.

Bishop Hosiiis said : Let those decrees which have been made in the case of
bishops, be observed as to these persons also.

(Latin.)

BiSHor At:tius said : Ye are not ignorant how large and important is the city of Thes-
salonica. Presbyters and deacons often come to it from other regions, and are not con-
tent to remain a short time, but either make their residence there or at least are with
difficulty compelled to return after a long interval to their own place.

All said : Those limits of time which have been decreed in the case of bishops
ought to be observed as to these persons also.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.
What things have been decreed for bishops with
regard to thr length of their absence, applies also
to presbyters and dcnrons.


Van Espen.
This canon needs no explanation.


' The reference is given incorrectly in the English Hefele.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344 431

CANON XVII.

(Greek.)

At the sii<jjgestion moreover of our brother Olympius, ' we are pleased to decree this
also : That if a bishop suffer violence aud is unjustly cast out either on account of his
discipline or for his confession of [the faith of j the Catholic Church or for his defence
of the truth, and, fleeing from danger, although innocent and devout [or, innocent and
being under charge of high treason], comes to another city, let him not be forbidden to
stay there until he is restored or until deliverance can be found from the violence and
injustice that have been done him. For it would be harsh indeed and most o])j)ressive
that one who has suffered unjust expulsion should not be harboured by us ; as such a
man ought to be received with the greatest consideration and cordiality.*

All said : This also is our pleasure.

{Latin.)

At the suggestion of our brother Olympius, we are pleased to decree this also : That
if any suffer violence and is unjustly cast out on account of his discipline and his
Catholic confession or for his defence of the truth, and, fleeing from dangers, although
innocent and devout, comes to another city, let him not be forbidden to stay there until
he can return or his wrong has been redressed. For it is harsh and unfeeling that he
who is suffering persecution should not be received ; indeed, great cordiality and abun-
dant consideration should be shown him.

All the synod said : All that has been decreed the Catholic Church spread abroad
throughout all the world will preserve and maintain.

And all the bishops of the various provinces who had assembled subscribed thus :

I, N., bishop of the city of N. and the province of N., so believe as above is written.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.


If a bishop goes info another province after
he has been m^'ustly expelled from his own, he
should be received, until he has been delivered
from his injury.


This is Canon XXI. of the Latin and the

last.

Van Espen.

St. Gregory seems to have had this canon
in mind when he wrote to the bishops of
Illyria (Lib. III., Ejnst. xliij.), who had been
cast out by the hostility of the barbarians.


CANON XVIII.

[Greek.)

Bishop Gaudentius said : Thou knowest, brother Aetius, that since thou wast
made bishop, peace hath continued to rule [in thy diocese]. In order that no remnants
of discord concerning ecclesiastics remain, it seems good that those who were ordained
by Musseus and by Eutychianus, provided no fault be found in them, should all be
received.

(This canon is wanting in the Latin.)

CANON XIX.

{Greek.)

Bishop Hosius said: This is the sentence of my mediocrity [i.e., un worthiness] —
that, since we ought to be gentle and patient and to be constant in compassion towards
all, those who were once advanced to clerical office in the Church by certain of our

' The Greek text of Bev. begins here and ends at the asterisk.


432 SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


brethren, if tliey are not williug to return to the churches to which they were nominated
[or, espoused], should for the future not be received, and that neither Eutychianus
shoukl continue to vindicate to himself the name of bishop, nor yet that Musieus be
accounted a bishop ; but that if they should seek for lay communion, it should not be
denied them.

All said : Such is our i)leasure.

(This canon is wanting in the Latin.)

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canons XVIII. and XIX. Both of these canons are lacking in the

Latin.


A clergifDirin who (Joes not live in the Church


Hefele.


among icfiose clrrcpj he is enrolled should not be it is clear that the reason why these two
receired. Eutijehian (ind Muscvus shall not hare canons do not exist in the Latin text is that


the name of bishops. But let them be admitted
to communion with the laity, if they wish,


I


they did not apply to the Latin Church and
only contained a special nile for Thessalonica.


CANON XX.

{Greek.)

Bishop Gaudentius said : These things wholesomely, duly, and fitly decreed, in the
estimation of us the bishops [joiv lepecov] such as are pleasing both to God and to man
will not be able to obtain due force and validity, unless fear [of a penalt}'] be added to
the decrees proclaimed. For we ourselves know that through the shamelessness of a
few, the divine and right reverend title of bishop [of the t)}^ tepwauuT]^] hath often come
into condemnation. If therefore any one, moved by arrogance and ambition rather than
seeking to please God, should have the hardihood to pursue a different course of action,
contrary to the decree of all, let him know beforehand that ho must give account and
defend himself on this charge, and lose the honour and dignity of the episcopate.

All answered : This sentence is proper and riglit, and such is our pleasure.^

And this decree will be most widely known and best carried into effect, if each of
those bishops among us Avho have sees on the thoroughfares or highway, on seeing a I
bishop [pass by] shall inquire into the cause of his passage and his place of destina- 1
tion. And if at his departure he shall find that he is going to the Court, he will direct I
his inquiries with reference to the objects [of a resort to the Court] above mentioned.
And if he come by invitation let no obstacle be put in the way of his departure. But if
he is trying to go to the Court out of ostentation, as hath afore been said by your
charity, or to urge the petitions of certain persons, let neither his letters be signed nor
let such an one be received to communion.

All said : Be this also decreed

(Latin.)

Bishop Gaudentius said : These things which you have wholesomely and suitably
provided [in your decrees] pleasing in [or, to] the estimation of all both \or, and] to
God and to men, can obtain force and validity only in case fear [of a penalty] be added
to this your action. For we ourselves know that through the shamelessness of a few the
sacred and veneraljU; sacerdotal [ — episcopal | name hath been many times and oft brought
to blame. If therefore anyom^ attempts to oppose the judgment of all and seeks to serve
ambition rather than ]>leas(; (rod, he must be given to know that he will have to render
an account and lose office and rank.

This can be carried into etfect only provided each of us whose see is on the highway
shall, if he sees a bishop ])ass, inquire into the cause of his jouraey, ascertain his desti-

• Here begins Canon xxj., according to the Greek text of Bev.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344


433


nation, and if be finds that he is on his wa}^ to the Conrt, satisfy himself as to what is con-
tained above [i.e., as to his objects at CourtJ, lest perhaps he has come by invitation, that
permission may be given him to proceed. If, however, as your holiness mentioned
above, he is going to Court to urge petitions and applications for office, let neither his
letters be signed nor let him be received to communion.

All said that this was proper and right and that this regulation was approved by
them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX. [the last part
of which in Beveridge, Si/nod., is numbered
xxj.]

If any bishop fries out of pride to do away tcith
what has been decreed admirably, and in a man-
ner pleasing to God, he shall lose his ejHscopate.
A bishop who shall see a bishop on his way to
the camp, if he shall hww that he goes therefor
any of the before-mentioned causes, let him not
trouble him, but if otherwise let him pronounce
excommimication against him.

This is Canon XI. of the Latin.

Van Espen.

After the words ["honour and dignity"]
according to Balsamou and Zonaras, as also
Gentian Hervetus. there follows tlie approba-
tion of the synod in these words : " All an-


swered, This opinion is becoming and well-
pleasing to us," which indicate this to be the
end of the canon ; and therefore the Greeks
make of this two distinct canons.

Dionysius and Isidore make but one canon,

and this appears to be more cougru-

otis on account of the subject-matter of the

first part, and will be manifest by connecting

the two parts together.

Van Espen follows Zonaras and Balsamon
in understanding "Bishops in Canali," as
such as were set on the public roads and
public highways, or rather " in cities which
are on the public highways, or ' Canals,' by
which they that pass go without labour, as in
a canal or aqueduct the water flows, for aque-
duct and canal are the same thing in the Ro-
man tongue."


[After Canon XX.]


' CANON XII. {Of the Latin Texts.)

Bishop Hosius said : But some discretion is here requisite, brethren dearly beloved,
in case some should come to those cities which are on the highway still ignorant of
what has been decreed in the council. The bishop of such a city ought therefore to
admonish him [a bishop so arriving], and instruct him to send his deacon from that
place. Upon this admonition he must, however, himself return to his diocese.


NOTES.


Van Espen.


This proposition of Hosius in the Roman
Codex is joined as an appendix to the preced-
ing^ canon. The Greeks omit it altogether.


canon, for no adoption by the synod is re-
corded : or else because, even if it were a de-
cree, it was only of temporary character, that
is to say, until the canons had been sufficient-
ly promulgated, and therefore some on the


very likely either because it seemed to be a ground of ignorance might be exempt from
proposition of Hosius's rather than a synodal the threatened penalties.


EXCURSUS ON THE OTHER ACTS OF THE COUNCIL.

As only the Canons have any real connexion with the Ecumenical Synods, they alone
have properly a place in this volume, and yet it may not be amiss to give a brief account of
the other acts of the council, so far as we know them.

(a) The Rale for Keeping Easter. — The Anglican Scholar, the Rev. William Cureton, of
the British Museum, first edited the then recently discovered Preface to the Paschal Letters


434


SARDICA. A.l). 343 or 344


of St. Atbanasius, together with the Letters themselves. The MS. which he then publisheLl
was in Syriac and was discoveretl in E<,'ypt. In the preface just referred to, it is expressly
stated that " a plan was agreed upon at Sardica with regard to the feast of Easter." But this
new plan, which was only expected to hold good for tifty years, failed, and altliough in
A.D. 346 Easter should have fallen on March 23d, yet the Council (so says St. Athanasius)
agreed to observe it on March 30tb. Another divergence fell in a.d. 341). Easter, Ijy the
Alexandrian calculation, would have been April 23d. But by Roman count, the origin of
which was attributed to St. Peter, Easter was never to be later than April 21st, and for the
sake of peace the Alexandrians yielded to the Romans and kept Easter on March 26th ; but
in 350, 360, and 368 the Alexandrian and Roman methods again disagreed, and even the fifty
years which Sardica had thought to ensure uniformity were marked by diverse usages.

(b) The Enci/rUcdl Letter. — The Council addressed a long Encyclical letter to all tlie
bishops of the world ; it is found in St. Athanasius' in Greek, in St. Hilary of Poictiers' in
Latin, and in Theodoret's Ecclcsi'isfical Risfori/.^ In this last there occurs at the end the so-
called " Creed of Sardica," which is now considered by scholars to be undoubtedly spurious.

(c) A Letter to the Diocese of Alexandria. — St. Athanasius^ gives us the Greek text of a let-
ter sent by the council to the diocese of Alexandria to the bishops of Egypt and Libya.

(d) A Letter to Pope Juliu'^. — Among the Fragments of St. Hilary^ is found a letter from
the synod to Pope Julius. Hefele says that the text is "considerably injured." One clause
of this letter above all others has given occasion to much controversy. The passage runs as
follows : "It was best and fittest that the priests [i.e., bishops] from all the provinces should
make their reports to the head, that is, the chair of St. Peter." Blondell declares the pas-
sage to be an interpolation, resting his opinion upon the barbarous Latin of the expression
valde congruentissitnum. And even Remi Ceillier, while explaining this by the supposition,
which is wholl}' gratuitous, that the original was Greek, yet is forced to confess that the sen-
tence interrupts the flow of thought and looks like an insertion. Bower,'^ in his History of
the Popes, and Fuchs" have urged still more strongly the spurious character of the phrase,
the latter using the convenient " marginal comment " explanation.

Besides these thei'e are three documents which Scipio Maffei discovered in MS. at
Verona, which by some are supposed to belong to the Council of Sardica.

(a) A Letter to the Christians of Mareotis.

(6) A Letter of St. Athanasius to the same Mareotic Churches. This letter is signed
not only by Athanasius, but also by a great number of the bishops composing the synod.

(c) A Letter from St. Athanasius to the Church of Alexandria.

On the authority to be attributed to these three documents I can do no better than
quote the closing words of Hefele,*^ whom I have followed in this whole excursus.

" These extracts shew, I think, quite sufficiently the spuriousness of these documents.
Is it possible that the Eusebians would have said of themselves : ' We are enemies of Christ? *
But aj^art from this, the whole contents of these three letters are lame and feeble. The con-
stant repetition of the same words is intolerable, and the whole style pointless and trivial.
To this it must be added that the whole of Christian antiquity knew nothing of these three
documents, which only exist in the codex at Verona, so that we cannot acknowledge them
as creiniine."


• Athanas. Apol. contra Ariaii., c. 44.

a nilar. Frarjm , t ii.. 12S3.

' Tlieodoret. Hist. Eccl, Lib. II., cap. 6

•• Athanap. Apnl. rtr. Arian.. c. 37, and again in chapter 41
(this last, which is really the same, is addressed to the bishops of
Egypt and Libya).


' Hilar. Fragment., Tom. ii.

« Howcr. Hist. Popes, in lor.

' Fnchs' liibiiuthe der Kirclicn vers., vol. ii., p. 128 (cit. by Ilef.)

" Uefele, UisUrry Councils, vol. ii., p. 166.


SARDICA. A.D. 343 or 344 435


EXCURSUS AS TO WHETHER THE SARDICAN COUNCIL WAS ECUMENICAL.

Some tlieologiaus and canonists have been of opinion that the Council of Sardica was
Ecumenical and would reckon it as the Second. But besides the fact that such a numbering
is absolutely in contrariety to all history it also labours under the difficulty, as Ave shall see
presently, that the Westerns by insisting that St. Athanasius should have a seat caused a
division of the synod at the very outset, so that the Easterns met at Philippopolis and con-
firmed the deposition of the Saint. It is also interesting to remember that when Alexander
Natalis in his history expressly called this synod ecumenical, the passage was marked with
disaj^proval by the Roman censors.

(Hefele. Hint. Councils. Vol. II., pp. 172 et seqq.)

The ecumenical character of this Synod certainly cannot be proved.^ It is indeed true
that it was the design of Pope Julius, as well as of the two Emperors, Constantius and Con-
stans, to summon a General Council at Sardica ; but we do not find that any such actually
took place : and the history of the Church points to many like cases, where a synod was
probably intended to be ecumenical, and yet did not attain that character. In the present
case, the Eastern and Western bishops were indeed summoned, but by far the greater num-
ber of the Eastern bishops were Eusebians, and therefore Semi-Arians, and instead of acting
in a better mind in union with the orthodox, they sej^arated themselves and formed a cabal
of their own at Philippopolis.

.We cannot indeed agree with those who maintain that the departure of the Eusebians in
itself rendered it impossible for the synod to be ecumenical, or it would be in the power of
heretics to make an Ecumenical Council possible or not. We cannot, however, overlook the
fact that, in consequence of this withdrawal, the great Eastern Church was far more poorly
represented at Sardica, and that the entire number of bishops present did not even amount
to a hundi'ed ! So small a number of bishops can only form a General Council if the great
body of their absent colleagues subsequently give their express consent to what has been
decided. This was not, however, the case at the Synod of Sardica. The decrees were no
doubt at once sent for accejotance and signature to the whole of Christendom, but not more
than about two hundred of those bishops who had been absent signed, and of these, ninety-
four, or nearly half, were Egyptians. Out of the whole of Asia only a few bishojas from the
I provinces of Cyprus and Palestine signed, not one from the other Eastern i:)rovinces ; and
even from the Latin Church in Africa, which at that time numbered at least three hundred
bishops, we meet with very few names. We cannot give much weight to the fact that the
Emperor Constantius refused to acknowledge the decrees of Sardica : it is of much greater
importance that no single later authority declared it to be a General Council. Natalis Alex-
ander- is indeed of opinion that because Pope Zosimus, in the year 417 or 418, cited the
fifth canon of Sardica as Nicene, and a synod held at Constantinople in 382 cited the sixth
as Nicene, the synod must evidently have been considered as an appendix to that of Nicea,
and therefore its equal, that is, must have been honoured as ecumenical. But we have
already shown how Zosimus and the bishops of Constantinople had been led into this con-
fusion from the defects of their manuscript collections of the canons. Athanasius, Sulpicius
Severus, Socrates, and the Emperor Jiastinian were cited in later times for the ecumenical
character of this synod. Athanasius calls it a fjceydXr) o-woSo? ; Sulpicius Severus says it was
ex toto orbe convocata ; and Socrates relates that "Athanasius and other bishops had demanded
an Ecumenical Synod, and that of Sardica had been then summoned.^ It is clear at the first

J Hefele refers to his having himself treated thie matter fully in 1 =Nat Alex. H. E., sec. iv., Diss, xxvij., Art. 3.

the Theologischer Quartalschrift of Tuhingen, 1852. | 'Socrates. B. £., Lib. ii., cap. 20.


436 SARDICA. A.D. 343 oh 344


glance that the two last authorities only prove that the Synod had been intended to be a
general one, and the expression " Great Synod," used by Athanasius, cannot be taken as
simply identical with ecumenical. While, however, the Emperor Justinian, in his edict of
346, on the Three Chapters, calls the Synod of Sardica ecumenical, he yet, in the same edict,
as well as in other places, does not reckon it among the General Councils, of which he counts
four. To this must be added, first, that the Emperor is not the authority entitled to decide
as to the character of an Ecumenical Synod ; and sect)ndly, that the expression Universale
Concilium was employed in a wider sense in speaking of those synods which, without being
general, represented a whole patriarchate.

The Trullan Synod and Pope Nicholas I. are further appealed to. The former in its
second canon approved of the Sardican canons, and Pope Nicholas said of them: " omnis
Ecclesia recepit eo.-^." But this in no way contains a declaration that the SjTiod of Sardica was
ecumenical, for the canons of many other councils also — for instance, Ancyra, Neocoesarea,
and others — were generally received without those synods themselves being therefore
esteemed ecumenical. Nay, the Trullan Synod itself speaks for us ; for had it held the
Synod of Sardica to be the second General Council, it would have placed its canons immedi-
ately after those of Nice, Avhereas they are j^laced after the four ancient General Councils,
and from tliis we see that the Trullan Synod did not reckon the Sardican among those
councils, but after them. To this it must be added that the highest Church authorities
speak most decidedly against the synod being ecumenical. We ma}- appeal first to Augus-
tine, who only knew of the Eusebian assembly at Sardica, and nothing at all of an orthodox
synod in that place ; which would have been clearly impossible, if it had at that time been
counted among the ecumenical synods. Pope Gregory the Great ' and St. Isidore of Seville^
speak still more plainly. They only know of four ancient General Councils — those of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. The objection of the Ballerini that Gregoiy and
Isidore did not intend to enumerate the most ancient general synods as such, but only those
w^hich issued important dogmatic decrees, is plainly quite arbitraiy, and therefore without
force. Under such circumstances it is natural that among the later scholars by far the
great majority should have answered the question, whether the Synod of Sardica is ecumen-
ical, in the negative, as have Cardinal Bellarmin, Peter de Marca, Edmund Richer, Fleury,
Orsi, Sacharelli, Tillemont, Du Pin, Berti, Ruttenstock, Rohrbacher, Remi Ceillier, Stolberg,
Neander, and others. On the other hand, Baronius. Natalis Alexander, the brothers Ballerini,
Mansi, and Palma-' have sought to maintain the ecumenical character of the synod, but as
early as the seventeenth century the Roman censors condemned the direct assertions of
Natalis Alexander on the subject.


'Greg M. Lib. ii., Epist. 10 | ' Jno. Bapt. Palina. PrreJeclinnes Hisl. Eccl. quas in Collegia

^ Isidor. Hispal. i7j/motoi/., Lib. vn., cap. IG. \ Urbaiiohabuit. Rome, 1S38. Tom. i., P. ii., p. 85.


THE CANONS OF THE CCXVH BLESSED FATHERS WHO

ASSEMBLED AT CARTHAGE.

COMMONLY CALLED

THE CODE OF CANONS OF THE AFRICAN CHURCH.

A.U. 419

Elenchus.
Introductory Note. The Canons ivitli the Ancient Epitome and Notes.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

An attempt to wi'ite a commentary' upon all the canons of the African Code, would have
meant nothing less tlian the prej^aration of one volume or more on the canon law of the
West. This is impossible and therefore, interesting as the field would be, I have been com-
pelled to restrain my pen, and rather than give a scant and insufficient annotation, I have
contented myself with providing the reader with as good a translation as I have been able
to make of the very corrupt Latin (correcting it at times by the Greek), and have added the
Ancient Epitome and the quaint notes in full of Jolni Johnson from the Second Edition, of
1714, of his " Clergyman's Vade-mecum," Pt. XL, which occupy little space, but may not
be easily reached by the ordinary reader. The student Avill find full scholia on these Canons
in Van EsjDen in the Latin, and in Zonaras and Balsamon in the Greek. These latter are in
Beveridge's S>i)wdicon.

Johnson writes an excellent Introduction to his Epitome of these Canons, as follows :

" Councils were nowhere more frequently called in the Primitive Times than in Africa.
In the year 4:18-19, all canons formerly made in sixteen councils held at Carthage, one at
Milevis, one at Hippo, that were approved of, were read, find received a new sanction from
a great number of bishops, then met in synod at Carthage. This Collection is the Code of
the African Church, which was always in greatest repute in all Churches next after the Code
of the Universal Church. This code was of very great authority in the old English Clnirches,
for many of the Excerptions of Egbert were transcribed from it. And though the Code of
the Universal Church ends with the canons of Chalcedon,' yet these African Canons are
inserted into the Ancient Code both of the Eastern and Western Churches. These canons
though ratified and approved by a synod, yet seem to have been divided or numbered by
some private and unlearned hand, and have probably met with very unskilful transcribers,
by which means some of them are much confounded and oliscured, as to their sense and
coherence. They are by Dionysius Exiguus and others entituled The Canons of the St/nod
of Africa. And though all were not originally made at one time, yet they were all confirmed
by one synod of African bishops, who, after they had recited the Creed and the twenty can-
ons of the Council of Nice, proceeded to make new canons, and re-enforce old ones."

In his " Library of Canon Law " (Bihliotheca Juris Crrnoniei) Justellus gives these canons,
and, in my opinion, gives them rightly, the title " The Code of Canons of the African
Church '■ {Codex Canonum Ecclesioe Africance), although Hefele- describes them as " the col-
lection of those African Canons put together in 419 by Dionysius Exiguus." Hefele says
that the title Dionysius gave them in his collection was " The Statutes of an African Coun-
cil" {Sfatuta Concilii Africani) which would certainly be wholly inadequate and mislead-
ing; but in the edition of Dionysius in Migne's Fafrolof/ia Latina (Tom. LXVIL, col. 181)
in the Codex Canonum Ecelesiasficorxni no such title occurs, but the perfectly accurate one,
" A Synod at Carthage in Africa, which adopted one hundred and thirty-eight canons." This
is an exact description of what took jjlace and of the origin of these most important dog-
matic and disciplinary enactments. Hefele must have been thinking of Dionysius's Pre-
face where the expression does occur l)ut not as a title.

(Beveridge. Si/nodicuii, Tom. II., p. 202.)
Cartilage was formerly the head of the whole of Africa, as St. Augustine tells us in his
Epistle CLXII. From this cause it happened that a great number of councils were held

' I do jiot understand what Johnson means by this statement. Vide Can. j. of Chalcedon.
'^ Uefele. Hist, of the Councils, vol. ii., p. 468, Note 1.


AFEICAN CODE. A.D. 419 439

there, gathered from all the provinces of Africa. Especially while Aurelius as Archbishop
was occupying the throne were these meetings of bishops frequently holden ; and by these,
for the establishing of ecclesiastical discipline in Africa, many canons were enacted. At last,
after the consulate of Honorius (XII.) and Theodosius (VIII. ), Augustuses, on the eighth
day before the Calends of June, that is to say, on May 25, in the year of our Lord 419,
another Council was held in the same city at which all the canons previously adopted were
considered, and the greater part of them were again confirmed by the authority of the
synod. These canons, thus confirmed by this council, merited to be called from that day
to this " The Code of Canons of the African Church." These canons Avere not at first adopted
in Greek but in Latin, and they were confirmed in the same language. This Dionysius
Exiguus distinctly testifies to in his preface to the "Code of Ecclesiastical Canons," in which
they are included. It is uncertain when the canons of this Carthaginian synod were done
into Greek. This only is certain, that they had been translated into Greek before the Coun-
cil in Trullo by which, in its Second Canon, they were received into the Greek Nomocanon,
and were confirmed by the authority of this synod ; so that from that time these canons
stand in the Eastern Chui'ch on an equality with all the rest.

An extremely interesting point arises as to what was the authority of the collection as a
collection, and how this collection was made ? There seems no doubt that the collection
substantially as we know it was the code accepted by the Council of Trullo, the canons of
which received a quasi-ecumenical authority from the subsequent general imprimatur given
them by the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second of Nice. Van Espen has considered
this point at great length in Dissertation VIII. of the First Part of his Commentaries, and to
his pages I must refer the reader for anything like an adequate presentation of the matter.
He concludes (§1.) that the "Code owes its origin to this synod," and argues against De
Marca in proof of the proposition that the collection was not the private work of DiouA'sius,
but the official work of the council b}- one of its officials, concluding with the remark (§ II.)
that "this was the persuasion both of Greeks and Latins, . . . and these canons are set
forth by Balsamon with the title, 'The Canons of the CCXVII. Blessed Fathers who met
together at Carthage,'"

In the notes on each canon I shall give the source, following Hefele in all respects (Hist
of the Councils, vol. ii., pp. 468 et seqq.), and content myself here with setting down a list of
the various councils which made the enactments, with their dates.

A.D.

Carthage (under Gratus) 345-348

(under Genethlius) 387 or 390

Hippo 393

L Carthage 394

II " (June 26) 397

III. " (August 28) 397

IV. " (April 27) 399

V " (June 15) 401

VL "■ (September 13) 401

VII. Milevis (August 27) 402

Vin. Carthage (August 25). 403

IX. " (June) 404

X. ''■ (August 25) 405

XL " (June 13) 407

XII. and XIII. Carthage (June 16 and October 13) 408


440 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

A.D.

XIV. Carthage (June 15) 409

XV. " (June 14) 410

XVI. " (May 1) 418

XVII. " (May 25) which adopted the African Code 419

The numbering of the African councils difters very widely between the different writers,
and Cave reckon.s nine between 401 and 008, and thirty-tive Carthaginian between 215 and
533.' Very useful tables, shewing the conclusions of Fuchs, are found at the end of
Bruus, Canoncs Apostoloruni et Conciliorum Veterum Sekcti.

I need only add that I have frequently used Dr. Bruns's text, but have not confined
myself to it exclusively. Evidently in the Latin, as we now have it, there are many corrupt
passages. In strange contradistinction to this, the Greek is apparently pure and is clear
throughout. Possibly the Greek translation was made from a j)urer Latin text than we
now possess.

AN ANCIENT INTRODUCTION.

(Found in Dionysius Exiguus, Codex Can. Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. Ixvii., col, 182.)

After the consulate of the most glorious emperors, Honorus for the twelfth time and
Theodosius for the eighth time, Augustuses, on the VIII. before the Calends of June at
Carthage, in the Secretarium of the basilica of Faustus, when Pope Aurelius had sat down,
together Avith Valentine of the primatial see of the province of Numidia, and Faustinus of
the Potentine Church, of the Italian province Picenum, a legate of the Roman Church, and
also with legates of the different African provinces, that is to say, of the two Numidias, of
Byzacena, of Mauritania Cjcsariensis, as well as of Tripoli, and with Vincent Colositanus,
Fortunatian, and other bishops of the proconsular province, in all two hundred and seven-
teen, also with Philip and Asellus, presbyters and legates of the Roman Church, and while
the deacons were fjtanding by, Avirelius the bishop said, etc., ut infra.


' For this Btateineot I am indebted to Mr. Ffoulkes in art. " African CouncilB." Smith and Cheetham, Diet. Christ. Antiq.


THE CANONS OF THE 217 BLESSED FATHERS WHO ASSEMBLED AT

CAETHAGE.

(Labbe and Cossart : Concilia, Tom. IL, Col. 1041 ; Dionysius Ex., Codex Can, Eccles.
[Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. LXVII.] ; Beveridge, Synodicon in loc.)

AuRELius THE BisHOP Said : ' You, most blessed brethren, remember that after the day
fixed for the s}Tiod we discussed many things while we were waiting for our brethren
who now have been sent as delegates and have arrived at the present synod, which
must be placed in the acts. Wherefore let us render thanks to our Lord for the gather-
ing together of so great an assembly. It remains that the acts of the Nicene Synod
which we now have, and have been determined by the fathers, as well as those things
enacted by our predecessors here, who confirmed that same Synod, or which according
to the same form have been usefully enacted by all grades of the clergy, from the highest
even to the loAvest, should be brought forward. The whole Council said : Let them be
brought forward.

Daniel the Notary read : The profession of faith or statutes of the Nicene Synod
are as follows.

And while he was speaking, Faustinus, a bishop of the people of Potentia, of the
Italian province of Picenum, a legate of the Roman Church said : There have been en-
trusted to us by the Apostolic See certain things in writings, and certain other things
as in ordinances to be treated of with your blessedness as we have called to memory in
the acts above, that is to saj^, concerning the canons made at Nice, that their decrees
and customs be observed ; for some things are observed out of decree and canon, but
some from custom. Concerning these things therefore in the first place let us make en-
quiry, if it please your blessedness ; and afterwards let the other ordinances Avhich
have been adopted or proposed be confirmed ; so that you may be able to show by your
rescripts to the Apostolic See, and that you may declare to the same venerable Pope,
that we have diligently remembered these things ; although the headings of action
taken had been already inserted in the acts.'^ In this matter we should act, as I have
said above, as shall please your beloved blessedness. Let, therefore the commonito-
rium come into the midst, that ye may be able to recognize what is contained in it, so
that an answer can be given to each point.

Aurelius said : Let the commonitorium be brought forward, which our brethren
and fellow-ministers lately placed in the acts, and let the rest of the things done or to
be done, follow in order.

Daniel the Notary read the Commonitorium. To our brother Faustinus and to our
sons, the presbyters Philip and Asellus, Zosiinus, the bishop. You well remember
that we committed to you certain businesses, and now [we bid you] carry out all things
as if we ourselves were there (for), indeed, our presence is there with you ; especially
since ye have this our commandment, and the words of the canons which for greater cer-
tainty we have inserted in this our commonitory. For thus said our brethren in the
Council of Nice when they made these decrees concerning the appeals of bishops :

" But it seemed good that if a bishop had been accused, etc." [Here follows verba-
tim Canon v. of Sardica.']

heniqnantly heard, the Roman hishoj) ivriting or
ordering.


Ancient Epitome.


If bishops shall hare deposed a bishop, and if
he appeal to the Roman bishop, he should be

And when this had been read, Alypius, bishop of the Tagastine Church, and legate
of the province of Numidia, said : On this matter there has been some legislation


1 The reader must not complain if he finds the meaning of the
translation often obscure. So great a scholar as Hefele says of
one of these speeches, " This. I believe, must be the meaning of
the somewhat unintelligible text, etc.," and again of another pas-


in


sage he says that it " is even more obscure." and that " the text ie
undoubtedly corrupt. The sense is probably, etc."

2 1 have followed in this passage the Greek text as a trifle less
incomprehensible.


442 AFRICAN CODE. A. P. 419


former sessions of our council, and we profess that we shall ever observe what was de-
creed by the Niceue Council ; yet I remember that when we examined the (heek
copies of this Nicene Synod, we did not find these the words quoted — Why this was the
case, I am sure I do not know. For this reason we beg your reverence, holy Po})e
Aurelius, that, as the authentic record of the decrees of the Council of Nice are said to be
preserved in the city of Constantinople, you would deign to send messengers with
letters from your Holiness, and not only to our most holy brother the bishop of Con-
stantinople, but also to the venerable bisho})s of Alexandria and Antiocli, who shall
send to us the decrees of that council witli the authentitieation of their signatures, so
that hereafter all ambiguity should be taken away, for we failed to find the words cited
by our brother Faustinus ; notwithstanding this however Ave promise to be ruled by
them for a short time, as I have already said, until reliable copies come to hand.
Moreover the venerable l)ishop of the lloman Church, Boniface, should be asked like-
wise to be good enough to send messengers to tlu^ aforementioned chui'chcs, who should
have the same copies according to his rescri})t, but the copies of the aforementioned
Nicene Council which we have, we place in these Acts.

Faustinus tlu; bishop, legate of the Uoman Church, said: Let not your holiness do
dishonour to the l\oman Church, either in this matter or in any other, by saying the
canons are doubtful, as our brother and fellow-bishop Alypius has vouchsafed to say :
but do you deign to write these things to our holy and most blessed pope, so that he
seeking out the genuine canons, can ti'(>at with your holiness on all matters decreed.
But it sufhccs that the most blessed bishop of tlu; city of liome should make enquiry
just as 3-our holiness proposes doing on your part, that there may not seem to have arisen
any contention between the Churches, but that ye may the rather be enabled to deliberate
with fraternal charity, when he has been heard from, what is best should be observed.

Aurelius the bishop said: In addition to what is set down in the acts, we, by the
letters from our insignificance, must more fully inform our holy brother and fellow-bishop
Boniface of everything which we have considered. Therefore if our ])lan pleases all,
let us be informed of this by the mouth of all. And the whole council said : It seems
good to us.

Novatus the bishop, legate of Mauritania Sitifensis, said : AVe now call to mind that
there is contained in this commonitory something about presbyters and deacons, how
they should be tried by their own bishops or by those adjoining, a provision which we
find nothing of in the Nicene Council. For this cause let your holiness order this part
to be read.

Aurelius the bishop said : Let the place asked for be read. Daniel the notary read
as follows : Concerning the apjieals of clergymen, that is of those of inferior rank, there
is a sure answer of this very synod, concerning which thing what ye should do, we think
should be inserted, as follows :

" Hosius the bishop said : I should not conceal Avhat has come into my mind up to
this time. If any bishop ])erchance has been quickly angered (a thing what should not
ha]ipen) and has acted quickly or sharjily against a ])resbyter or a deacon of his, and
has wished to drive him out of the Church, provision should be made that the innocent
be not condemned, or be de]irived of communion : he that has been ejected should have
the right of appeal to the bishops of the bordering dioceses, that his case slumld be
heard, and it should be carried on all the more diligently because to him who asks a
hearing it should not be denied. And the l)ishop who either justly or unjustly rejected
him, should patiently allow the affair to be discussed, so that his sentence be either ap-
proved or else emended, etc."

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome. j This is the first part of Canon xiv. of Sar-

A pra^bytpr or flearon jvJio has been cut off, dica. as tlie canon previously quoted is Canon
has tlie privAJegc of (ippealiini to the neighbouring "^'- of the same synod.
bi^hop^. Moreover, he ivho eut him off should
bear ivith equaniinitij the conclusion arrived at. '


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


443


And when this had been read, Augustine, the bishop of the Church of Hippo of the
province of Niimidia, said : We promise that this shall be observed by us, provided that
upon more careful examination it be found to be of the Council of Nice. Aurelius the
bishop said. If this also is pleasing to the charity of you all, give it the confirmation of
your vote. The whole Council said : Everything that has been ordained by the Nicene
Council pleases us all. Jocundus, the bishop of the Chui'ch of Suffitula, legate of the
province of Byzacena, said : What was decreed by the Nicene Council cannot in any
particular be violated.

Faustiuus the bishop, legate of the Roman Church, said : So far as has developed
by the confession of your holiness as well as of the holy Alypius, and of our brother Jo-
cundus, I believe that some of the points have been made weak and others confirmed,
which should not be the case, since even the very canons themselves have been brought
into question. Therefore, that there may be harmony betAveeu us and your blessedness,
let your holiness deign to refer the matter to the holy and venerable bishop of the Ro-
man Church, that he may be able to consider whether what St. Augustine vouchsafed to
enact, should be conceded or not, I mean in the matter of appeals of the inferior grade.
If therefore there still is doubt, on this head it is right that the bishop of the most
blessed see be informed, if this can be found in the canons which have been approved.


Ancient Epitome.
Since the written decrees of the Nicene Council
have not been found, let the Roman bishop deign


to xvrite to the bishop of Coyistantinople and to
him of Alexandria, ojid let us Icnoiv whcd he re-
ceives from them.


Aurelius the bishop said : As we have suggested to your charity, pra}' allow the
copies of the statutes of the Nicene Council to be read and inserted in the acts, as well as
those things what have been most healthfully defined in this city by our predecessors,
according to the rule of that council, and those which now have been ordained by us.
And the whole council said : The copies of the Creed, and the statutes of the Nicene
Synod which formerly were brought to our council through Csecilean of blessed mem-
ory, the predecessor of your holiness (who was present at it), as well as the copies of
the decrees made by the Fathers in this city following them, or which now we have de-
creed by our common consultation, shall remain inserted in these ecclesiastical acts, so
that (as has been already said) your blessedness may vouchsafe to write to those most
venerable men of the Church of Antioch, and of that of Alexandria, and also of that of
Constantinople, that they would send most accurate copies of the decrees of the Council
of Nice under the authentificatiou of their signatures, by which, the truth of the matter
having become evident, those chapters which in the commonitory our lirother who is
present, and fellow-bishop Faustinus, as well as our fellow-presbyters Philip and Asel-
lus brought with them, if they be found therein, may be confirmed by us ; or if they be
not found, we will hold a synod and consider the matter further. Daniel the notary
read the profession of faith of the Council of Nice and its statutes to the African
Council.


Tlie Profession of Faith of the Nicene Council.
We believe in one God, etc., . . . and in the Holy Ghost,
etc., . . . anathematize them.


But those who say,


The statutes also of the Nicene Council in twenty heads were likewise read, as are
found written before. Then what things were promulgated in the African Synods, were
inserted in the present acts.


444 AFRICAX CODE. A.D. 419

CANON I.

TTiat the statutes of the Nicene Council are to be scrupulously observed.

AuRELius the bishop said : Such are the statutes of the Niceue Council, which our
fathers at that time brought back with them : and preserving this form, let these things
which follow, adopted and confirmed by us, be kei)t firm.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon I.


Let the copies of the decrees of the Nicene
Council ichirh our fathers In-ouyht back with
them from that synod, be observed.


Johnson.
It is certain that C?ecilian, then Bishop of
Carthage, was present at the Council of Nice ;
that any other African bishop was there does
not ai)pear ; but prolial)ly he was attended
with several clergyman, who were afterwards
ordained bishops.


CANON II.

Of Preaching the Trinity.

The whole Council said : By the favour of God, by a unanimous confession the
Chui'ch's faith which through us is handed down should bo confessed in this glorious
assembly before anything else ; then the ecclesiastical order of each is to be built up
and strengthened by the consent of all. That the minds of our brethren and fellow
bishops lately elevated may be strengthened, those things should be propounded which
we have certainly received from our fathers, as the unity of the Trinity, which we retain
consecrated in our senses, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which
has no dilference, as Ave say,^ so we shall instruct the people of God. Moreover by all
the bishops lately promoted it was said : So we openly confess, so we hold, so we
teach, following the Evangelic faith and your teaching.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon II.
No difference is recognised or tuught hg the


decrees of the Council of Nice between the Per
sons of the Holy Trinity.


This canon, or rather introduction, is taken
from Canon j., of tlie Council of Carthage
held under Genethlius, a.d. 387 or 390.^


• CANON III.

Of Continence.

AuRELius the bishop said: When at the past council the matter on contiuencj- and
chastity was considered, those three grades, wliich by a sort of bond are joined to chas-
tit}' by their consecration, to wit bishops, presbyters, and deacons, so it seemed that it
was becoming that the sacred rulers and ]n-iests of God as well as the Levites, or those
who served at the divino sacraments, should be continent altogether, by which they
would be able with singleness of heart to ask what they sought from the Lord : so that
what the apostles taught and antiquity kept, that we might also keep.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon III.

Let a bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon be
chaste and conlin<')it.


This canon is taken from Canon ij., of
Carthage 387 or 390,


In assigrning these canons to the several sj-nods that adopted them, I have pimply followed Hefele. ' Or " have learned."


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


445


CANON IV.

Of the different oi'ders that should abstain from their ivives.

Faustinus, the bishop of the Potentiue Church, in the province of Picenum, a
legate of the Roman Church, said : It seems good that a bishoj), a presbyter, and a
deacon, or whoever perform the sacraments, should be keepers of modesty and should
abstain from their wives.

By all the bishops it was said : It is right that all who serve the altar should keep
pudieitv from all women.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.

Let those tvho pray abstain from their wives
that they may obtain their petitions.


This canon is taken from Canon
Carthage 387 or 390, last mentioned.


!]•


of


Johnson.

See Canon XXV. " Abstain from their
wives," i.e. Some time before and after the
Eucharist, as the old Scholiasts understand
it. [i.e. the Greek scholiasts, but see notes to
Canon xiij. of Quinisext.]


CANON V.

Of Avarice.

AuRELius, the bishop, said : The cupidity of avarice (which, let no one doubt, is the
mother of all evil things), is to be henceforth prohibited, lest anyone should usurp an-
other's limits, or for gain should pass beyond the limits fixed by the fathers, nor shall it
be at all lawful for any of the clergy to receive usury of any kind. And those new edicts
{suggest iones) which are obscure and generally ambiguous, after they have been ex-
amined by us, wall have their value fixed (formam accijjiunt) ; but with regard to those
upon which the Divine Scripture hath already most plainly given judgment, it is un-
necessary that further sentence should be pronounced, but what is already laid down is
to be carried out. And what is reprehensible in laymen is worthy of still more severe
censure in the clerg}'. The whole synod said : No one hath gone contrary to what is
said in the Prophets and in the Gospels with impunity.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.

As the talcing of any kind of usury is con-
demned in laymen, much more is it condemned
in clergymen. |

This canon is made up of Canons x. and
xiij. of the Synod of Carthage held under
Gratus in a.d. 345-348. This synod was held
to return thanks for the endingf of the Do-


evil did seem to have been removed. Dona-
tist worship was prohibited by the imperial
law and it was not until the times of Con-
stans and Coustantius that it again oj^enly
asserted itself. The synod while in session
also took advantage of the opportunity of
passing some useful general canons on dis-
cipline.

Johnson.

natist schism ; and indeed for some time the ! See Canon of the Apostles 36 (44) ; Nic, 17.


CANON VI.

That the chrism should not be made by presbyters.

FoRTUNATUs the bishop, said : In former councils we remember that it was decreed
that the chrism or the reconciliation of penitents, as also the consecration of virgins be
not done by presbyters : but should anyone be discovered to have done this, what
ought we to decree with regard to him ?

Aurelius the bishop said : Your worthiness has heard the suggestion of our brother
and fellow-bishop Fortunatus ; What answer wiU you give ?


446 AFKICAN CODE. A.D. 419


And all the bishops rej^lied : Neither the making of the chrism, nor the consecra-
tion of virgins, is to be done by presbyters, nor is it permitted to a presbyter to recon-
cile anyone in the public mass {in publicn missa), this is the pleasure of all of us.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VI.


Let no presbyter make the chrism, nor prepare


viz., that used at Coulirmatiou ; though
neither was the chrism used at baptism to
be consecrated by Priests. See Deer, of


tlie uiicthm, nor consecrate virgins, nor publicly r>f,iosiiiVr

reconcile anyone to communion. , j^;^ Pi,/ observes, That this is one of the

first monuments where the name of " mass "
This is Canon iij. of the Carthaginian Syn- occurs to signify tlie public ]u-ayers. wliich


the church made at offering the Eucharist.
And let the reader obsei've, that there is no
mention of the " mass " in the co2)ies which
the Greeks made use of. And further, he
restrains the meaning of the word " mass "
too much, W'hen he suj^poses that it denoted


od under Genethlius, a.d. 387 or 390.

Johnson.

Not the chrism used upon persons at theii*
baptism, says the scholiou in Bishop Bever-
idges Annotation, but the Mystical Chrism, ' the Communion Office only.

CANON VII.

Concerning those loho are reconciled in peril of death.

AuRELius the bishop said : If anyone had fallen into peril of death diiring the ab-
sence of the bishop, and had scmght to reconcile himself to the divine altars, the pres-
byter should consult the bisho}), and so reconcile the sick man at his bidding, which
thing we should strengthen with healthy counsel. By all the bishops it was said;
Whatever your holiness has taught us to be necessary, that is our pleasure.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon VII. This is Canon iv. of the SA-nod of 387 or

A priest desiring to reconcile anyone in peril 390.
to the sacred altars must consult the bishopt and Johnson.

do what seems good to him. I See Canon 43.

CANON VIII.

Of those who make accusation against an elder ; and that no criminal is to he suffered
to bring a charge cujainst a bishop.

NuMiDiUs, the bishop of Maxula, said : Moreover, there are very many, not of good
life, mIio think that their elders or bisho])s should be the; butt for accusation ; ought
such to be easily admitted or no? Aurelius the bishop said : Is it the pleasure of your
charity that he who is ensnared by divers wickednesses should have no voice of accu-
sation against these?

All the bisho]is said : If he is criminous, his accusation is not to be received.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII. , Johnson.

It has scrmcd good that Ihof irho are them- \ See Canons 132 and 133 and Constantinople
selves defendants for C7'imes should not briny Canon G.
accusations; nor should they be alloioed to lay

crimes to anyone's charge. [The " ciders " mentioned in this canon

are] probabl}' the same with senes in other

This is Canon vi. of Genethlius's Synod at canons, viz., Meti'opolitans, as is generally

Carthage, a.d. 387 or 390. I believed. The Latin here calls them Majores


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. -ilO


447


n(ttu, the Greek iraripa^. Bislioi? Beveridge
sujiposes that the word denotes bisho2), though
perhaps 2Iujorcs natu may signify presbyters.


Justellus on the canon j^roduces some seem-


ing authorities for this.


CANON IX.

Of those loho on account of their deeds are justly cast forth from the congregation of
the Church.

Augustine the bishop, the legate of the Numidian province, said : Deign to enact
that if any perchance have been rightly on account of their crimes cast forth from the
Church, and shall have been received into communion by some bishop or presbyter,
such shall be considered as guilty of an equal crime with them who Hee away from the
judgment of their own bishop. And all the bishops said ; This is the pleasure of
all of us.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.
Let him be excommunicated who communi-
cates with one excommunicated.


This is Canon vii. of the same synod of
387 or 390.


CANON X.

Of presbyters loho are corrected by their oivn bishops.

Alypkts the bishop, a legate of the province of Numidia, said : Nor should this be
passed over ; if by chance any presbyter when corrected by his bishop, inflamed by
self-conceit or pride, has thought fit to offer sacrifices to God separately [from the
authority of the bishop] or has believed it right to erect another altar, contrary to
ecclesiastical faith and discipline, such should not get off with impunity. Valentine,
of the primatial see of tlie province of Numidia, said : The propositions made by our
brother xllypius are of necessity congruous to ecclesiastical discipline and faith ; there-
fore enact what seems good to your belovediiess.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


NOTES.

I himself from the Church, and shall set up


7-/. J 7 ; ; • 7 ■ ; 7 77 . auother altar, and shall offer to God the holy

If one conae)}inea oil his bishon shall separate .,, i i n . i n i .


himself and set up an altar or make the offering ■ '^
he should be punished.


Aristenus.


gifts ; such an one shall not be allowed to go
on with impunity, since he is acting contrary
to the faith and constitution of the Church ;
but he is to be stricken with anathema.


Whoever has been cut off by his own bishop
and does not go to the synod to which his
bishop is subject, that an examination may be q^ 399
made of the grounds of his cutting off, and
that whatever is contrary to justice may be
corrected ; but, puffed up with pride and con


This and the following canon are Canon
viii. of the so often mentioned synod of 387


Johnson.


ceit, shall despise the synod and separate that of Gangra 6.


See Canon of the Apostles 24 (or 32) and


CANON XI.

If any presbyter, inflated against his bishop, makes a schism, let him be anathema.

All the bishops said : If any presbyter shall have been corrected by his superior, he
should ask the neighbouring bishops that his cause be heard by them antl that through
them he may be reconciled to his bishop : but if he shall not have done this, but, puffed
up with pride, (which may God forbid !) he shall have thought it proper to separate him-
self from the communion of his bishop, and separately shall have offered the sacrifice to


448 AFRICAN CODE. A.JJ. -iVJ


God, and made a schism with certain accomplices, let him be anathema, and let him
lose his place ; and if the complaint which he brought against his bishop shall [not]
have been found to be well founded, an enquiry should be instituted.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon XI. See note to last canon. The last clause is

A Presbyter condemned hy his bishop, is al- certainly corrupt ; in the council of Carthage
lowed to appeal to the neighboHring bif<Jioj>s : bi(t at which it was first adopted there is no
if he shall not make any appeal, but shall make " "on," making the meaning clear.
a schism, ayid be elated with conceit and shall offer
the Holy Gifts to God, let him be anathema. \

CANON XII.

If any bishop out of Synod time shall have fallen under accusation, let his cause be
heard by J 3 bishops.

Felk the bishop, said : I suggest, according to the statutes of the ancient councils,
that if any bishop (which may God forbid !) shall hr.vc fallen under any accusation, and
there shall have been too great necessity to wait for the summoning of a majority of the
bishops, that he may not rest under accusation, let his cause be heard by 12 bishops ;
and let a presbyter be heard by six bishops with his own bishop, and a deacon shall be
heard In' three.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome or Canon XII. "Who was the bishop's judge at the first in-

^lien a bishojy is to be tried, if the whole stance does not appear by this canon ; but it


synod does not sit, let at least twelve bisho2Js
take up the matter ; and for the case of a pres-
byter, SIX and his oivn diocesan; and for the
case of a deacon, three.


is natural to suppose it was the Primate. It
is probable that this canon is to be under-
stood of hearing upon an appeal, because it is
certain that a priest's cause, at the first in-
stance, was to be tried before the bishop (see
This is Canon x. of the Synod of Geneth- ] Can. 10, 11). And therefore the latter part
lius. j of the canon can be understood of no hearing

Johnson. but by way of appeal, nor by consequence the

Hereby must be meant African canons ; former. And this seems more clear by Can.
that under Gratus [a.d. 348] had decreed the Afr. 29.
same thing. '

CANON XIII.

That a bishop shoidd not be ordained except by many bishojjs, but if there shoidd be
necessity he may be ordained by three.

Bishop Auhelius said : AVhat says your holiness on this matter? By all the bishops
it was answered : The decrees of the ancients must be observed by us, to wit, that with-
out the consent of the Primate of any province even many bisho}is assembled together
should not lightly presume to ordain a bishop. But should there be a necessity, at his
bidding, throe bishops should ordain him in any place they happen to be, and if anyone
contrary to his profession and subscription shall come into any place he shall thereby
deprive himself of his honour.

NOTES.

This is Canon xij. of the befoi'e mentioned
Synod of 387 or 390.


Ancient Epitome of C.xnon XIII.

At the bidding of the Primate even three bish-
ops can make a bisliop. But lohoever goes

counter to his profession and sul)scription, is dc- See Can. Ap. 1, Nic. 1.
prived of his honour by his own Judgment. He that was called a ^Metropolitan in other


Johnson.

Nic. 1.
ed a ]\Ie
Churches was a Primate in Africa.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


449


CANON XIV.

TJiat one of the bishops of Tripoli should come as legate, and that a presbyter might be
Jieard there by Jive bishops.

It also seemed good that one bishop from Tripoli, on account of the poverty of the
province, should come as a legation, and that there a presbyter might be heard by five
bishops, and a deacon by three, as has been noted above, his own bishop presiding.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome op Canon XIV. I a. d. 393, and was repeated at the Cartha-

„ - „ , /• 7 • 7 • rrr ■ ' Sfinian synod of 397. The second half is from

On account of the scarcity of bishops in Trip- ^auon viij. of the same council.
oil, one bishop shall sujficejor a legation. | ■*

Johnson [See Canon 12).
This canon is made up of two parts. The "Legate," /. e., to a Synod, there being few
first part is Canon v. of the synod of Hippo, \ bishops in that province.


CANON XV.

Of the divers orders loho serve the Church, that if any one fall into a criminrd business
and refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical court, he ought to be in danger therefor ; and
that the sons of bishops (sacerdotum) are not to attend ivorldly shoios.

Moreover it seemed good that if any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who had a crimi-
nal charge brought against him or who had a civil cause, refused to be tried by the
ecclesiastical tribunal, but wished to be judged by the secular courts, even if he won his
suit, nevertheless he should lose his office.

This is the law in a criminal suit ; but in a civil suit he shall lose that for the recov-
ery of which he instituted the proceedings, if he wishes to retain his office.

This also seemed good, that if from some ecclesiastical judges an appeal Avas taken
to other ecclesiastical judges who had a superior jurisdiction, this should iu no way
injure the reputation of those from whom the appeal was taken, unless it could be shown
that they had given sentence moved by hatred or some other mental bias, or that they
had been in some way corrupted. But if by the consent of both parties judges had
been chosen, even if they were fewer in number than is specified, no appeal can be
taken.

And [it seemed good] that the sons of bishops should not take part in nor witness
secular spectacles. For this has always been forbidden to all Christians, so let them
abstain from them, that they may not go where cursing and blasphemy are to be found.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.


A bishop or cleric who has a criminal suit
brought ar/ainst him, if he leaves the Church and
betalces himself to secular judges, even if he had
been unjustly used, shall lose his rank. And if
he ivas successful in his political affairs, if he
follows this, he shall lose his own grade. No
appeal can be taken from the ecclesmstical judges,
except theg be proved to have given their decision
beforehand moved thereto by a bribe or by hatred.


No appeal can be taken from the decision <f
judges chosen by each side.

This canon is made up of Canons ix., x., and
xj. of the Council of Hippo, a. d. 393.

Johnson.
In this canon the African bishops made bold
with the Civil Courts. To lay such restraints
on bishops and clergymen is, I am sui-e, very
proper, to say no more.


450 AFKICAX CODE. A.D. 419


CANON XVI.

TJiat no bisJiop, preshyfer or deacon should be a " conductor ; " and that Readers should
take ivives : and that the clergy should abstain from usnr// ; and at lohat age they or vir-
gins should be consecrated.

Likewise it seemed good that bishops, ])resbyters, and deacons should not be "con-
ductors " or " procurators ; " nor seek their food by any base and vik' business, for
they shouhl remember how it is Avritten, " No man tij^hting for God cumbereth himself
with worklly atiairs."

Also it seemed good that Readers when they come to years of puberty, should be
compelled either to take wives or else to profess continence.

Likewise it seemed good that if a clergyman had lent money he should get it back
again, but if kind {speciem) he should receive back the same kind as he gave.

And that younger than twenty-tive years deacons should not be ordained, nor virgins
consecrated.

And that readers should not salute the people.


NOTES.


AxciEXT Epitome of Canon XVI.

A bishop, presbyter, and deacon may not be a
" conductor " or a "procurator." A reader token
he comes to pufjerfy must contract marriaye or
2)7'ofess continence.

A cleric who has lent to someone, ivhat he
yave let him receive, or as much.

Let not him be a deacon, irho is made a dea-
con being under twenty-five.

And let not readers salute the people.


This canon is made up of Canons xv., xviij.,
and xxj., and added to these Canon j. of the
same Second Series of the synod of Hijjj^o,
A.D. 393.

Johnson.

Zonaras says this was never observed any-
where but in Africa. See Can. Afr. 19 (27).

Du Pin turns the Latin, saluto, by " ad-
dressing his speech to the people."


CANON XVII.

TJiat any province on account of its distance, may have its oion Primate.

It seemed good that Mauretania Sitiphensis, as it asked, should have a Primate of
its own, with the consent of the Primate of Numidia from whose synod it had been sep-
arated.' And with the consent of all the primates of the African Provinces and of all
the bishops permission was given, by reason of the great distance between them.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non XVII. Johnson

Mauretania Sitiphensis, on account of the yreat
distance, is permitted to have its own Primate.

This canon is Canon iij. of the first series
of canons enacted at Hippo in 393.


N.B. From this place forward the Latin
and Greek numeration varies ; but Justellus's
Edition in Greek and Latin follows the Latin
division.


CANON XVIII. (Gk. xviii. T/ie Latin caption is the canon of the Greek.)

If any cleric is ordained he ought to he admonished to observe the c<msiitutiojis.
And that neither the Eucharist nor Baj^tism should he given to the bodies of the dead.
And that every year in every province the Metropolitans come together in synod.

(Gk. Canon xix.)
It seemed good that before bishops, or clerics were ordained, the provisions of the
canons should be brought to their notice, lest they might afterwards repent of having
through ignorance acted contrary to law.

' The test here is corrupt.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


451


Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XIX.
The things which have been adopted by the


synods should be made known to him who is to
be ordained.


(Gk. Canon xx.)

It also seemed good that the Eucharist should not be given to the bodies of the
dead. For it is written : " Take, Eat," but the bodies of the dead can neither " take "
nor " eat." Nor let the ignorance of the presbyters baptize those who are dead.

Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XX.
The Eucharist is not to be given to the body The ignorance of a presbyter shall not bap-


of one dead for it neither eats nor drinks.


tize a dead man.


(Gk. Canon xxi.)

And therefore in this holy synod should be confirmed in accordance with the Ni-
cene decrees, on account of Ecclesiastical causes, which often are delayed to the injury
of the people, that every year there should be a synod, to which all, who are primates of
the provinces, should send bishops as legates, from their own synods, two or as many as
they choose ; so that when the synod meets it may have full power to act.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Greek Canon XXI. j Eucharist or Baptism be not given to dead

According to the decrees oftheNicene Fathers \ corpses ; and that the Metropolitans in every

a yearly synod shall be assembled, and two legates \ pi'ovmce meet m synod yearly.] They speak

or as man>/ as the// shall choose, shall be sent by *^eir own language, and call him a Metro-


the primates of every province.


politan, whom the Africans called a Primate ;

but then they have also the entire 18th

This is composed of Canons II., IV., and ^anon, as it here stands according to the

V. of the second series of enactments of ^^tm, which they divide into three, and num-


Hippo, A.D. 393.


Johnson.


ber them 19, 20, 21.

See Can. Nic. 5. It seems very odd that
they should allege the authority of the


The 18th canon in the Edition of Tilius Nicene Synod upon this occasion ; for that

and Bishop Beveridge runs thus ; viz. [If any orders a synod twice a year, this but once ;

clergyman be ordained he ought to be re- that intends a provincial synod, this a dioc-

minded to keep the canons ; and that the esan or national one.


CANON XIX. (Greek xxii.) i

TJiat if any bishop is accused the cause should he brought before the primate of his oivn
province.

AuEELius, the bishop, said : Whatever bishop is accused the accuser shall bring
the case before the primates of the province to which the accused belongs, and he
shall not be suspended from communion by reason of the crime laid to his charge
unless he fails to put in an appearance on the appointed day for arguing his cause
before the chosen judges, having been duly summoned by the letters ; that is, within
the space of one month from the day in which he is found to have received the letters.
But should he be able to prove any true necessity which manifestly rendered it impos-
sible for him to appear, he shall have the opportunity of arguing his case within


' For Greek xx. and xxi. see Latin Canon XVin.


452 AFKICAX CODE. A.D. 419

another full month ; but after the second month he shall not communicate until ho is
acquitted.

But if he is not williug to come to the annual general council, so that his cause
may there be terminated, he himself shall be judged to have pronounced the sentence
of his (iwn condemnation at the time in which he does not communicate, nor shall he
communicate eitlu-r in his own church or diocese.

But his accuser, if he has not missed any of the days for pleading the cause, shall
not be shut out from communion ; V)ut if he has missed some of them, withdruwing
himself, then the bishop shall be restored to communion and the accuser shall be
removed froiu communiou ; so, nevertheless, that the possibility of going on with the
case be not taken from hiin, if he shall prove that his absence was caused by hick of
power and not by lack of will.

And this i-; enacted, that if the accuser turn out to be himself a criminal when the
case against the bishop has come to argument, he shall not be allowed to testify imless
he asserts that the causes are personal and not ecclesiastical.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non XIX. This canon is made up from Canons YI.

A bi^h</p accused and haled to judgment sludl find YII. of the last mentioned second series
have the space of tiio months ; if there is any ex- of the enactments of Hippo, 393.
CM.se ' for his delay from tlie other side. Bid |

after this he shall he excommunicated if he docs , Johnson.

not appear. But if when the accused is present ; See Can. Afr. 28 and Can. Ap. 11 (14).
the accuser flees, then tlie accuser shcdl he de- 1 By this [" Universal Synod "] is meant a
prived of communion. But the accuser tvho is National Synod of Africa.
infamous shall not be an accuser at all. ' See Can. Constantinople 6.

CANON XX. (Greek xxiii.)
0/ accused presbyters or clerks.

But if presbyters or deacons shall have been accused, there shall be joined to-
gether from the neighbouring places witli the bishop of the diocese, the legitimate mnn-
ber of colleagues, whom the accused shall seek horn the same ; that is together with
himself six in the case against a presbyter, in that against a deacon three. They shall
discuss the causes, and the same form shall be kept with regard to days and ]iostpone-
meuts and removals from communion, and in the discussion of persons between the
accusers and the accused.

But the causes of the rest of the clergy, the bishop of the place shall take cogni-
zance of and determine alone.

NOTES.


This is Canon viij. of Hippo, 393.

Johnson.
See Canon 12.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

JVJien a presb]iter is accused, six of the neigh-
bour in ff bishop.<! together with the bishop of that
region shall Judge the matter. But for a deacon,
three. ]Miat things concern the other clerics
even one bishop shall examine.

CANON XXI. (Greek xxiv.)

That the sons of clergymen are not to be joined in marriage ivith heretics.

Likewise it seemed good that the sons of clergymen should not be joined in matri-
mony Avitli gentiles and heretics.

> It would seem that this most be the meaning.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


453


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.
[The same as the cauon.J


NOTES.

j This is Canon xij. of Hippo, 393.


CANON XXII. (Greek xxv.)

That bishops or other clergymen shall give nothing to those ivho are not Catholics.

And that to those who are not Catholic Christians, even if they be blood relations,
neither bishops nor clergymen shall give anything at all by way of donation of their
possessions.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome op Canon XXII.

Bishops and clergymen shall give nothing of
their goods to heretics, nor confer aught ujyon
them even if they be their relatives.


This is Canon xiv. of Hippo, 393.


CANON XXIII. (Greek xxvi.)

That bishops shall not go across seas.

Item, That bishops shall not go beyond seas without consulting the bishop of the
primatial see of his own province : so that from him they may be able to receive a
formed or commendatory letter.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIII.

A bishop is not to cross the seas unless he has
received from the Primate of his region a letter
dimissory.

This is Canon xxvij. of Hippo, 393.

Johnson.

See note on Canons of the Apostles, 10
(13). [viz:]


[The use of Letters Commendatory was
very early in the Church ; St. Paul mentions
them II. Cor. iij. 1. And it is not easy to be
conceived how discipline can be restored but
by the reviving of this practice. It is surely
irregular to admit all chance comers to the
Communion, who, for avight we know, may
stand excommunicated by their own bishop.
Of the difference between Commendatory and
Pacific and Formal Letters, see Can. Chalc,
11 ; Apost., 25, 26 ; Ant., 6 ; Sardic, 13].


CANON XXIV. (Greek xxvii.)

TTiat nothing be read in church besides the Canonical Scripture.

Item, that besides the Canonical Scriptures nothing be read in church under the
name of divine Scripture.

But the Canonical Scriptures are as follows :

Genesis.

Exodus.

Leviticus.

Numbers.

Deuteronomy.

Joshua the Son of Nun.

The Judges.

Euth.

The Kings, iv. books.


454 AFIilCAX CODE. A.D. 419

The Chronicles, ij. books.

Jol).

The Psalter.

The Five books of Solomon.

The Twelve Books of the Prophets.

Isaiah.

Jeremiah.

Ezeehiel.

Daniel.

Tobit.

Judith.

Esther.

Ezra, ij. books.

Macchabees, ij. books.

The New Testament.
The Gospels, iv. books.
The Acts of the Apostles, j. book.
The Epistles of Paul, xiv.
The Epistles of Peter, the Apostle, ij.
The E|)istles of John the Apostle, iij.
The Epistles of James the Apostle, j.
The Epistle of Jnde the Apostle, j.
The Revelation of John, j. book.

Let this be sent to our brother and fellow bishop, Boniface, and to the other bishops
of those parts, that they may confirm this canon, for these are the things which we
liave received from our fathers to be read in church.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIV.


Johnson.


Let nothing hemles the canonical Scriptures
he read in church. These two books [i.e. the two ]\Iaccabees]

rpi ■ . ^ • J. TT- ono mi ^^'^ mentioued only in Dionvsius Exiguus's

This IS Canon xxxvj of Hippo. 393. The g^^ ^^,^_ / ^^^^ ^^,,; ^^,^^^ ^^^-

last phrase alWng the read mg of tlie pas- -< Boniface," /.c. Bishop of Kome-
Bions ot the JMartyrs on their Auuiversaries .

is omitted from the African code.


CANON XXV. (Greek xxviii.)

Concerning hishops and the Jmver orders who ivait upon the most hnj// mysteries. It
has seemed good that these abstain from their ivives.

AuRELiT's, the bishop, said : We add, most dear brethren, moreover, since we have
heard of the incontinency of certain clerics, even of readers, towards their wives, it
seemed good that what had been enacted in divers councils should be confirmed, to wit,
that subdeacons who wait ujion the holy mysteries, and deacons, and i)resbyters, as
well as bishops according to former statutes,^ should contain from their wives, so that
they should be as though they had them not : and unless they so act, let them be re-
moved from office. But the rest of the clergy are not to be compelled to this, unless
they be of mature age. And by the whole council it was said : A\ hat your holiness has
said is just, holy, and pleasing to God, and we confirm it.


' The Greek reads " koto, tou? tSi'ou? opou?," and so it was understood at the Council of Trullo, as is evident from Canon XIII. of
that synod. The Latiu is " secundum propria statuta," but Bruns reads " priora."


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


455


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXV. j Can. Trull., 13, where there were several Afri-

Those who handle hohj thhH/.'< should alMain t"^u Bishops present, and allowed of that ex-

even from their own wives at' the times of their plication ; yet Dion. Exig. is not clear, viz..


ministration.


Secundum propria statuta.

By Can. Laod., 23. Ministers, i.e.


By (Jan. Laod., 23. Ministers, i.e., sub-
This is founded upon Canon iv. of the deacons, are forbid to touch the Holy Vessels,
ancil of Carthaoe, which met September yet here they are said to handle the Mys-


Council oi uartnaoe, wuicn niei oepieniuer yet

13th, 401, but the provisions are more strin- teries ; I suppose thev might handle the
gent here, subdeacons as well as deacons Holy Vessels, etc. before and after the cele-
bration, but not during the solemnity ; or
else the customs of several ages and counti'ies


being constrained to continence.

Johnson.
" Times of ministration," so it is explained,


differed as to this particular.


CANON XXVI. (Greek xxix.)

That no one should take from the possessions of the Church.'^

Likewise it seemed good that no one should sell anything belonging to the Church :
that if there was no revenue, and other great necessity urged thereto, this might be
brought before the Metropolitan of the province that he might deliberate with the ap-
pointed number of bishops whether this should be done : that if such urgent necessity
lay upon any church that it could not take counsel beforehand, at least let it call to-
gether the neighbouring bishops as witnesses, taking care to refer all the necessities of
his church to the council : and that if he shall not do this, lie shall be held as respon-
sible toward God, and as a seller in the eye of the council, and he shall have lost thereby
his honour.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVI.

Church goods must not be sold. If they
bring in no revenue they may he sold at the will
of the bishops. If the necessity does not alloiv
that consultation shoidd take jJlace, he who sells
shall call together the neighbouring bishops. If


he does not do so he shall be held responsible to
God and to the Synod.

This is Canon v. of the Synod of Carthage,
Sept. 13th, 401.

Johnson.

"Appointed number," i.e.. Twelve, see
Canon 12.


CANON XXVII. (Greek xxx.)

Presbyters and deacons convicted of the graver crimes shcdl not receive laying on of
hands, like laymen."^

It also was confirmed that if presbyters or deacons were convicted of any of the
greater crimes on account of which it was necessary that they should be removed from
the ministry, that hands should not be laid upon them as upon penitents, or as upon
faithful laymen, nor should it be permitted that they be baptized over again and then


advanced to the clerical grade.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXVII.
A presbyter convicted and repenting, is not to


Johnson.
This canon seems to have been designed


be rehaptized as one to be advanced, neither as , to preclude deposed clergymen from all pos-
a layman is he to be reordained. \ sibility of being restored, directly or indi-

This is Canon xij. of the before-mentioned j ■^'

Council of Carthage, Sept. 13th, 401. '


1 Not found in the Greek of Beveridge, but in that given by Labbe.


s This found only in Latin.


456


AFKICAX CUDE. A.D. 419


CA:<0^ XXYIII. (Greek xxxi.)

Presbj/ters, deacons, or clerics, ivlio shall think (joocl to carry appeals in their causes
across the water shall not at all be adndtied to co)nmimion^

It also seemed good that presbyters, deacoDS, and others of the inferior clergy in the
causes which they had. if they were dissatistied with the judgments of their bislio])s, let
the neighbouring bisliu}>s with the consent of their own l)ishoj> hear them, and let the
bishops who have been called in judge between them : l)ut if they think they have cause
of ap})eal from these, the}' shall not betake themselves to judgments from beyond seas,
but to the primates of their own provinces, or else to an universal council, as has also
been decreed concerning bishops, lint whoso shall think good to carry an ajipeal across
the water shall be received to communion by no one within the boundaries of Africa.


NOTES.


AxciEXT Epitome of Cakon XXVIII.
Clerics irho hare been condemned, if the// takr
exception to the judgment, shall not appeal be-
i/ond seas, but to the neighbouring bishops, and
to their oicn ; if theg do othericise let them be
excommunicated in Africa.

This canon is the same as Canon xvij. of the
Synod of Carthage of 418, but it lias some
words with regard to appeals which that canon
does not contain, viz.: -'Ant ad universale con-
cilinm, sieut et de episeapis scEpe ecmstitufam est."
This clause, affirming that bishops have often
been forbidden to appeal across the water from
the decisions of the African bishops, has caused
great peii^lexity as no such decrees are extant.
The Ballerini, to avoid this difficulty, and
possibly for other reasons, suggest an entirely


different meaning to the i:)assage, and suppose
that it means that '"bishops have often been
allowed to appeal to the Universal Council
and now this privilege is extended to priests." ^
But this would seem to be a rather unnatural
interjiretation and Van Espen in his Coninien-
tary shews good reason for adopting the more
evident view.

Johnson.

See Can. Afr., 19.

Clearly the See of Rome is here aimed at,
as if Carthage were the place designed by
Providence to put a stop to the growth of
power in Christian Rome, as well as heathen.
It is strange, that this canon should be re-
ceived by the Church of Rome in former
ages.


CAXOX XXIX. (Greek xxxii.)

If anyone icho is excommunicated shcdl receive communion before his cause is heard he
brings damnation on himself.^

Likewise it pleased the whole Council that he who shall have been excommunicated
for any neglect, whether he be bishop, or any other cleric, and shall have presumed
while still under sentence, and his cause not yet heard, to receive communion, he shall
be considered by so doing to have given sentence against himself.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXIX.


One excommunicate ivho shall communicate
before absolution sentences himself.

This canon seems to be founded upon
Canon iv. of Antioch.


Johnson.
See Can. Ap., 21 (29), Antioch, 4.

By this canon the criminous bishop is sup-
posed to be excommunicated before he comes
to have his cause heard by a Synod, or by 12
neip:hbouring bishops : and it is therefore most
rational to believe that he was thus censured
by his Primate. See Can. Afr., 12.


' This is not found in the Greelc of Beveridpe.
» Ballerini. edit. .V. Leon M., Tom. n., p. 90C.


* Not foand in the Greek of Beveridge.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 457

CANON XXX. (Greek xxxiii.)

Concerning the accused or acciiser.^

Likewise it seemed good that the accused, or the acciisor, if < living iD the same place
as the accused I he fears some evil mav be doue him bv the tumultuous multitude, mav
choose for himself a place near by, where the cause may be determined, and where
there will be no difficulty in producing the witnesses.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXX.
Accuser or accused may select for himself a safe place if he fears violence.

CINON XXXI. (Greek xxxiv.)

If certain clerics advanced by their oion bishops are supercilious, let them not remain
whence they are unioilling to come forth.

It also seemed good that whoever of the clergy or of the deacons would not help
the bishop in the necessities of the chiu'ches, when he wished to lift them to a higher
position in his diocese, should no longer be allowed to exercise the functions of that
grade from which they were not willing to be removed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXI. in some Churches, were provided of a better

^\llo despises a greater honour shall lose what mainteuauce than priests ; or it may be un-

he hath. derstood of inferior clergymen, who were per-

JoHNsoN. mitted to marry in the degree they were now

It is most probable that this canon is to be ^^'. ^""^ ^°;^^*^'^ ^°^, williuglv take the order of

understood of deacons designed bv the bishop f'''''.^\''''' <^^eacoD, because then they were pro-

to be ordained priests, for the deacons, at least ^'^^^ed marriage.

CANON XXXII. (Greek xxxv.)

//' any poor cleric, no matter what his ranJ: may be, shall acquire any property, it shall
be subject to the power of the bishop.^

It also seemed good that bishops, presbyters, deacons and any other of the clergy,
who when they were ordained had no possessions, and in the time of their episcopate or
after they became clerics, shall pui-chase in their own names lands or any other 2:)ropei*ty,
shall be held guilty of the crime of intrenching upon the Lord's goods, unless, Avhen they
are admonished to do so, they place the same at the disposal of the Chui'ch. But should
anything come to them personally by the liberality of anyone, or by succession from
some relative, let them do what they will ^A-ith it ; if, however, they demand it back
again, contrary to what they proposed, they shall be judged unwoi-thy of ecclesiastical
honour as back-sliders.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXII. situm " is the same as "profession," or " call-

Whoso after his ordination although he has i°g/' ^^^d the meaning, were this the case,

nothing yet buys afield, shall give it to the would be that he must employ it as befits his

Church, unless he got it by succession from a clerical calling. Van Espen follows Balsamon

relation or by pure liberaliti/. and Zonaras in understanding it to mean that

if he has proposed to employ a part for the

In this canon there is difficulty about the Church or for the poor, and changes his mind,

meaning of the phrase '-quod eorum proposito he is to be deposed ; and this meaning I have

congruat." Hardouin suggests that ^' propo- followed.

' Found only in Latin. ^ •• of the Church" in Dion. Esig.


458


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


CANON XXXIII. (Greek xxxvi.)

Tliai presbyters shonhl not sell the yoods of the ChurcJi in ivhich t.iey are constituted :
and that no bishop can ri<j]dlij nse anythintj the title to ichich vests in the ecclesiastical nid-
ternal centre {fjLdrpLKo<i).

It also seemed p;oocl that ])resbyters slionld not sell the ecclesiastical propeiiy where
they are settled without their bishop's kuowledj^e ; and it is not lawful for bishops to sell
the goods of the Church without the council or their presbyters being aware of it. Nor
should the bishop without necessity usurp the i)ro])erty of the maternal {uiatricis) Church
(nor should a presbyter usurp the projierty of his own cure {fifuli)].^

NOTES.
Anciext Epitome of Canon XXXIII. in the diocese must not be applied to the

A presbi/fer is not to sell ecclesiastical prop-
erty without the consent of the bishop. A bishop


INrothcr Church through the usui-pation of
the bisliop."

Johnson.

" Or title." So I turn the Lat. Tifidns for
want of a proper English word. It denotes a
lesser church in any city or diocese, served
b}^ a priest.

"The Mother Church," i.e., The cathedral,


is not to sell tvithoiU the approbation of his synod
a country properly.

Fuchs {Biblioth. der Kirchenvers., vol. iij., p.
5) thinks the text is corrupt in the last sen-
tence and shovdd be corrected by Canon x. of
the Council of Carthage of 421, so as to read,
" that which is left by will to a rural church the Church in which the bishop I'esides.

Moreover at this Synod we read all the conciliar decrees of all the Province of Africa
in the diiiereut sjnods held in the time of Bisho]^ Aurelius.^

Concerning the Synod which assembled in Hippo Regio.

Under the most iUustrious consuls, the most glorious Emperor Theodosius Augustus
for the third time, and Abiindantius, on the viij. Ides of October, at Hippo Regio, in
the secretarium of the Church of Peace. And th(> rest of the acts of this Synod have
not been written down here because these constitiitions are found set forth above.

Of the Council of Carthage at lohicJt the proconsidar bishops loere appointed legates
to the Council at Adrumetum.

In the consulate of the most glorious emperors — Arcadius for the third time and Hon-
orius for the second time, Augustuses, on the vith'^ day before the Calends of July, at Car-
thage. In this council the proconsular bishops were chosen as legates to the Council of
Adrumetum.


Of a Council of Carthage at which many stahdes ivere made.

In the consulate of those most illustrious men, Ca^sarius and Atticus, on the vtli day
before the Calends of Se})tember in the secretarium of the restored basilica, when Aure-
lius the bisho]), together with the bishops, had taken his seat, the deacons also standing
by, and Victor the old man of Puppiana, Tutus of Migirpa and Evangel of Assuri.

The Allocution of Aurelius the bishop of Carthage to the bishops.

Aurelius, the bishop, said : ' After the day fixed for the council, as ye remember, most
blessed brethren, we sat and waited for the legations of all the African provinces to
assemble u]>(>ii tlic day, as I have said, set by our missive; but wIkmi \ho, letter of our


' Only found in the Latin.

^TheW intfrludes or " Ditrressioni'," as Van Espen calls them,
are found in Dionysius and in the Greek texts.


' In the Greek this reads xvith.
* The text here I euspect ie much corrupted.
Latin du nut a^ree.


The Greek and


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


459


Byzacene bishops had beeu read, that was read to your charity, Avhich they had dis-
cussed with me who had anticipated the time and day of the council ; also it was read
by our brethren Honoratus and Urban, who are to-day present with us in this council, sent
as the legation of the Sitifensine Province. For our brother Reginus of the Yege[t]seli-
tane^ Church,- the letters sent to my littleness by Crescentian and Aurelius, our fellow-
bishops, of the first sees of the [two] Numidias, in which writings your charity will see
with me how they j^romised that either they themselves would be good enough to come
or else that they would send legates according to custom to this council ; b\;t this it
seems they did not do at all, the legates of Mauritania Sitifensis, who had come so
great a distance gave notice that they could stay no longer ; and, therefore, ]:>rethren, if
it seem good to your charity, let the letters of our Byzacene brethren, as also the breviary,
which they joined to the same letter, be read to this assembly, so that if by any chance
they are not entirely satisfactory to yoTir charity, such things in the breviary may be
changed for the better after diligent examination. For this very thing our brother and
fellow-bishop of the primatial see, a man justly conspicuous for his gravity and prudence,
Mizonius, demanded in a letter he addressed to ifiy littleness. If therefore it meets
with your approval, let there be read the things which have been adopted and let each
by itself be considered by your charity.


CANON XXXIV. (Greek xxxvii.)

That nothing of those things enacted in tlie Synod of Hippo is to he corrected.

Bishop Epigonius said : In this summary {Breviarium) which was adopted at the
Synod of Hippo, we think nothing should be amended, nor anything added thereto
except that the day on which the holy Feast of Easter falls should be announced in
Synod.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIV,

Nothing is to he corrected in the synod of
Hippo, nor anijfhing added thereto, except that
the time of celebrating Easter should be an-
nounced in time of synod.

The first of these introductions is that of
the Synod of Hippo in a,d. 393 ; the next that


of Carthage in a.d. 394, and the third that of
the same place, held August 28th, a.d. 397.

This canon (number xxxiv. of the code) is
the beginning of Canon v. of the last named
Synod.

Johnson.

See Canons 51 and 73.


CANON XXXV. (Greek xxxviii.)

Tiled bishops or clergymen should not easily set free their sons.

That bishops or clerics should not easily let their children pass out of their power ;
unless they were secure of their morals and age, that their own sins may pertain to
them.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXV.

Bishops and clergy shall not set their children
free until their morals are established.


This canon is Canon xiij. of the Synod of
Hippo, A.D. 393.


'In Gustavus Willmann'B CorpMS Tnscriptionum iaimarMw, having the same name and not far one from the other. C/. map
Vol. viii., p. 47, the reading is given as Vegeselitance, in one word. 20. Spruner-Sieglin, Atlas Antiqmis.

The town was Vegesela, and unfortunately there were two towns ^ The verb is lacking. The Ed. of Migne's Dion. Exig. suggests

1 legit.


460 AFRICAN CODE. A.I). -iVJ

CANON XXXVI. (Greek xxxix.)

That bishops or clergymen are not to be ordained unless they have made all their family
Christians.

None shall be ordained bishop, ])rosbyters, or deacons before all the inmates of
their houses shall have become Catholic Christians.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVI. This canon is Canon xvij. of the Synod of

IT<' shall not he ordained who hath not made ■ Hippo, a.d. 393.
all his household orthodox.

CANON XXXVII. (Greek xl.)

It is not lawful to offer anyth ing in the Holy BIysteries except bread and wine mixed
ivith luater.

Ix the sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord nothing else shall be offered
than that '.vhich the Lord himself ordained, that is to say, bread and wine mixed with
water. But let the first-fruits, whether honey or milk, be offered on that one most sol-
emn day, as is wont, in the mystery of the infants. For although the}' are offered on
the altar, let them have nevertheless their own benediction, that they may be distin-
guished from the sacraments of the Lord's body and blood ; neither let there be offered
as first-fruits anything other than grapes and corns.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVII. i corrupt that Van Espen notes that for the
Let bread andxoine mixed with water only he ordinary " offerantur" some MSS. read '-non
offered. loff'erantur."

The text of the Greek here does not ex- ' This canon is Canon xxiij. of the Synod of
actly aoree with the Latin. The Greek reads Hippo a.d. 393.
as follows: "That in the Holy Mysteries

nothing else be offered than the body and Johnson.

blood of the Lord, even as the Lord himself See Can. Ap. 2 (3).

delivered, that is bread and wine mixed with ! "The Mystery of Infants " of this Qucere,
water." all that I have met with are in the dark as to

Further down with regard to the first-fruits this matter. Dionysius Exiguus's Latin is
I have followed the Greek text which seems Lac, etc. The Greek stands thus, 'Eire -ydXa
decidedly preferable, in fact the Latin is so | k. t. A.

CANON XXXVIII. (Greek xli.)

lliat clerics or those who are continent shall not visit virgins or ividoivs.

Neither clerics nor those who profess continence should enter the houses of widows
or virgins without the bidding or consent of the bishops or presbyters : and then let
them not go alone, but with some other of the clergy, or with those assigned by the
bishop or ])resbyter for this purpose ; not even bishops and presbyters shall go alone to
women of this sort, except some of the clergy are present or some other grave Chris-
tian men.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXVIII. | alone, hut with those with whom preshyters and

Clerics and those who are continent shall not beacons visit them,
go In iridotns or virgins, unless at the bidding This canon is canon xxiv. of the Synod of
of the bishop and presbyter : and even tiicn not Hippo, a.d. 393.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 461

CANON XXXIX. (Greek xlii.)

Tlittt a bishop should not he called the chief of the priests.^

That the bishop of the first see shall not be called Prince of the Priests or High
Priest (Suinmus Sacerdos) or any other name of this kind, but only Bishop of the
First See.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XXXIX. the Pi'ime. So in Numidia, Nicetius in Mau-

The first bishop shall not he called Prince o/ ^itania, in the original Latin between Can.
the Priests, nor Hiah Priest, but Bishop of the 8^' ^nd Can. 86, and see Can. 86.
Urst see ■^' ^" Ji^stellus on this canon shews, that

Tertullian, Optatiis, and Augustine, did apply

This canon is Canon xxv. of the Synod of \ ^li^se titles to their own African bishops ;

Hiwpo A D 393 ^^^ therefore supposes, that the meaning of

-r the canon was to suppress the flame of vain

glorv, which proceeded from these sparks of
" The bishop of the Prime See," i.e., The Jofty titles.
primate. So Xantippus is called bishop of i

CANON XL. (Greek xliii.)

Concerning the non-frequenting of taverns by the clergy, except lohen travelling.

That the clergy are not to enter taverns for eating or drinking, nor unless com-
pelled to do so by the necessity of their journey.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome or Canon XL. This canon is Canon xsvj. of the Synod of


A cleric on a journey may enter a tavern,
otherwise not.


Hippo, A.D. 393.


CANON XLL (Greek xHv.)

TJiat by men loho are fasting sacrifices are to he offered to God.

That the Sacraments of the Altar are not to be celebrated except by those who are
fasting, except on the one anniversary of the celebration of the Lord's Supper ; for if
the commemoration of some of the dead, whether bishops or others, is to be made in
the afternoon, let it be only with prayers, if those who officiate have already breakfasted.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLL I Eucharist, ?lnd not the Eucharist itself, and

The holy mijsteries are not offered except by ' *^^* ^"^ Maunday-Thursday ^ yearly, before


those who are fastiny.

This canon is Canon xxviij. of the Synod of
Hippo, A.r). 393.

Johnson.

From this canon and the 29th of Trullo, it
is evident that by the Lord's Supper, the an-
cients understood the supper going before the


the Eucharist, they had such a public enter-
tainment in imitation of our Saviour's last
Paschal Supper. I refer it to the considei*a-
tion of the learned reader, whether St. Paul,
by the AetTrioi/ KvpiaKov, 1 Cor. xi. 20. does not
mean this entertainment. For the obvious
translation of that verse is, " It is not your
duty or business] when you meet together
in the church] to eat the Lord's Supper."


* The Greek reads for " bishop," " a Primate." I 2 This is Johnson's spelUng here, but not in the last phrase of

this same note.


463 AFRICAN CODE. A.I). 419

He would not have them to eat this supper iu previous entertainment, as may be seen by
the public assembly: "For" (says he) this canon, which was made in the 4th cen-
" have ye not houses to eat and drink in, or tury. Further it seems probable, that the
despise ye the Church of God ? " From the Lord's Supper and the Love-feast was the
4th age forward, the Eucharist was some- same, though it was not usually called the
times called the Lord's Supper ; but from the Lord's Sui)per ; but only (perhaps) that love-
beginning it was not so. And even after it feast, which was made on the day of the in-
did sometimes pass by this name, yet at other stitution of the Eucharist, which we now call
times this name Avas strictly used for the Maundy-Thursday.

CANON XLII. (Greek xiv.)

Concerning the not having feasts tender any circumstances in churches.

That no bishops or clerics are to hold feasts in cliurclies, unless perchance they arO
forced thereto bv the necessity of hospitality as tliey })ass by. The people, too, as far
as possible, are to be prohibited from attending such feasts.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLII. i of hospitality. This also is forbidden to the

I laity.
A cleric is not to feast in a church, tmless]
jjerchance he is driven thereto by the necessity This canon is Canon xxix. of the Synod of

HipiDo, A.D. 393.

CANON XLIIL (Greek xlvi.)

Concerning penitents.

That to penitents the times of their penance shall be assigned by the will of the
bishop according to the difference of their sins ; and that a presbyter shall not recon-
cile a penitent without consulting the bishop, unless the absence of the bishop urges
him necessarily thereto. But Avheu of any penitent tlu^ offence has been public and
commonly known, so as to have scandalized the whole Church, he shall receive imi^o-
sitiou of the hand before the altar (Lat. " before the aj3se").


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIIL


This canon is canon xxx. of the Svnod of
Hippo, A.D. 31)3.

Tiie bishops shall fx the time of jjenance for Johnson.

those doing penance accoi'ding to their sins. A' Here [i. e., in translating aftsirfew; church-
presbytcr without his hwwledge shall not recon- porch] I follow Zonoras ; see Can. Nic, 11.
die one doing penance, even ivhen necessity im- Du Pin renders absidcm, a high place near
pels him thereto.^ ' the bishop's throne.

CANON XLIV. (Greek xlvii.)

Concerning Virgins.

That holy virgins when they are separated from their parents by whom they have
been wont to be guarded, are to be commended by the care of the bishoji, or presbyter
where the bishop is absent, to women of graver age, so that'- living with them they may
take care of them, lest they hurt the reputation of the Church by wandering about.

• This last clause seems manifestly to be corrupt and ehonld I ' The Latin is axit.

read "unless when, etc."


I


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


463


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIV. I This canon is Canon xxxj. of the Synod of

She who leaves her father for the sake ofvir- 1 Hippo, a.d. 393.
ginity is to be commended to grave women.


CANON XLY. (Greek xlviii.)

Concerning those ivho are sick and cannot ansioer for themselves.

That the sick are to be baptized who cannot answer for themselves if their [servants]
shall have spoken at their own proj^er peril a testimony of the good will [of the sick
man.]

(Greek Canon xlix.)

Concerning j^layers luho are doing penance and are converted to the Lord.^

That to players and actors and other persons of that kind, as also to apostates
when they are converted ' and return to God, grace or reconciliation is not to be de-
nied.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLV.

TJiat he who cannot answer for himself on
account of illness is to be baptized when he shall
have given evidence of his desire.

A repentant actor is to be received to penance.

This canon is made up of Canons xxxij. and
xxxiij. of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.


Johnson.

" Ajjostates," i.e., those who elsewhere are
called Lapsi ; those who had done sacrifice
through the violence of torment in time of
persecution, professing in the meantime that
their consciences did not consent to what
their hands did.


CANON XLVI. (Greek 1.)

Concerning the passions of the martyrs.

The passions of the Martyrs may be read Avhen their anniversary days are cele-
brated.

NOTE.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVI.

The passions of the martyrs are to be read on
their commemorations.


This canon is the last part of Canon xxxvj.
of the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 393.


CANON XL VII. (Greek li.)
Concerning [the Donatists and ^] the children baptized by the Donatists.

Concerning the Donatists ^ it seemed good that we should hold counsel with our
brethren and fellow priests Siricius and Simplician concerning those infants alone who
are baptized by Donatists : ^ lest what they did not do of their own will, when they
should be converted to the Church of God with a salutary determination, the error of
their parents might prevent their promotion to the ministry of the holy altar.

But when these things had been begun, Honoratus and Urbanus, bishops of Mauri-


' Found only in the Greek.

' In the Greek "doing penance."

' Found only in the Greek.


* Not in the Greek.

' Latin reads " among them" instead of " by Donatists. "


464 AFRICAN CODE. A.T). 41«J


tania Sitifensis, said : When some time ago we were sent to your lioliness, we laid
aside what things had been written on this accoiiut, that we might wait for the arrival
of our brethren the legates from Numidia. But because not a few days have passed in
which they have been looked for and as yet they are not arrived, it is not fitting that wo
should delay any louger the commands Ave received from our brother-bisho})s ; and there-
fore, brethren, receive our story with alacrity of mind. We have heard concerning the
faith of the Nicene tractate : True it is that sacrifices are to be forbidden after break-
fast, so that the}' may be oifered as is right by those who are fasting, and this has been
contirmeil then and now.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLVII. making a schism was, that Cascilian, Bishop

Wluii (hose in itifanci/ baptized b/j Donatists of Carthage, liad, in the time of peisecutiou,

are converted, this shall be no impediment to i been a Traditor, i.e., given up the Bible to the

them. Andthe Holii Miisterics,asisright,areto heathen irKjnisitors ; this Avas denied by the

be celebrated only b// ilicni fasting. Orthodox, who charged them with the same

crime in effect, viz. of being too favourable


This canon is made from Canon xxxvij. of
the Synod of Hippo, a.d. 398, and from Can-
on j. of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th,
A.D. 397.


to the Traditors, and those that had lapsed.
They likewise are charged with Arianism.

I have omitted what is here mentioned
concerning the Council of Nice ; because I do


Johnson. ' not find that any one has been able to pene-

See Can. 41. trate into the meaning of the Fathers as to

The pretence that the Donatists had for that particular.


^&


CANON XL VIII. (Greek lii.)

Of rehaptisms, reordinations, and translations of bishops.

But we suggest that we decree Avhat was set forth by the wisdom of the plenary
synod at Capua, that no rebaptisings, nor reordinati(ms should take place, and that
bishops should not be translated. For Gresconius, bishop of Villa Kegis, left his own
people and invaded the Church of Tubinia and having been admonished down to this
very day, to leave, according to the decree, the diocese he had invaded, he treated the
admonition with disdain. We have heard that the sentence pronounced against him
has been confirmed ; but we seek, according to our decree, that ye deign to grant that
being driven thereto by necessity, it be free to us to address the rector of the province
against him, according to the statutes of the most glorions princes, so that whoever is
not willing to acquiesce in the mild admonition of your holiness and to amend his
laAvlessness, shall be immediately cast out by judicial authority. Aurelius the
bishop said : By the observance of the constituted form, let him not be judged to
be a member of the synod, if he has been asked by you, dear brethren, to depart and
has refused : for out of his own contempt and contumacy he has fallen to the power of
the secular magistrate.* Honoratus and Urban tlui bishops said: This pleases us all,
does it not ? And all the bishops answered : It is just, it pleases us.


NOTES.

Ancient EpiTo:^rE of Canon XLVIII.
Let there be no 7rhaptisms, nor reordinations


nor translations of bishops. Therefore let Cres
conias bo forbidden bi/ Judicial atiflioritij.for he


This canon is Canon j., of the Svnod of
Carthage of August 28th. a.d. 397. The acts
of this synod were first accurately edited by
the Ballerini (in their edition of tlie works of


has left his own people,' and has tahm possession ^^- Lp<^) f^"d were printed by Mansi, in an
of the diocese of Ceneum, althonfjh ecclesiastically , amended form, in his Concilia,
admonished that he teas not to change.

' 1 have followed the Greek text here, the Latin is very confused.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


465


CANON XLIX. (Greek Uii.)

Hoiv many bishops there should be to ordain a bishop.

HoNORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said: We have issued this command, that
(because lately two of our brethren, bishops of Numidia, presumed to ordain a pontiff, )
only by the concurrence of twelve bishops the ordination of bishops be celebrated.
Am-elius, the bishop, said : The ancient form shall be preserved, that not less than three
suffice who shall have been designated for ordaining the bishop. Moreover, because in
Tripoli, and in Arzug the barbarians are so near, for it is asserted that in Tripoli
there are but live bishops, and out of that number two may be occupied by some ne-
cessity ; but it is difficult that all of the number should come together at any place
whatever ; ought this circumstance to be an impediment to the doing of what is of
utility to the Church ? For in this Church, to which your holiness has deigned to
assemble ^ we frequently have ordinations and nearly every Lord's day ; could I
frequently summon twelve, or ten, or about that number of bishops ? But it is an easy
thing for me to join a couple of neighbours to my littleness. Wherefore your charity
will a<jfree with me that this cannot be observed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XLIX. for him to get twelve : " For," says he, " we

Fetoer than three bishops do not suffice for the \'^^^^ frequently, and almost every Sunday,

ordination of a bishop. nien to be ordained." He must mean bishops

I for otherwise it had been notliing to his pur-
ThisisCanonij., of the Synod of Carthage, pose, because he could ordain priests or


August 28th, 397.

Johnson.

See Can. 13.

The occasion of this canon was a complaint
that two bishops in Numidia had pi'esumed to
ordain a third ; upon which it was proposed


deacons by himself, without the assistance of
other bishops : and yet it is very strange,
that ordinations of bishops should be so fre-
quent as to bear that expression of " almost
every Sunday." There were indeed above one
hundred bishoprics in his Province ; but


that not less than twelve should perform this j these could not occasion above six or eight
office : But Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, '\ ordinations in a year ; but it is probable that
desires that the old form might be observed, ' the privilege belonging to him, Can. 55,
and three bishops be sufficient ; especially, I brought very many ordinations to the church
because in Tripoli, where thei*e were but five i of Carthage ; for it is evident, there was a
bishops in all, it would be hard to get more great scarcity of men fit for the Episcopal
than three together. And he adds, that ^ office in Africa. It is fui'ther evident from
though it were no hard matter for him to get ! this canon, that bishops were not ordained in
two bishops to assist him in his ordinations the church of their own see, but in that of
at Carthage, yet it would not be practicable the Primate. See Can. Ant., 19.


CANON L. (Greek liv.)

Hoio many bishops should be added to the number of those ordaining, if any opposition
had been made to the one to be ordained.

But this should be decreed, that when we shall have met together to choose a
bishop, if any opposition shall arise, because such things have been treated by us, the
three shall not presume to purge "^ him who was to be ordained, but one or two more
shall be asked to be added to the aforesaid number, and the persons of those objecting
shall first be discussed in the same place (plebe) for which he was to be ordained. And
last of all the objections shall be considered ; and only after he has been cleared in the


' Notice the African use of ttie phrase conveyiire ad.
'' The Greek reads "to depose him," and varies considerably
from the Latin. I have followed the Latin but confess that in


part I have failed to catch a meaning,
clear, as usual.


The Greek is perfectly


466


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


public sight sliall he at last be ordained. If this agrees with the mind of yom* holiness,
let it be confirmed by the answer of yonr wortliiness. All the bishops said, We are well

pleased.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon L. I

If any controversy arise concerning a bishop
icho has been elected hy three bishops, let txoo
others be coOpted, and so let there be an exami-
nation made of his affairs; and if it shall appear
thai he is pure, let him be ordained.


This canon is Canon iij.
Carthage, Aug. 28th, 397.


of the Synod of


Johnson.
Here the bishops meet to choose a new one.


and it is evident by the foregoing canon, that
they met not in the vacant church, but in
that of the Primate ; and that therefore not
the people, but the bishops had the chief
share in the election. The people might
make their objections, which suppoises they
knew who their intended bishop was; but
the bishops were the judges of the cause.
And it seems probable, that if there were any
dispute, some of the bishops Avent to the
vacant church to hear the allegations against
the person that was elected, or proposed.


CANON LI. (Greek Iv.)

TJiat the date of Easter is to be announced by the Church of Carthage.

HoNORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said : Since all things treated by our commoni-
tory are known,^ we add also what has been ordered concerning the day of Easter, that
we be informed of the date always by the Church of Carthage, as has been accustomed
and that no short time before. Aurelius, the bishop, said : If it seems good to your
holiness, since we remember that we pledged ourselves sometime ago that every year
we would come together for discussion, when we assemble, then let the date of the
holy Easter be announced through the legates present at the Council. Honoratus and
Urban, the bishops, said : Now we seek of the present assembly that ye deign to
inform our province of that day by letters. Aurelius, the bishop, said : It is neces-
sary it should be so.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LI.

Let the day on which Easter is to be kept he
announced by the Church of Carthage in the
annual synod.


This canon is the first part of Canon iv. of
the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, 397.

Johnson.
The synod met in August. See Can. 78.


CANON LII. (Greek Ivi.)
Of visiting provinces.

Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said : This was commanded to us in word, that
because it had been decreed in the Council of Hi])])() that each province should be vis-
ited in the time of the council, that ye also deign that this year or next, according to
the order ye have drawn \\\), you shoidd visit the province of Mauritania.

Aurelius, the bishop, said : Of the province of Mauritania because it is situated in
the confines of Africa, we have made no decree, for they are neighbours of the barba-
rians ; but God grant (not however that I make any rash proniise of doing so), we may
be able to come to your province. For ye should consider, brethren, that this same
thing our brethren of Tripoli and of the Arzuges region ^ could demand also, if occasion
offered


' The Latin "iioponntur " is almopt certainly corrupt, Van : from Orosius that the pame province was called Tripolifana and
Eepen suppepts " abpoluta Punt" as the meaninc." | Repio Arzugum, and that Arzuges was a race name of wider ap-

' Vide f'orripus ( Partpch'p ed.) Johannid in Mon. Germ. Hist. ; plication,
(in the Series Auctores Anliquissimi), Proem, p. xiv. It seems j


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 467

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LII. t annually ; and the persons by whom this visi-

As the St/nod at Hippo decreed, every prov- tation was performed, can scarce now be dis-

incc should he visited in an annual Synod. covered ; only it appears, by the words of

Aurelius, that the Bishop of Carthage was

This canon is the last part of canon iv of one, if not the only visitor ; but it was im-

the Council of Carthage, August 28th, a. d. 397. possible that he could visit all the provinces


Johnson.
The manner of visiting provinces, and that


in Africa personally every year, he must use
delegates.


CANON LIII. (Greek Ivii.)
Tliat dioceses should not receive a bishop except by the consent of its own bishop.

Epigonius, the bishop, said : In many councils it has been decreed by the sacerdo-
tal assembly that such communities as are contained in other dioceses and ruled by
their bishops, and which nevei' had any bishops of their own, should not receive rulers,
that is bishops, for themselves except with the consent of the bishop under whose
jurisdiction they have been. But because some who have attained a cei-tain domination
abhor the communion of the brethren, or at least, having become depraved, claim for
themselves domination with what is really tyranny, for the most part tumid and stolid
presbyters, who lift up their heads against their own bishops or else win the people to
themselves by feasting them or by malignant persuasion, that they may by unlawful
favour' wish to place themselves as rulers over them ; we indeed hold fast that
glorious desire of your mind, most pious brother Aurelius, for thou hast often opposed
these things, pajiug no heed to such petitioners ; but on account of their evil thoughts
and basely conceived designs this I say, that such a community, which has ahvajs
been subject in a diocese, ought not to receive a rector, nor should it ever have a bishop
of its own. Therefore if this which I have proposed seems good to the whole most
holy council, let it be confii'med.

Aurelius, the bishop, said : I am not in opposition to the proposition of our brother
and fellow bishop : but I confess that this has been and shall be my practice concern-
ing those who were truly of one mind, not only with regard to the Chui'ch of Carthage,
but concerning every sacerdotal assemblage. For there are many who, as has been
said, conspire with the people whom they deceive, tickling their ears and blandly seduc-
ing them, men of vicious lives, or at least puffed up and separated from this meeting,
who think to watch over their own people, and never come to our council for fear that
their wickedness should be discussed. I sa}', if it seems good, that not only should
these not keep their dioceses, but that every effort should be made to have them ex-
pelled by public authority from that church of theirs which has evilly favoured them,
and that they be removed even from the chief sees. For it is right that he who cleaves
to all the brethren and the whole council, should possess with full right not only his
church but also the dioceses. But they who think that the people suffice them and spurn
the love of the brethren, shall not only lose their dioceses, but (as I have said,) they shall
be deprived by public authority of their own cures as rebels. Houoratus and Urban,
the bishops, said : The lofty provision of your holiness obtains the adherence of the
minds of all of us, and I think that by the answer of all what you have deigned to
propose will be confirmed. All the bishops said : Placet, placet,

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LIII.

Wlioso shall neglect his call to a si/ nod, and
shall despise the charity of his brethren, putting


his trust in the multitude who are with him, let
him be deprived of them by the imperial author-
ity.


468 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

This canon is Canon v. of the Synod of fies some town or village lying remote from
Carthage of August 28th, a.d. 397, beginning the Bishop's City, but belonging to his juris-
with the second clause. diction ; and is to be understood to lie a place

distinct from the bishop's church or cathe-


JOHNSON.

It is very evident that a diocese here signi-


dral.

See also Can. 56 and Deer. Anast., 6.


CANON LIY. (Greek Iviii.)
That a sirange cleric is under no circumstances to be received by another.

Ei'lGONius, the bishop, said : This has been decreed in many councils, also just novi'
it has l)eon confirmed b}' your ])rudence, most blessed brethren, that no l)isli()]) should
receive a strange cleric into his diocese without the consent of the bishop to whose juris-
diction the cleric belongs. But I say that Julian, who is ungrateful for the favours
bestowed upon him by God through my littleness, is so rash and audacious, tluit a
certain man who was baptized by me, when he was a most needy boy, commended to
me by the same, and when for many years he had been fed and reared by me, it is cer-
tain that this one, as I have said, was baptized in my Ghurch, by my own unworthy
hands ; this same man began to exercise the office of reader in the Mappalieu diocese,
and read there for nearly two years, with a most incomprehensil)le cout('mj)t of my
littleness, the aforenamed Julian took tliis man, whom lie declared to be a citizen of his
own city Vazarita, and without consulting me ordained him deacon. If, most blessed
brethren, that is permissible, let it be declared to us ; but if not, let such an impudent
one l)e restrained that he may in no way mix himself in someone's communion.

Numidius, the bishop, said : If, as it seems, Julian did this without your worthiness
being asked for bis consent, nor even consulted, we all judge that this was done in-
iquitously and unworthily. AVherefore unless Julian shall correct his error, and shall
return the cleric to your people with proper satisfaction, since what he did was con-
trary to the decrees of the council, let him be condemned and separated froin us on
account of his contumacy. Epigonius, the bishop, said : Our father in age, and most
ancient by his promotion, that laiidable man, our brother and colleague Victor wishes
that this petition should be made general to all.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LIV. This canon is Canon vj. of the Synod of

I Carthage, August 28th, a.d. 397.


Since Jnlinn has ordained a reader of Epi(jo-
niics's to the diaeonate, unless he shall shew au-
thor it >j received from him to do so, he shall in-
crease the penalty of his contumacy.


Johnson.

See Canon of the Apostles, 12 (15, 16), and
Chalcedon, 10.


CANON LV. (Greek lix.)

That it be I a wf 2d for the bishop of Carthage to ordain a cleric ivhenever he icishes.

AuKELius, the bishop, said : My lu'etlireu, pray allow me to speak. It often happens
that ecclesiastics who are in need seek deacons [pncjiositis in the Latin], or presbyters
or bisho])s from me : and I, bearing in mind what things have been ordained these I
observe, to wit, I sunimon the bishoj) of the cleric who is sought for, and I shew him the
state of affairs, how that they of a certain church ask for a certain one of his ch^rgy.
Perchance then they make no objection, but lest it liaj)pen that afterwards they might
object when in this case they shall have been demanded (postulati) by me, who (as you
know) have the care of many churches and of the ordinands. It is right therefore that
I should summon a f(>llow l)isho]) with two or three witnesses from our numlu^r. But if


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 409

he be found indevotus [aKa^oal(OTO<i], what does your charity think should be done ? For
I, as ye know, brethren, by the condescension of God have the care of all the churches.
Numidius, the bishop, said : ^ This see always had the power of ordaining a bishop
according to the desire of each Church as he wills and on whose name there was agree-
ment {fuisset convenius). Epigonius, the bishop, said : Your good nature makes small
use of your ]30Avers, for you make much less use of them than you might, since, my
brother, you are good and gentle to all ; for you have the power, but it is far from your
practice to satisfy the person of each bishop in prima tantummodo conventione. But
if it should be thought that the rights of this see ought to be vindicated, 3'ou have the
duty of sup])orting all the churches, wherefore we do not give thee power, but we con-
firm that power thou hast, viz. : that thou hast the right at thy will always to choose
whom thou wilt, to constitute - prelates over peoples and churches who shall have asked
thee to do so, and when thou so desirest. Posthumianns, the bishop, said : Would it be
right that he who had only one presbyter should have that one taken away from him ?
Aurelius, the bishop, said : But there may be one bishop by whom many presbyters can
be made through the divine goodness, but one fit to be made bishop is found with diffi-
culty. Wherefore if any bishop has a presbyter necessary for the episcopate and has
one only, my brother, as you have said, even that one he ought to give up for promo-
tion. Posthumianus, the bishop, said : If some other bishop has plenty of clergy, should
that other diocese come to my help ? Aurelius, the bishop, said : Of course, when 3-0U
have come to the help of another Church, he who has many clerics should be persuaded
to make one over to you for ordination.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LV. | op of Carthage extended to the whole African

Tt 1 r 7 ^ ji, L- 1 -c n n 7 diocose or the six provinces of Africa, which

It IS taivful for the bishop of Carthaqe, when- , ■ -\ a \ i 1 1 • i ■ mi •

J, '11. 7 .7 7 1 I, i contained near live Imudred bisnopncs. ihis

ever he wills, to choose those icho are to be set , , -> , » j. t j.- £

,, , , ./. ,, , was what caused svxch irequent ordinations oi

over the churches : even if there tvere onti/ one -, • i • j.i /-n i j? n ^i /c< r^

,, i;^7z:T 1-7 bishops 111 tlie Cliurch ol Carthag^e bee Can.

presbyter worthii of rule. For one bishop can .„ t^ i ai xt i \ a i -i • j? ^i

z 1 ■ 1: , 7 J v?< ^ ^7 ■ Air. 49, and the Note) And it is further

ordain many presbiiters, but one fit for tlie epis- i. at i. i.i -d- i i? n ti i, i

copate is hard to find. ^ -^ ^ apparent, that the Bishop of Carthage had

•' some power over tlie whole Alrican cnurcn,

mi • ■ IT ^ , 1 te e n •• .'and was probably their visitor (See Can. 52).

iliis canon is the first halt of Canon vii. ol t, , ,1 , i i i -1 i e -1 ■ ■

,1 ^ -1 / ^ ^1 1114 L ooj^i But that he had the sole power ol ordainmer

the Council of Carthage held August 28tli 1 • i f 1 i .n at ■ i

OQ7 ^' e & bishops lor every church, with the assistance

-J of anv two bishops, does not appear, though

Johnson. Justellus is of this opinion ; nay, the 49th

It is evident, that this privilege of the Bish- canon proves that he had it not.

CANON LVI. (Greek Ix.)

That bishops who ivere ordained for dioceses shall not choose for themselves dioceses [in
the Greek provinces^.

HoNORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said : We have heard that it has been decreed
that dioceses should not be deemed fit to receive bishops, unless with the consent of
their founder : but in our province since some have been ordained bishops in the dio-
cese, by the consent of that bishop by whose power they were established, have even
seized dioceses for themselves, this should be corrected by the judgment of j-our charity,
and prohibited for the future. Epigonius, the bishop, said : To every bishop should be
reserved what is right, so that from the mass of dioceses no part should be snatched
away, so as to have its o\^^l bishop, without consent from the proper authority. For it
shall suftice, if the consent be given, that the diocese thus set apart have its own bishop

' The meaning of this whole canon ie very obscure, the text I ^Migne's text reads this negatively " ut non constituas." but I
is almost certainly corrupt ; and the Greek in many places in no | have followed Labbe and Cossart and have omitted the " non."
way corresponds to the Latin.


470 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

only, and let Lim * not seize other dioceses, for only the one cut uli' f loin the many merited
the honour of receiving a bishop. Aurelius, the bishop, said : I do not doubt that it is
pleasing to the charity of you all, that he who was ordained for a diocese by the consent
of the bishop who luldtlie mother see, should retain only tlie people for whom he was
ordained. Since therefore I think that everything has been treated of, if all things are
agi'eeable to your mind, pray confirm them all by your sufirage. All the l)islio])s said:
We all are well pleased, and we have confirmed them with our subscription. And they
signed their names.

I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and
have subscribed what has been read. So too did all the other bishops in like fashion
sign.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVI. ; done when Caesarius and Atticus were consuls.

If anil diocese has received consent to //are o^ anno xrve vulg. 397. and there is mention of
bishop of its own from him who has the right, an embassy of two bishops from a council of
that one shall not invade tJie rest of the dioceses. Carthage to the Emperors, to procure the

privilege of sanctuary to all impeached for any

This is the last part of Canon vij. of the crime, if they tied to the Church. This is
Synod of Carthage, August 28, a.d. 397. said to be done when Honorius and Eutychi-

anus were consuls, anno a-rje vulg. 398. And
Johnson. further, here is an account of a bishop sent

It had scarce been worth while to give so legate to Anastasius, Bishop of the Apostoli-
much of this canon in English if I had not cal see, and Venerius of Milan, to sujjply the
thought it proper, in order to confirm the African Church with men fit to be ordained,
sense of the word diocese, mentioned in note For Aurelius complains that many Churches
on Can. 53, viz., a town or village, where have not so much as one man, not so much as
there is a church subject to the bishop of the an illiterate one, in deacon's orders, much less
city. had they a competent number of men for the

Between this canon and the following, there superior dignities. He speaks of the impor-
is a reference to a former council at Carthage tunate clamours of many people, that were
forbiddinc^ bishops to sail, without a formal themselves almost killed, I suppose, by some
letter from the Primate ; and this said to be common pestilence.

In this council it loas decreed that bishops should not travel by sea ivithout formed, letters.

During the consulate of those illustrious men, C;esar and Atticus, on the sixth before
the Calends of July, at Carthage, it seemed good that no bishop should travel by water
without "formed letters" from the Primate. The authentic acts will be found by him
who seeks them.

In this council, bishops whose names are set down hcrcdf/er were sent as legates to the
Emperor.

After the consulate of the most glorious Emperor Honorius Augustus for the fourth
time, and of the renowned Eutychian, on the fifth of the calends of May, at Carthage iu
the secretarium of the restored basilica. In this council Epigonius and Vincent, the
bishops, received a le<j:ati()n, in order that they might obtain a law from the most glori-
ous princes in behalf of those taking refuge in the Church, whatever might be the
crime of which they were accused, that no one should dare to force them away.

In this council a legation vjas sent to the Bishops of Bovie and Milan with regard to
children baptized by heretics, and to the Emperor with regard to having such idols as still
remained taken avjay, and cdso with regard, to many other matters.

After the consulate of the renowned Mabius Stilico, on the sixteenth of the calends
of July, at Carthage in the secretarium of the restored basilica.

When Aurelius, the Bishop, together with his fellow-bisliops liad taken their seats,

1 The common reading " vindicent" is almost certainly wrong, and is not even mentioned by Brune.


AFKICAN CODE. A.D. 419 471


the deacons standing b}^ Aurelius, the Bishop, said : Your charity, most holy brethren,
knows fully as well as I do the necessities of the churches of God throughout Africa.
And since the Lord has vouchsafed that from a part of your holy company this present
assembly should be convened, it seems to me that these necessities which in the dis-
. charge of our solicitude we have discovered, we ought to consider together. And after-
wards, that there should be chosen a bishop from our number who may, with the help
of the Lord and your prayers, assume the burden of these necessities, and zealously ac-
complish whatever ought to be done in the premises, going to the parts of Italy across
seas, that he may acquaint our holy brethren and fellow-bishops, the venerable and
holy brother Anastasius, bishop of the Apostolic see, and also our holy brother Vene-
rius the Bishop of Milan, with our necessity and grief, and helplessness. For there has
been withheld from these sees the knowledge of what was necessary to provide against
the common peril, especially that the need of clergy is so great that many churches are
in such destitution as that not so much as a single deacon or even an unlettered clerk
is to be found. I say nothing of the superior orders and offices, because if, as I have
said, the ministry of a deacon is not easily to be had, it is certainly much more difficult
to find one of the superior orders. [And let them also tell these bishops] that we can
no longer bear to hear the daily lamentations of the different peoples almost ready to
die, and unless we do our best to help them, the grievous and inexcusable cause of the
destruction of innumerable souls will be laid at our door before God.


CANON LVII. (Greek Ixi.)

That persons baptized when child^'en by the Donatists may he oi'dained clergymen in the
Catholic Church.

Since in the former council it was decreed, as your unanimity remembers as well as
I do, that those who as children were baptized by the Donatists, and not yet being able
to know the pernicious character of their error, and afterward when they had come to the
use of reason, had received the knowledge of the truth, abhorred their former error,
and were received, (in accordance with the ancient order) by the imposition of the
hand, into the Catholic Church of God spread throughout the world, that to such the
remembrance of the error ought to be no impediment to the reception of the clerical
office. For in coming to faith they thought the true Church to be their own
and there they believed in Christ, and received the sacraments of the Trinity. And
that all these sacraments are altogether true and holy and divine is most certain, and
in them the whole hope of the soul is placed, although the presumptuous audacity of
heretics, taking to itself the name of the truth, dares to administer them. They are
but one after all, as the blessed Apostle tells us, saying: "One God, one faith, one bap-
tism," and it is not lawful to reiterate what once only ought to be administered. [Those
therefore who have been so baptized] having anathematized their error may be received
by the imposition of the hand into the one Church, the pillar as it is called, and the
one mother of all Christians, where all these Sacraments are received unto salvation
and everlasting life ; even the same sacraments which obtain for those persevering in
heresy the heavy penalty of damnation. So that which to those Avho are in the truth
lighteueth to the obtaining of eternal life, the same to them who are in error tends but to
darkness and damnation. With regard then to those who, having fled from error, acknowl-
edge the breasts of their mother the Catholic Church, who believe and receive all these
holy mysteries with the love of the truth, and besides the Sacraments have the testimony
of a good life, there is no one who would not grant that without doubt such persons
may be raised to the clerical office, especially in such necessity as the ]3resent. But
there are others of this sect, who being already clergymen, desire to pass to us with
their peoples and also vv^ith their honours, such as for the sake of office are converts to
life, and that they may retain them seek for salvation [i.e., enter the Church]. I think
that the question concerning such may be left to the graver consideration of our afore-


472 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

said brothers, and that when they have considered by their more prudent counsel the
matter refeired to them, they may vouchsafe to advise us -what a2)proves itself to them
with regard to this question. Only conceruiui^ those who as chiklreu were baptized by
heretics we decree that they c(msent, if it seems good, to our decision concerning the
ordination of the same. All things, thereftu'e, which Ave have set forth above with the
holy bishops, let your honourable fraternity with me adjudge to be done.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVII. the third to tliat of June 15 (or 16), a.d.

SiuJi as have been tchUe children baptized r^^^-
by (he Donafists may be ordained should they \ The canon is Canon j. of the Synod of


repent, anathematize their heresy, and be other-
wise tvorthy.

Of the three Introductions to Carthaginian
Councils which precede this canon, the lirst
refers to the synod held June 2(5, a.d. 397 ;
the second to that held April 27, a.d. 399 ; and


Carthage of June 15 (or IG), a.d. 401. The
eight other canons of this synod follow in the
African Code in their own order.

Johnson.

See Can. 47, which was made in a former
synod.


CANON LVIII. (Greek Ixii.)

Of the remaining idols or temples ivhich should he done aivay by the Emperors.

Wherefoue the most religious Emperors should be asked' that they order the re-
maining idols to be taken entirely away throughout all Africa; for in many maritime
places and in divers possessions the iniquity of this error still flourishes : that they
command them to be taken away and their temples, (such as are no ornament, being set
up in fields or out of the way places) be ordered to be altogether destroyed.


This is Canon ij. of the Synod of Carthage
of June 15 (16), a.d. 401.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon LVIII.

The remains of the idols should be abolished
altogether.

CANON LIX. (Greek Ixiii.)

That clerics he not compelled to give testimony in public concerning the cognizance of
their oivn judgment.

It should be petitioned also that they deign to decree, that if perchance any shall
have been Avilling to plead their cause in any church according to the Apostolic law
imposed upon the Churches, and it ha]i]iens that the decision of the clergy does not
satisfy one of the parties, it be not lawful to summon that clergyman mIio had been
cognitor or present,'- into judgment as a witness, and that no person attached to any
ecclesiastic be compelled to give testimony.


NOTES.


Johnson.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LIX.

A cleric ivho has decided a case shall not, if it

be displeasing, be summoned to a tribunal to "According to the Apostoliclaw," viz., that

yive evidence cnncerninq it ; and no crclrsiasti- *^' '^^- l^^'^id, 1 Cor. vi. 1, 2, etc. I follow the

cal person shall be forced to yive testimony. Greek scholia in rendering this canon. In

Latin coynitor is he that is solicitor, or advo-

Tl lis is Canon iij. of the Synod of Carthage, cate, rather than tlie judge who takes cog-
June 15 (or 16), A.D. 401. nizauce.

' I have followed the Greek text. The Latin reads : " Instant I ' Thit< mupt mean " who had heard the cause or been present at
etiam ali.e uecei^sitates religiosis imperitoribus postulaud.-c " | the hearing," and so the Greek has it.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 473

CANON LX. (Greek Ixiii.)

Of heathen feasts.

This also must be sought, that (since contrary to the divine precepts feasts are held
in many places, which have been induced by the heathen error, so that now Christians
are forced to celebrate these by lieathens, from which state of things it happens that in
the times of the Christian Emperors a new jiersecution seems to have secretlv arisen :)
they order such things to be forbidden and prohibit them from cities and possessions
under pain of punishment ; especially should this be done since they do not fear to
commit such iniquities in some cities even upon the natal days of most blessed mar-
tyrs, and in the very sacred places themselves. For upon these days, shame to say,
they perform the most wicked leapings throughout the fields and open places, so that
matronal honour and the modesty of innumerable women who have come out of
devotion for the most holy day are assaulted by lascivious injuries, so that all approach
to holy religion itself is almost fled from.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LX.


The Greeic feasts must cease to be kept, because


Johnson.
Bishop Beveridge and Tilius's edition of
these canons, in Greek and Latin, number


of their impropriety, and because tlicij seduce the two preceding canons as I have done in


many Christians, moreover they are celebrated on
the commemorations of the martyrs.

This is Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage,
Aug. 15 (or 16), A.D. 401.


the margin, with the same figures [viz: 63] .
I follow them in this error because by this
means the reader may more readily be referred
from the Latin original and from this English
translation to the Greek.


CANON LXI. (Greek Ixiv.)

Of spectacles, that they he not celebrated on Lord's days nor on the festivals of the Saints.

FuRTHERMOEE, it must be sought that theatrical spectacles and the exhibition of
other plays be removed from the Lord's day and the other most sacred days of the
Christian religion, especially because on the octave day of the holy Easter [i.e., Low
Sunday] the people assemble rather at the circus than at church, and they should be
transferred to some other day when they happen to fall upon a day of devotion, nor
shall any Christian be compelled to witness these spectacles,^ especially because in the
performance of things contrary to the precepts of God there should be no persecution
made by anyone, but (as is right) a man should exercise the free will given him by God.
Especially also should be considered the peril of the co()perators who, contrary to the
precepts of God, are forced by great fear to attend the shews.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon LXI. This is Canon V. of the Synod of Carthage,

There shall be no theatrical representations J^^i^e 15th (16), a.d. 401.
upon Lord's days or feast days.

CANON LXII. (Greek Ixv.)

Of condemned clerics.

And this should be sought, that they deign to decree that if any clergyman of what-
ever rank shall have been condemned by the judgment of the bishops for any crime, he
may not be defended either by the churches over which he presided, nor by anyone what-

1 Here ends the Greek text.


474 AFKICAN CODE. A.D. 419


ever, niuler pain of loss both of money and office, and let them order that neither age nor

sex be received as an excuse.

NOTES.


A>x'iENT Epitome of Canon LXII.
No one shall justify a clergyman condemned by
his own bishop.


This is Canon vj. of the Synod of Carthage,
June 15 (or 16), a.d. 401.


CANON LXIII. (Greek Ixvi.)

Of players loho have become Christians.

And of them also it must be sought that if anyone wishes to come to the gi-ace of
Christianitv from any ludicrous art {ludicra arte) and to remain free of that stain, it be
not lawful for anyone to induce him or compel him to return to the performance of the

same things again.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIII.
Whoever has turned away from tlie stage to
adopt an honest life, shall not be led back thereto.

This is Canon vij. of the Synod of Car-
thage, June 15 (or IG), a. d. 401.


Johnson.

This canon is probably to be understood of
slaves bought by their masters for the service
of the Circ, or Theatre.


CANON LXIY. (Greek Ixvii.)

0/ celebrating manumissions in church, that permission be asked from the Emperor.

Concerning the publishing of manumissions in church, if our fellow bishops
throughout Italy shall bi; found to do this, it will be a mark of our confidence to follow
their order [of proceedings], full powder being given to the legate we send, that what-
ever he can accomplish worthy of the faith, for the state of the Church and the salva-
tion of souls, we shall laudably accept in the sight of the Lord. All which things, if
they please yom- sanctity, pray set forth, that I may be assured that 1113- suggestion has
been ratified by you and that their sincerity may freely accept our unanimous action.
And all the bishops said : The things which have been enjoined to be done and have
been wisely set forth by your holiness are pleasing to all.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIV.


Johnson.

It is certain, that in Italy, and some other
The Emperor s permission should besought ^/o ' parts of the Empire, slaves were solemnly set

at liberty by tlieir masters, in the church and
presence of the bishop, from the time of Con-
stantine, but it should seem this custom had


allow the public manumission of slaves in church.


This is Canon viij. of the Synod of Car
thage, June 15 (or IG), a. n. 401. ' not yet obtained in Africa.

CANON LXV. (Greek Ixviii.)

Concerning the condeTunecl bis/iop f^fjuitius.

AuRELTUs, the bishop, said : I do not think that the case of E(]uitius should be passed
over in the legation, who some time ago for his crimes was condemned 1)V an Episcoi)al
sentence ; that if by any chance our legate should meet him in those yiavts, our brother
should take care for the state of the Church, as opportunity offered or where he could, to


AFEICAN CODE. A.D. 419 475


act against liiui. And all the bishops said : This prosecution is exceedingly agreeable
to us, especially as Equitius was condemned some time ago, his impudent unrest ought
to be repelled everywhere more and more for the good estate and health of the Church.
And they subscribed, I, Aurelius, the bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented
to this decree, and after having read it have signed my name. Likewise also signed all
the other bishops.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXV. | This is Canon ix. of the Synod of Carthage,

Equitius, who had been condemned by fhe ^^^^^ 1^ (oi' 16), a.d. 401.
j%idgment of the bishops, and had behaved impu-

dentlif against the ecclesiastical aidhority, ought Johnson.

to be opposed. I See Can. Af r. , 78.

In this council the letters of Anastasius the Roman Pontiff ivere read, admonishing the
Catholic bishops concerning the Donatists.

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Vencentius and Flavins, on the Ides
of September, at Carthage, in the secretarium of the restored basilica. When we had
been gathered together in council in the church at Carthage and had taken our seats,
bishops from all the African Provinces, that is to say, Aurelius, the bishop of that see
with his colleagues (just who they were is made evident by their signatures) [the same
bishop Aurelius said] : When the letters of our most blessed brother and fellow^ priest,
Anastasius, bishop of the Church of Rome, had been read, in which he exhorted us out
of the solicitude and sincerity of his paternal and brotherly love, that we should in no
way dissimulate with regard to the wiles and Avickednesses of the Donatist heretics and
schismatics, by which they gravely vex the Catholic Church of Africa, we thank our Lord
that he hath vouchsafed to inspire that best and holy archbishop with such a pious care
for the members of Christ, although in divers lands, yet builded together into the one
body of Christ.

CANON LXVI. (Greek Ixix.)

2'hat the Donatists are to he treated leniently.

Then when all things had been considered and treated of which seem to conduce to
the advantage of the church, the Spirit of God suggesting and admonishing us, we deter-
mined to act leniently and pacifically w-itli the before-mentioned men, although they were
cut off from the unity of the Lord's body by an unruly dissent, so that (as much as in us
lies) to all those wdio have been caught in the net of their communion and society, it might
be know^n throughout all the provinces of Africa, how they have been overcome by misera-
ble error, holding different opinions, "that perchance," as the Apostle says, w'hen we have
corrected ^ them wdth gentleness, " God should grant them repentance for the acknowdedg-
ing of the truth, and that they might be snatched out of the snares of the devil, who are
led captive of him at his wall."

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVI.

It seemed good that the Donatists should be
treated kindly and with leniency, even if they
should separate themselves from the Church, so
that perchance through their respiectfor our great
gentleness they may be loosed from their captivity.


The introduction refers to the Synod of
Carthage of September 13, 401, and this canon
is part of Canon j. of that Synod. We are in-
debted to the Ballerini for collecting the acts
of this Synod by a comparison of the pseudo-
Isidore, Dionysius, Ferrandus and the quota-
tions contained in the acts of the Synod of
Carthage of 525.


* The Greek reads "when we have gathered them together."


476 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

CANON LXYII. (Greek Ixx.)

Of the letters to he sent to the judges, that they may take note of the things done between
the Donatists and the Maximianists.

Therefore it seemed good that letters should be given from our council to the African
judges, from whom it would seem suita])le that this should be sought, that in this matter
they would aid the common mother, the Catholic Church, that the episcopal authority
may be fortiticd ' in the cities; that is to say that by their judicial power and with dili-
gence out of their Christian faith, they enquire and record in the pul)lic acts, that all
may have a firm notion of it, what has taken place in all those ]ilaces in which the
Maximianists, who made a schism from them, have obtained basilicas.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXYII.


The secular ai'm must he implored by sjinoddl
letters to assist our common Jlot/ier the Catholic
Church against those by whom the authority of
the bishop is despised.


This canon is the other half of Canon j. of
the Synod of Carthage, September 13, a.d. 401.

Johnson.

Maximianists were a sect bred out of the
Donatists, and separating from them.


CANON LXVIII. (Greek Ixxi.)

That the Donatist clergy are to he received into the Catholic Church as clergymen.

It moreover seemed good that letters be sent to our brethren and fellow-bishops, and
especially to the Apostolic See, over which our aforesaid venerable brother and colleague
Anastasius, presides, that [eVetS?) in the Greek, quo in the Latin] he may know that Africa
is in great need, for the peace and prosperity of the Church, that those Donatists who
were clergymen and who by good atlvice had desired to leturn to Catholic unity, should
be treated according to the will and judgment of each Catholic bishop who governs the
Church in that place ; and, if it seem good for Christian peace, they be received
with their honours, as it is clear was done in the fornuM- times of this same division.
And that this was the case the example of the majority, yea, of nearly all the African
Churches in which this error had sprung u]), testify ; not that the Council which met
about this matter in foreign parts should be done away, but that it may remain in
force with regard to those who so will to come over to the Catholic Church that there be
procured by them no breaking of unity. But those through whom Catholic unit}' was
seen to have been altogether pei-fected or assisted by the manifest winning of the souls
of their brethren in the places where they live, there shall not be objected to them
the decree contrary to their honour adoi)ted by a foreign council, for salvation is shut
off to no one, that is to say, that those ordained by the Donatist party, if having been
corrected they have been willing to return to the Catholic Church, are not to be - re-
ceived in their grades, according to the foreign council ; but they are to be excepted
through whom they received the advice to retiu-n to Catholic unity.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXVIII.


Balsamon.
This canon is special, for it seemed good to
Those ordained by the DonaHsts, even though the fathers that such of the Donatists as came
their reeepii<m has been forbidden b]i a foreign to tlie orthodox faith should be so received as
synod, since it is truhj good that (dl should be to hold the grade of their holy orders, even
saved, if they correct themselves, let them be re- though a transmarine, that is to say an Ital-
ceived. ian, council had decreed othel'^vise.


' In the Greek, " since the episcopal authority is spurned." ' The Greek and Beveridge introduce a second " not."


AFRICAN CODE. A.I). 419


477


Aristenus.

Those Doiiatists who are peuiteut .incl anath-
ematize their heresy are to be allowed to re-
main in their proper rank, and be numbered
among the clergy of the Catholic Church,
because Africa was labouring under a great
shortness of clergy.

This canon is Cauou ij. of Carthage, Sept.,
A.D. 401.

Johnson.

Whether the Douatists' clergy should be re-
ordained was only a point of discipline ; for
the Donatists retained Episcopacy. There-
fore the African fathers, as they leave other
churches to their liberty, so at the same time
they declare that they would continue their
old practice, and leave every bishop to act ac-
cording to his own discretion in this matter.
Probably, one great motive, besides that of
peace, which they had to this, was the great
scarcity of clergymen in Africa, of which Au-
relius complains in his speech, inserted into
the Acts before Canon 77 (61), and proposes
that they send to the bishops of Rome and
Milan for a supply. And that this was the


true reason, does in some measure ajjpear
from the words of the Latin canon at large,
in which the occasion of this decree is said to
be projjfer necessitatem. And this is the most
probable reason why it is left to the discretion
of the bishop, whether to admit Donatist cler-
gymen as such, if he had occasion for their
service. And after all it is clear from this
very canon, that other churches had deter-
mined this point the contrary way. There-
fore Mr. Calamy exceeds when he says : " As
for the Donatists, all agree that their orders
were acknowledged." Further, he would have
it thought probable, that orders were not
always conferred among the Donatists by
persons superior to presbyters. This he
would infer from the great number of the
bishops of that faction in Africa, viz., 278,
many of which (says he) could be no more
than parish ministers. But why so ? Were
there not above four hundred Catholic bish-
ops ? And Avhy not as many of one side as
the other? If our dissenters of any sort had
fallen into the Episcopal form of government,
no question but they would have had a bish-
op in every city at least, and equalled our
church in the number of prelates.


CANON LXIX. (Greek Ixxii.)

That a legation he sent to the Donatists for the sake of inaTcing peace.

It further seemed good, that when these things were done, legates should be sent
from our number to those of the Donatists whom they hold as bishops, or to the peo-
ple, for the sake of preaching peace and unity, wdthout which Christian salvation can-
not be attained ; and that these legates should direct the attention of all to the fact that
the}^ have no just objection to urge against the Catholic Church. And especially that
this be made manifest to all by the municipal acts (on account of the weight of their
documents) what they themselves had done in the case of the Maximianists, their own
schismatics. For in tliis case it is shewn them by divine grace, if they wall but heed it,
that their separation from the unity of the Church is as iniquitous as they now^ pro-
claim the schism of the Maximianists from themselves to be. Nevertheless from the
number, those whom they condemned by the authority of their plenary council, they
received back with their honours, and accepted the baptism w^hich they had given while
condemned and cut off. And thus let them see how with stupid heart they resist the
peace of the Church scattered throughout the whole world, when they do these things
on the part of Douatus, neither do they say that they are contaminated by communion
with those whom they so receive for the making of peace, and yet they despise us, that
is the Catholic Church, which is established even in the extreme parts of the earth, as
being defiled by the communion of those whom the accusers have not been able to win
over to themselves.'

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXIX.

It seemed good flint legides he sent to jyreach
peace and nniti/ to the Donatists ivlio had been
converted to the orthodox faith.


This canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, Sep-
tember, A.D. 401.


' I think this is the probable meaning of the canon.


478 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


C.\NON LXX. (Greek Ixxiii.)

W/uU clerics a/wuld abatainfrotn their loives.

Moreover since incoiitinence has beeu chiu<j;ed against some clergymeu with rej^ard
to their own wives it has seemed good that bishojjs, ])resl)yters, and deacons should
according to the statutes ah-eady made abstain even from their own wives ; and unless
they do so that they should l)e removed from the clerical ofhce. But the rest of the
clergy shall not be forced to this but the custom of each church in this matter shall be
followed.

NOTES.


A>xiENT Epitome of Canon LXX.

Bishops, presbyters and deacons shall abstain
for their wires or else be rcmored from the ecclesi-
astical order. But the rest of the clerf/// shall
not be forced to tlie same: but let the custom be
observed.


This is Canon iv. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.

Johnson.

A repetition of Canon 25 (28).


CANON LXXI. (Greek Ixxiv.)

Of those who leave in neglect their axon j>eojple.

Moreover it seemed good that no one should be allowed to leave his chief cathedral
and go to another church built in the diocese, or to neglect the care and frequent at-
tendance upon his own cathedral by reason of too great care for his own affairs.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXI. This is Canon vj. of Carthage, Seiiteinber,

It seemed good thai no bishop shall translate a.d. 401.
himself to another see, leaviny his own, nor that\ Johnson.

through a care for his own affairs he shoiddneg- See Canons 53 (57), 56 (60).
led his diocese. 1 "Princiixilis Cathedra,"' his own Cathedral.

CANON LXXII. (Greek Ixxv.)

Of the hajjtism of infants when there is soine doubt of their being already baptized.

Ite.m, it seemed good that whenever there were not found reliable w^itnesses who
could testify that without any doubt the}' were Iniptized and when the children them-
selves were not, on account of their tender age, able to answer concerning the giving of
the sacraments to them, all such children should be baptized without scrapie, lest a
hesitation should deprive them of the cleansing of the sacraments. This was ui'ged by
the Moorish Legates, our brethren, since they redeem many such from the barbarians.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXII. had been baptized or no ; lest they might through

that doubt lose the divine aJ)lution.
It seemed good that thry should h,> baptized rpj^j^ -^ (.^^^^^^ ^," ^^ Carthage, September,
about ivhom there was an ambiguity whether they ^ ^ ^qj^

CANON LXXIII. (Greek Ixxvi.)

27ie date of fdister and the date of the Council should he ayinounced.

Item, it seemed good that the day of the venerable Easter should be intimated to
all by the subscription of formed letters ; and that the same should be observed with
regard to the date of the Council, according to the decree of the Council of Hippo, that


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 479


is to say the X. Calends of September, and that it should be written to the primates of
each province so that Avhen they summon their councils they do not impede this day.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIII.
It seemed good that the day of the Holy Easter
should be announced on the day of the annual
Synod, or on the tenth day before the calends of
September.

This is Canon viij. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.


Johnson.

See Can. 51 (55).

" The time of council," i.e., of the national
council at Carthage.

The Greek canon says rj npo SeVa KaXavSwv
2€irT€fj.l3pL(jiv, and Zonaras makes this the 21st
of August, but he mistakes in his calcula-
tion.


A.D. 401.

Johnson.


CANON LXXIV. (Greek kxvii.)

That no hishop who is an intercessor is to hold tlce see where he is intercessor.

Item, it has been decreed that it is not lawful to any intercessor to retain the see
to which he has been appointed as intercessor, by any popular movements and sedi-
tions ; but let him take care that Avithin a year he provide them with a bishop : but if he
shall neglect to do so, when the year is done, another intercessor shall be appointed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIV. \ This is Canon IX. of Carthage, September,

It seemed good that tlie bishop wJw had been
called in as an intercessor, by the zeal and dissen-
sions of the people, shoidd not be alloived to be- \ We here call this ofllicer " Guardian of the
come the occupant of its throne : but let a bishop spiritualities" in the vacancy of the see.
be provided within a year, or else in the next \
year let another intercessor be appointed.

CANON LXXV. (Greek kxviii.)

Of ashing from the Emperors defenders of the Churches.

On account of the afflictions of the poor by whose troubles the Church is worn out
without any intermission, it seemed good to all that the Emperors be asked to allow de-
fenders for them against the power of the rich to be chosen under the supervision of the
bishops.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXV.
That the bishop be not annoyed, let Defensors


This is Canon X. of Carthage, September,
401.

Johnson.
be appointed. I See note on Can. Chalcedon, 23.

CANON LXXVI. (Greek Ixxix.)

Ofhishojis who do not put in an appearance at Council.

Item, it seemed good that as often as the council is to be assembled, the bishops
who are impeded neither by age, sickness, or other grave necessity, come together, and
that notice be given to the primates of their several provinces, that from all the bishops
there be made two or three squads, and of each of these squads there be elected some
who shall be promptly ready on the council day : but should they not be able to attend,


480 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

let them write their excuses in the tractory,' or if after the couiiiif]; of the tractorv cer-
tain necessities smidenly arise by chance, unless they semi to thcnr own primat*^ an
account of their iinpeiliment, they ouj^ht to be content with tlu' roumiuuiun of tlicir

own Church.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVI. by the Primate of the province to the synodi-

_, , , , ,. , ^, 1 J I cal letter sent by the Bishop of Carthage.

Those who do not attend the annual synod, i. ^^^ ^^^^ inserted between canon DOth and
nn ess tin, he mv,AuntanU, prevented m>i>4 ^'\^\^i "Tractoria" seems to denote the letter


satisfied tvith the communion of their own
churches


of the Primate to tlie inferior bishops for
choosing legates, if it do not rather denote


_,, . . ^ . , ^ .1 Oil the Bishop of Carthage's circular-letter to all

This IS Canon xj., of Carthage, September, ^,^^ primates, as it does in the next para-


401

Johnson.

" Tractory " has several significations ; here
it seems to denote the written return made


graph.

[The penalty in the last clause is] a very
singular sort of censure, and very motlerate.
See Can. 80 (83).


CANON LXX^^I. (Greek Ixxx.)

Of Cresconius.

Concerning Cresconius of Villa Regis this seemed good to all, that the Primate of
Numidia should be informed on this matter so that he should by his letters summon
the aforementioned Cresconius in order that at the next plenary Council of Africa he
should not put off making an appearance. But if he contemns the summons and does
not come, let him recognize the fact that sentence should be ju-ouounced against him.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVII. This canon was probably formerly an ap-

Unless Cresconius who has been snmmoned by peudix (so Hefele thinks) to Canon xj.. of the
letter to the Synod, shall appear, let him know Synod of Carthage of September 13, 401.
that he will ham sentence given against him.

CANON LXXYIII. (Greek Ixxxi.)

Of the Church of Hippo- Diarrhytus.

It further seemed good that since the destitution of the Church of Hippo-Diar-
rhytus should no longer be neglected, and the churches there are retained by those who
have declined the infamous communion of Equitius, that certain bishops be sent from
the present council, viz. : Reginus, Alypius, Augustine, Materuus, Theasius, Evodius,
Placian, Urban, Valerius, Ambivius, Fortunatus, Quodvultdeus, Honoratus, Januarius,
Aptus, Honoratus, Ampelius, Victorian, Evangelus and Piogation ; and when those had
been gathered together, and those had been corrected who with cul])able pertinacity
were of opinion that this flight of the same Equitius should be waited for, let a bishop
be ordained for them by the vote of all. Put if these should not be willing to consider
peace, let them not ]n'event the choosing for ordination of a bishop, for the advantage
of the church which has been so long destitute.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXVIII. l jjippo shoxdd be elected, and that theij shndd in
It seemed good that, after Equitius had been no u-ay impede the ordination of a prelate for
condemned by the unirrrsal voir, a btsliop of that church.


' All mention of the " tractory" is omitted in the Greek version.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


481


This canon was likewise probably an ap-
pendix, to Canon xiij, of the Synod of Car-
thac^e of September 13th, 401, according
to Hefele.


Johnson.
See Can. Afr., 65.

Here the place of election and consecration
seems to be the vacant see.


CANON LXXIX. (Greek Ixxxii.)

Of clerics who do not take care to have their causes argued ivithin a year.

It was further decreed that as often as clergymen convicted and confessed ^ of any
crime either on account of eorum, quorum verecuudiiB parcitur, or on account of the
opprobrium to the Church, and of the insolent glorying of heretics and Gentiles, if per-
chance they are willing to be present at their cause and to assert their innocence, let
them do so within one year of their excommunication ; if in truth they neglect during
a year to purge their cause, their voice shall not be heard afterwards.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIX.


Wlien a cleric has been convicted of a crime,
if lie says his cause shoidd be heard upon appeal,
let file appeal be made ivithin a year ; after that
the appeal shall not be admitted.


This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.

Johnson.

Though the Latin syntax of this canon is very
confused, and, I am apt to think, corrupted,
yet it is evident enough, that this is the inten-
tion of it.


CANON LXXX. (Greek Ixxxiii.)

That it is not permitted to make superiors of monasteries nor to ordain as clerics those
ivho are received from a monastery not one's oivn.

Item, it seemed good that if any bishop wished to advance to the clericature a monk
received from a monastery not under his jurisdiction, or shall have appointed him supe-
rior of a monastery of his own, the bishop who shall have thus acted shall be separated
from the communion of others and shall rest content with the communion of his own
people alone, but the monk shall continue neither as cleric nor superior.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXX.
Whoever shall receive a monk from a monas-
tery not subject to his jurisdiction, and if he shall
ordain him to the clerical estate or shall appoint
him prior of his monastery, such an one shall be
cut off from communion.


NOTES.

This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.

Johnson.

See Canons 76 (79) and 122 (123).


CANON LXXXI. (Greek Ixxxiv.)

Of bishops who appoint heretics or heathens as their heirs.

Item, it was ordained that if any bishop should prefer to his Church strangers to
blood relationship with him, or his heretical relatives, or pagans as his heirs, he shall be
anathematized even after his death, and his name shall by no means be recited among
those of the priests of God. Nor can he be excused if he die intestate, because being a
bishop he was bound not to postpone making such a disposition of his goods as was
befitting his profession.


' Brans says, Locus corruptus.


482


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXI.
Let a bishop he anathema if he make heretics
and heathen his heirs.

This is Canon xv. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 4(il.

Johnson.

There were in this ao^e two written tables


men now living, with whom that church held
communion and correspondence ; the other,
the names of all eminent bishops, and other
men of their own or other churches, now
dead. The deacon rehearsed all the names, in
both tables at the altar, whenever the Eucha-
rist was celel)rated. These tables were by the
Greeks called AtirTvxa, and by some English

kept in every church, whereof one contained writers "dij^tychs." See Can. of Peter of

the names of all eminent bishops and clergy- Alex., 14.


CANON LXXXII. (Greek Ixxxv.)

Of ma7iu7nissions.

Item, it seemed good that the Emperor be petitioned witli regard to announcing
mauuniissious in church.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXII.


The imperial 2}(">'i^^ission must be asked for
the making of the manumission of slaves in
churches.

Aristenus.

This is the same as the sixty-fourth [Greek
nijmbering] canon, and is there explained.


This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, September,
.A.D. 401.

Johnson.

A repetition of Canon 64 (67).


CANON LXXXIII. (Greek Ixxxvi.)

Of false 3Iemories of Martyrs.

Item, it seemed good that the altars which have liocn set np here and there, in fields
and by the wayside as Memories of Martyrs, in which no body nor reliiiues of martyrs can
be proved to have been laid \\\\ should be overturned by the bishops who rule over such
places, if such a thing can be done. But should this be impossible on accoimt of the
]iopular tumult it would arouse, the poo])le sliouhl none tlie less be admonished not to
frequent such places, and that those who believe rightly should be held bound by no
superstition of the place. And no memory of martyrs should at all be accepted, unless
where there is found the body or some reliques, or wliich is declared traditionally and
by good authority to have been originally his habitation, or possession, or the scene of
his passion. For altars which have been erected anywliere on account of dreams or
inane f/^^asi'-revelations of certain people, should be in every way disapproved of.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.\non LXXXIII. 1 been setup on account of dreams and false 7rve-
An altar in the fa Ids or in a rivei/ard ivhich 'ulions.
lacks the reliques (f the martyrs should tie thnnon


down unless it u-oidd cause a public tumult to
do so : and the same is the case with such as have


This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.


CANON LXXXIV. (Greek Ixxxvii.)

OJ^ extirpating the remains of the idols.

Item, it seemed good to j^^tition tlie most glorious Emperors that the remains of
idolatry not only in images, but in any places whatever or groves or trees, should alto-
gether be taken away.


AFlilCAN CODE. A.D. 419 483


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIV.


Let all remains of idolatrii be abolished ivhethcr
in statues, or in places, or groves or trees.


This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.

Johnson.
See Canon 58 (G2.)


CANON LXXXV. (Greek Ixxxviii.)

Tliat by the bishop of Carf/iru/c, wJwn there shall be need, letters shall be ivritten and
subscribed in the name of all the bishops.

It was said by all the bishops : If any letters are to be composed in the name of the
council it seemed good that the venerable bishop who presides over this See should
vouchsafe to dictate and sign them in the name of all, among which also are those to the
episcopal legates, who are to be sent throughout the African provinces, in the matter of
the Donatists ; and it seemed good that the letters given them should contain the tenor
of the mandate which they are not to go beyond. And they subscribed : I, Aurelius,
bishop of the church of Carthage have consented to this decree and having read it have
signed it. Likewise all the rest of the bishops subscribed.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXV.
It seemed good that whatever letters were to be


This is Canon xix. of Carthage, September,
A.D. 401.


sent from the Synod should be written and sub-
scribed by the bishop of Carthaye in the name
of all.

In this Council previous decrees are confirmed.

In the fifth consulate of the most glorious Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, Augusti,
the VI Calends of September, in the City of Milevis, in the secretarium of the basilica,
when Aurelius the bishop of Carthage had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons
standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said : Since the body of the holy Church is one, and
there is one head of all the members, it has come to pass by the divine permission and
assistance given to our weakness, that we, invited out of brotherly love, have come to
this church. Wherefore I beg jour charity to believe that our coming to you is neither
superfluous, nor unacceptable to all; and that the consent of all of us may make it
manifest that we agree with the decrees already confirmed b}^ the Council at Hippo or
which were defined afterwards by a larger synod at Carthage, these shall now be read to
us in order. Then at last the agreement of j^our holiness will appear clearer than light,
if they know that the things lawfully defined by us in former councils, ye have set
forth, not only by your consent to these acts, but also by your subscriptions.

Xantippus, bishop of the first see of Numidia said : I believe what pleased all the
brethren and the statutes they confirmed with their hands ; we by our subscribing our
names shew that it pleases us also, and have confirmed them with our superscrij^tion.

Nicetius, the bishop of the first see of Mauritania Sitifensis said : The decrees which
have been read, since they do not lack reason, and have been approved by all, these also
are pleasing to my littleness, and I will confirm them with my subscription.

CANON LXXXVI. (Greek Ixxxix.)

Of the order of bishops, that those ordained more recently do not dare to talce pre-
cedence of those ordained, before them.

Valentine, the bishop, said : If your good patience will permit, I follow the things
which were done in time past in the Church of Carthage, ;ind which were illustrious
having been confirmed by the subscriptions of the brethren, and I profess that we


484


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


intend to preserve this. For this we know, that ecclesiastical discipline has always
remained inviolate : therefore let none of the brethren dare to place himself before
those ordained earlier than himself ; but by the offices of charity this has always been
shewn to those ordained earlier, which always should be accepted joyfully by those
ordained more recently. Let your holiness ^'ive command that this order be streufrth-
ened by your interlocutions. Aurelius, the bishop, said : It would not be fitting that
we should repeat these things, were it not for the existence of certain inconsiderate
minds, whieli would induce us to making such statutes; but this is a common cause
about which our brother and fellow bishop has spoken, that each one of us should recog-
nize the order decreed to him by God, and that the more recent should defer to the
earlier ordained, and they should presume to do nothing when these have not been con-
sulted. "Wherefore I say, now that I think of it, that they who think they may presume
to take precedence over those ordained before them, should be coerced suitably by the
great council. Xantippus, l)ishop of the first see of Numidia, said : All the brethren
present have heard what our brother and fellow bishop Aurelius has said, what answer
do we make? Datian, the bishop, said : The decrees made by our ancestors should be
strengthened by our assent, so that the action taken by the Church of Carthage in past
synods should hold fast, being confirmed by the full assent of all of us. And all the
bishops said : This order has been preserved by our fathers and by our ancestors, and
shall be preserved by us through the help of God, the rights of the primacy of Numidia
and of Mauritania being kept intact.

Of the archives and Tnatricula of Numidia.

Moreover it seemed good to all the bishops who subscribed in this council that the
matricula and the archives of Numidia should be at the first see and in the Metropolis,
that is Constantina.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVI.

Thini shaJf not prefer thiiself to thine ciders,
hut shalt follow them. For he that spurns those
who were before him should he frowned down
upon.

The introduction belongs to the Synod of
Milevis, of August 27, a.d. 402.

This canon (Ixxxvj.) is Canon j., of the
above named Synod.

Johnson.

From this canon it appears that the prim-
acy in Africa was ambulatory, and belonged


to the senior bishoj:) of the province. If the
pi'imacy had been fixed to the bishop of any
certain city, as in other countries, there would
have been a salvo or exception for tliat bisliop,
as there is in the 24tli canon of the Synod of
Bracara [Braga] in Spain, which orders that
all bishops take place according to their
seniority, with a reserve to the bishop of the
metropolis. The bishop of Carthage was not
included in this canon ; for it is evident that
he had a precedence annexed to his see, and
that he was in reality a sort of patriarch. The
reason why Numidia and Mauritania are
particularly mentioned is, that some disputes
had been started there on that subject.


CANON LXXXVII. (Greek xc.)

Concerning Quodvultdeus, the bishop.

In the case of Quodvultdeus of Centuria, it pleased all the bisho]is that no one
should communicate with him until his cause should be brought to a C(mclusion, for his
accuser when he sought to bring the cause before our council, upon being asked whether
he was willing with him to be tried before the l)ishops, at first said that he was, but on
another day answered that lie was not willing, and went away. lender these circum-
stances to deprive him of his bislio])rick, before the conclusion of his cause was known,
could commend itself to no Christian as a just act.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 485

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVII. i municated, until the cause is finished. But if

is not just that he be deposed before sentence is
given.


Since Quodvultdeus at first promised to come
to our synod when his op2)oser had asked that he
be admitted, and aftenvards ivithdrcw, saying that


This canon is part of Canon ij. of Synod of


that was displeasing to him, he sJiould be excom- Milevis, a.d. 402.

CANON LXXXVIII. (Greek xci.)

Of Maxiinian, the bishop.

But in the case of Maximian of Vagal ^ it seemed good that letters be sent from the
council both to him and to his people ; that he should vacate the bishoprick, and that
they should request another to be appointed for them.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXVIII.

Let Maximian of Bagai be expelled from his
church, and another be set in his room.


This canon is remaining part of Canon ij.,
of the Synod of Milevis, a.d. 402.


CANON LXXXIX. (Greek xcii.)

TJiat bishops who are Disdained shall receive letters from their ordainers bearing the
date and the name of the consid.

It further seemed good that whoever thereafter should be ordained by the bishops
throughout the African provinces, should receive from their ordainers letters, written in
their own hands, containing the name of the consul and the date, that no altercation
might arise concerning which were ordained first and which afterwards.


Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXIX.

Whoever is ordained in Africa let him have
letters signed by the proper hand of him that or-
dained him, containing the date and tJie name of
the Consul.

This is Canon iij. of Milevis, a.d. 402.


NOTES.

Johnson.
It is evident from this canon that the
church in this age followed the date of the
civil government, which was in the consulship
of Caius and Titius, as our civil date is in the
1st, 2d, 3d, etc., year of the reign of our King
or Queen.


CANON XC. (Greek xciii.)
Of those who have once read in church.^ that they cannot be advanced by others.

Item, it seemed good that whoever in church even once had read should not be ad-
mitted to the ministry {clericatum) by another church.

And they subscribed : I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented
to this decree, and, having read it, have signed it. Likewise also the rest of the bishops
signed.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XC.
He who has only once read in a Church [i.e.,


diocese] shall not be admitted into the clergy by
another Church.

This is Canon iv. of Milevis, 402.


' Hefele saye {Sist. Councils. Vol. n., p. 428) that Vagiensem not Bagajensem is the true reading.


48G AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 410


There is set forth in this council what the bishojps did who were sent as legates across
seas.

In the consulship of those most illustrious men, the most glorious Emperor Theo-
dosius Augustus, uud Itunioridus, the VITI. ' Calends of S<'ptond)er, ;it C:irth;ige, in the
basilica of the second rcj^iou, when Aurelius the bisliop had taken liis seat in ])lenaiy
council, the deacons standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said : From stress of circum-
stances, venerable brethren, 1, although so small, have been led to assemble you in
council. For a while ago, as your holinesses will remember, while holding a council we
sent our brothers as legates to the regions beyonil seas. It is right that these should
at this meeting of yoiir holinesses narrate the course of their now tinisluMl legation, and
although yesterday Avlien we were in session concerning this matter, besides ecclesias-
tical matters, we ]iaid some prolonged attention to what they had done, nevertheless it
is right that to-day the discussion of yesterday should be confirmed by ecclesiastical
action.

Of the blshojys of tJie African provinces who were not present at this council?

The right order of things demands that first of all we should enquire concerning our
brethrtm and fellow l)ishoi)s, who were to come to this council either from Bvzacena or
at least from Mauritania, like as they decreed that they would be present in this council.
And whfui Philologius, Geta, Yenustianus, and Felician, bishops of the province of By-
zacena had presented and read their letters of legation, and Lucian and Silvanus, le-
gates of the province of Mauritania Sitii)liensis, had done the same, the bishop Aurelius
said : Let the text of these writings be placed in the acts.

Of the Byzacene hishojps.

Numidius, the bishop, said : We observe that our brethren and fellow bishops of the
province of Byzacena and of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis have sent legates
to the council; we now seek whether the legates of Numidia have come, or at least of
the i)r()vince of Tripoli or of ^Mauritania-Ciesarieusis.

Of the bishops of Mauritcniia Sitiphensis.

Lucian and Silvanus, the bishops, legates of the Province of Mauritania Sitiphensis
said : The tractory came late to our Ctesarian brethren or they w^ould have been here ;
and they will certainly come, and we are confident of their attitude of mind that what-
ever shall be determined b}' this council, they without doubt will assent unto.

Of the bishops of Ntiinidia.

Alypius, bishop of the church of Tagaste said : We have come from Numidia, I and
the holy brethren Augustine and Possidius, but a legation could not be sent from Nu-
midia, Ijecause by the tumult of the recruits the bishops have either been prevented from
coming or fully occn])ied by their own necessary atiairs in their sees. For after I had
brought to tlie holy Senex Xanti])pus your holiness's tractory, this seemed good in the
present business that a council should be appointed, to which a delegation with instruc-
tions should be sent, but when I reported to him in later letters the im])e(liment of the
recruits, of w^hich I have just spoken, he (!Xcus(h1 them by his own rescrijits. Aurelius,
the bishop, said : There is no doubt that the aforesaid brethren and bisho})s of Numidia,
when they shall have received the acts of the council, will give their consent and will
take pains to carry into effect Avhatever shall have been adopted. It is therefore neces-
sary that by the solicitude of this see what we shall have determined be comnninicated
to them.


' Nino, in some ^tSS.

' In the Greek this iB made part of the last sentence, and for " Of " it reads •• for the sake of " (iid).


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 487


Of the hisliojys of Trvpoli.

This is what I could learu conceriniiEi; our brethren of Tripoli, that they appointed
our brother Dulcicius as a legate : but because he could not come, certain of our sons
coming from the aforesaid province asserted that the aforesaid had taken shipping, and
that it was thought that his arrival had been delayed by storms ; nevertheless also con-
cerning these matters, if your charity is willing, this form shall be preserved, that the
placets of the couucii be sent to them. And all the bishops said : What your holiness
has decreed pleases us all.

CANON XCI. (Greek xciv.)

Of holding meetings xoith the Donatists.

Aurelius, the bishop, said : What has come out in the handling of your charity, I
think this should be confirmed by ecclesiastical acts. For the profession of all of you
shews that each one of us should call together in his city the chiefs of the Donatists
either alone and with one of his neighl)our bishops, so that in like manner in the differ-
ent cities and places there should be meetings of them assembled by the magistrates or
seniors of the places. And let this be made an edict if it seems good to all. And all
the bishops said : It seems good to all, and we all have confirmed this with our sub-
scription. Also we desire that your holiness sign the letters to be sent from the council
to the judges. Aurelius, the bishop, said : If it seems good to your charity, let the form
of summoning them be read, in order that we all may hold the same tenour*of proceed-
ing. All the bishops said : Let it be read. Lsetus the Notary read.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCI.

Let each of the bishops meet with the leaders
of the Donatists in h is otvn city ; or let him as-
sociate with himself a neighbouring bishop, that
they together may meet them.


This introduction together with the propo-
sitions of the different bishops belongs to the
Synod of Carthage of August, 403.

This canon (xcj.) is Canon j. of that synod.


CANON XCII. (Greek xcv.)

Form of convening the Donatists.

That bishop of that church said : What by the authority of that most ample see we
shall have impetrated, we ask your gravity to have read, and that you order it to be
joined to the acts and carried into effect. When the jussio had been read and joined to
the acts, the bishop of the Catholic Church,^ said : Vouchsafe to listen to the mandate
to be sent through your gravity to the Donatists, and to insert it in the acts, and to
carry it to them, and informs us in your acts of their answer. " We, sent by the au-
thority of our Catholic Council, have called you together, desiring to rejoice in your cor-
rection, bearing in mind the charity of the Lord Avho said : Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they shall be called the children of God ; and moreover he admonished through the
prophet those who say they are not our brothers, that we ought to say : Ye are our
brethren. Therefore you ought not to despise this pacific commonitory coming of love,
so that if ye think we have any part of the truth, ye do not hesitate to say so : that is,
when your council is gathered together, ye delegate of your number certain to whom you
intrust the statement of your case ; so that we may be able to do this also, that there
shall be delegated from our Couucii who with them delegated by you may discuss peace-
fully, at a determined place and time, whatever question there is which separates your
communion from us ; and that at length the old error may receive an end through the
assistance of our Lord God, lest through the animosity of men, weak souls, and ignorant

' i.e. Carthage. Migne reads " of that Church " and difEers in what followB.


488 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


people should perish by sacrilegious dissension. But if ye shall accept this proposition
iu a fraternal spirit, the truth will easily shine forth, but if ye are not willing to do this,
your distrust will be easily known." And when this had been read, all the bishops said :
This pleases us well, so let it be. And they subscribed : I, Aiirelius, bisbo}) of the
Carthaginian Church, have consented to this decree, and having read it, have subscribed
it. Likewise also the rest of the bishops signed.

This synod sent a legation to the Princes against the Donatists.

The most glorious eruperor Houorius Augustus, being consul for the sixth time, on
the Calends of July, at Carthage in the basilica of the second region. In this council
Theasius and Euodius received a legation against the Donatists. In this council was
inserted the commouitorium which follows.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCII. j ye filxould ajypoint certain persons to ichom (his

Mliat thinffs shoidd be i<ukl to the Donatists are l^^tould be entrusted, nho, at a fixed time and

these : " We (jreatty desire to rejoice in your con- P^ace, shall urge your case; otherwise your dis-


version ; for we Jiave been commanded to say even
to those not desiring to tje our brethren, 'Ye are
our brothers.' We come therefore to you and we
exhort you iliat if you have any defence to make,


trust will he thenceforward patent.'

This canon is Canon ij. of the Synod of
Carthage of August 25, a.d. 403.


CANON XCIII. (Greek xcvi.)
The character of the Conimonitory which the legates received against tJie Donatists.

The Commonitorium for our brothers Theasius and Evodius, sent as legates from
the Council of Carthage to the most glorious and most religious princes. When by the
help of the Lord they are come into the ])reseuce of the most pious princes, they shall de-
clare to them with what fulness of confidence, according to the direction of the council
of the year before, the prelates of the Donatists had been urged by the munici]>al author-
ity to assemble, in order that if they really meant their professions, they might liy fit
persons chosen from their number, enter into a peaceful conference with us in Christian
meekness, and whatever they held as truth they might not hesitate to declare it frankly ;
so that from such conference the sincerity of the Catholic position, which has been con-
spicuous for so long a time, might be perceived even by those who from ignorance or
obstinacy were op])osing themselves to it. But deterred by their want of confidence
they scarcely ventured to reply. And forsooth, because we had discharged toward
them the offices which become bishops and peacemakers, and they had no answer to
make to the tnith, they betook themselves to unreasonable acts of brute force, and
treacherously oppressed many of the bishops and clergy, to say nothing of the laity.
And some of the churches they actually invaded, and tried to assault still others.

And now, it behoves the gracious clemency of their Majesties to take measures that
the Catholic Church, which has begotten them as worshippers of Christ iu her womb,
and has nourished them with the strong meat of the faith, should by their forethought,
be defended, lest violent men, taking advantage of the times of religious excitement,
should by fear overcome a weak people, whom by argument they were not able to per-
vert. It is well known how often the vile gatherings {detestcdnJis manus) of the Cir-
cumcelliones ' have been forbidden by tin; laws, and also condemned by ninny decrees of
the Em])erors, their majesties most religious pred(!cessors. Against the madness of
these people it is not unusual nor contrary to the holy Scriptures to ask for secular
l^eia<? in the Greekl protection, since Paul the Apostle, as is related in the authentic Acts
of the Apostles, Avaidid off a conspiracy of certain lawless men by the help of the mili-

' Vide Kraas. Real. Encyclopadie.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 489

tary. Now tlieu we ask that there be extended to the Catholic Churches, without auy
dissimukitiou, the protection of the ordiiium [i.e. companies of soldiers, stationed] in each
city, and of the holders of the suburban estates in the various places.' At the same
time it will be necessary to ask that they give commandment that the law, set forth by
their father Theodosius, of pious memory, which imposed a hue of ten pounds of gold
upon both the ordainers and the ordained among heretics, and which was also directed
against proprietors at whose houses conventicles were held, be confirmed anew ; so
that it may be effective with persons of this sort when Catholics, provoked by their
wiles, shall lay complaint against them ; so that through fear at least, they may cease
from making schisms and from the wickedness of the heretics, since they refuse to be
cleansed and corrected by the thought of the eternal punishment.

Let request be also made that the law depriving heretics of the power of being able
to receive or bequeath by gift or by will, be straightway renewed by their Piety, so that
all right of giving or receiving may be taken away from those who, blinded by the mad-
ness of obstinacy, are determined to continue in the error of the Donatists.

With regard to those who by considerations of unity and peace are willing to cor-
rect themselves, let permission be granted to them to receive their inheritance, the law
notwithstanding, even though the bequest by gift or inheritance was made while they
were yet living in the error of the heretics ; those of course being excepted, who under
the stress of legal proceedings have sought to enter the Catholic Church ; for it may
well be supposed, that persons of this latter sort desired Catholic unity, not so much
from fear of the judgment of heaven, as from the greed of earthly gain.

For the furtherance of all these things the help of the Powers {Potestatum) of each
one of the provinces is needed. With regard to other matters, whatever they shall per-
ceive is for the Church's interests, this we have resolved that the legation have full au-
thority to do and to carry into effect. Moreover it seemed good to us all, that letters
from our assembly should be sent to the most glorious Emperors and most Excellent
Worthinesses, whereby they may be assured of the agreement of us all that the legates
should be sent by us to their most blessed court.

Since it is a very slow business for us all to set our names to these letters, and in
order that they may not be bui'dened with the signature of each one of us, we desire
thee, brother Aurelius, that thy charity be good enough to sign them in the name of us
all. And to this they all agi-eed.

I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage have consented to this decree and
have subscribed my name. And so all the other bishops subscribed.

Letters ought likewise to be sent to the judges that, until the lord permit the legates
to return to us, they give protection through the soldiers of the cities, and through the
holders of the farms of the Catholic Church. It ought also to be added concerning the
dishonest Equitius, which he had shewn by laying claim to the jus sacerdotum, that he be
rejected from the diocese of Hippo according to the statutes of the Emperors. Letters
ought also to be sent to the Bishop of the Church of Rome in commendation of the
legates, and to the other Bishops who may be where the Emperor is. To this they
assented.

Likewise I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this de-
cree, and having read it, have set my name to it.

And all the other bishops likewise subscribed.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIII. | stretch forth a helping hand to the Churches.

TJie Emperors luho were born in the true re- . For the military band overthreiv the dire conspir-
ligion and tvere educated in the faith, ought to acy which was threatening Paul.

* The text is corrupt and the Greek and Latin do not agree in many places.


490 AFKICAX CODE. A.D. 419


Here follows a hrief declaration of what things were decreed in this Synod.

When Stilico a second time uiul Authemius, those illustrious men, were consuls, on
the tenth before the calends of September, at Carthage in the basilica of the second
refnou. I have not writttm out in full the acts of this council' because they treat of
the necessities of the time rather than of matters of ^^'eiieral interest, but for the instruc-
tion of the studious I have added a brief di-iest of the same council.*'


CANON XCIV. (Greek xcvii.)
Summary of Chajyters.

That a free delegation be sent to the council from all the provinces to Mizoneum.
Legates ^ and letters were ordered to be sent for the purpose of directing the free
legation : that became the unity had been made only at Carthage, letters should also be
given to the judges, that they might order in the other ])rovinces and cities the work of
union to be proceeded with, and the thanksgivings of the Church of Carthage for the
whole of Africa concerning the exclusion of the Donatists should be sent with the let-
ters of the bishops to Court {ad Comitatum).

The letters of Pope Innocent were read : that bishops ought not readily to carry
causes across seas, and this very thing was confirmed by the judgment of the bishops
themselves ; that on account of thanksgiving and the exclusion of the Donatists, two
clerics of the Church of Carthage should be sent to Court.

NOTES.

Anciext Epitome of Canox XCIV. I This introduction is taken from the Synod

I of Carthage of August 23, 405. There is also
It seemed good that letters be sent to the . added the introduction of the Synod of Car-
2Iagidrates that the Donatists be expelled.^ 1 thage of June 13, 407.

In this synod certain things already decreed are corrected.

Under the most illustrious emperors Honorius for the A^Ith time, and Theodosius
for the second time, the consuls being the Augusti, on the Ides of July in Carthage in
the basilica of the second region, when bishop Aurelius together with his other lushops
had taken his seat, and while the deacons stood by, he said : Since it was decreed
in the council of Hij^po, that each year there should assemble a plenary council of
Africa, not only here in Carthage but also in the different provinces in their order, and
this was reserved that we should determine its ])lace of meeting sometimes in Numidia
and sometimes in Bvzacium. But this seemed laborious to all the brethren.


CANON XCV. (Greek xcviii.)

An universal council to he held only vjhen necessai^j.

It seemed good that there should be no more the yearly necessity of fatiguing the
brethren ; but as often as common cause, that is of the whole of Africa, demands, that
letters shall be given on every side to that see in this matter, that a synod should be
gathered in that ])rovince, where the desirability of it induces ; but let the causes which
are not of general interest 1h' judged in their own provinces.

' In the (Jreek. "The act" of the present synod have not been I brief synopsis of what was stndionsly enacted in this synod is
■written ont liere in full, etc." " here set forth."

» The Greek test here is much to be preferred, " wherefore a = The Latin text here is certainly comipt.

I ■• This is placed by IJcveridj;e under Greek canon xcviij.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 491

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCV. This canon is Canon j. of the Synod of

Carthage, a.d. 407.


When general necessity so urges, letters are to
be sent to the chief see, and a synod held in a
convenient 2)lacc. But let ordinary causes be


Johnson.
This canon is a tacit revocation of that


settled in their oivn provinces. i clause for annual synods in the 18th canon,

1 which was ntiade in a former council.

CANON XCVI. (Greek xcix.)

That from judges who have been chosen, no appeals may he taken.

If an appeal be taken, let him who makes it choose the judges, and with him he
also against whom the appeal is taken ; and from their decision no appeal may be made.

Concerning the delegates of the different provinces.

When all the delegates of the different provinces came together, they have been
most graciously received, that is those of the Numidians, Byzacenes, Stifensian Moors,
as well as Csesariaus and Tripolitaus.

Concerning the executors of Churches.

It has seemed good moreover that the appointment of five executors should be
asked for in all matters pertaining to the necessities of the Church, who shall be por-
tioned off in the different provinces.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVI.

If one party to a suit takes an appeal, and if
both choose together a judge, no furtlier appeal
shall be alloived.


This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage, a.d.
407.


CANON XCVIL (Greek c.)

27iat there he sought from the Emperor the protection of Advocates in causes ecclesiastical.

It seemed good that the legates who were about leaving, viz., Vincent and Fortu-
natian, should in the name of all the provinces ask from the most glorious Emperors to
give a faculty for the establishment of scholastic defensors, whose shall be the care of
this very kind of business : so that as the priests ^ of the province, they who have re-
ceived the faculty as defensors of the Churches in ecclesiastical affairs, as often as
necessity arises, may be able to enter the private apartments of the judges, so as to re-
sist what is urged on the other side, or to make necessary explanations.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVII.

That there be asked of the Emperor the ap-
pointment of Patrons for ecclesiastical heads.


whose care it shoidd be to defend the Church in
its affairs, and who as priests could easily refer
ivhat things were urgent.


(Greek ci.)

That the legation he free.

It seemed good that the chosen legates should have at the meeting freedom of action
{legationem liberam).

1 Mansi notes that this refers to the heathen priests, and quotes Cod. Theod. 47, de decurionibus.


492 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

TJie pi'otest of the Mauritanian hishojjs against Primosiis.

It is evident that those of Mauritania Caesarieusis gave evidence in their own writ-
ings that Primosus had been summoned by the chiefs of the Thiganensian city, that
he shouhl present himself to the plenary council according to the imperial constitutions,
and, Avhen sought for, as was right, Primosus was not found, at least so the deacons re-
ported. Put since the same Mauritaniaus petitioned that letters be sent from the whole
synod to the venerable brother, the aged Innocent, it seemed good that they should be
sent, that he might know that Primosus had been sought at the council and not found
at all.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome.


Johnson.


PLackiuw 1 See can. 75 (78) and note on Can. Chalced.,

*■ ^ 23.

These officers [i.e. "defensors"] seem to be
Balsamon. called " executores " in the acts of synod just

^1 , , tt.^ ■ 1 . -1 before this canon.

The content^ of this canon being special are ^he "priest of the province" was one
useless, therefore no explanation has been ^^^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^^. ^f advocates to be

S^^®^" j counsel to the province, to act and plead in

I their behalf ; and that he might do it more
This Canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, a.d. effectually he was allowed to have private
407. I conference with the judge.

CANON XCYIII. (Greek oil.)
Of the j)eo2>les which never had bishops.

It seemed good that such peoples as had never had bishops of their own should in
no way receive such unless it had been decreed in a plenary council of each province
and by the primates, and with the consent of the bishop of that diocese to which the
church belonged.

NOTES.


Church is, is subject, shall not have bisho2)S of
their own.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCVIII.

TT'7^ oso never heretofore had a bishop of their
oivn, unless the general synod of the Province

shall agree to it, and tJic Primate, in agreement I This canon is Canon iv. of the Synod of
with him to whom the 2J'>^(^i^i*ice in which /Ae I Carthage, a.d. 407.

CANON XCIX. (Greek ciii.)

Of people or dioceses returned from, the Donatists.

Such communities as have returned from the Donatists and have had Ijishops, with-
out doubt may contiiiiK^ to have them oven without any action of the councils, but such
a community as had a l)isho])aud when he dies wish no longer to have a bishoji of their
own, but to belong to the diocese of some other bisho]), this is not to be denied them.
Also such bishops as before the promulgation of the im])erial law concerning unity as
brought back their p(>o]il(' to the Catholic Church, they ought to be allow(Ml still to rule
them : but from the time of that law of unity, all the Churches, and their dioceses, and if
perchance there be any instruments of the CUiurch or things ]iertaiuing to its rights
should belong to the Catholic bishops of those places to whom the places pertained
while under the heretics, whether they be converted to the Catholic Church or remain
unconverted heretics. Who(!ver after this law shall make any such usurpation, shall
restore as is meet the usurped possessions.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


493


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XCIX.
Wlwever (ire con verted from the Donntists may
retain their oivn bishops, although they had them
tvithout the consent of the synod ; and when the
bishop iH dead, if they do not loish another to be
substituted in his room, but desire to place them-
selces under some other bishop, they shall be al-
lowed to do so. And such bishops as before the
union have brought back the people they ruled, let


them still rule them. After the imperial Edict on
Unity ecery church must defend its otvn riyhts.

This canon is Canon v. of Carthage, a.d.
407.

Johnson.

"An imperial law concerning unity" i.e.
For uniting all in the catholic faith, and
ejecting the donatistical bishops.


CANON C. (Greek civ.)
0/ (he stujgestion of Bishop Maurentius.

{Hefele says " Tlie text of this canon is much corrupted and very difficult to he under-
stood." He gives as a synopsis, " The council appoints judges in the affair of Bishop
Maurentius.''' {Hefele, Vol. II., p. Jf.Jf^.)']

Johnson thus condenses and translates.

Bishop Maurentius having an information against him, lying before the council,
moves for a hearing ; but the informers don't appear upon three calls made by the
deacons on the day appointed. The cause is referred to Senex Xantippus, Augus-
tinus, and five more summoned by the council, the informers were to make up the
number twelve.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon C.
It is riyht that sentence be given on the sididea-
cons ivho are said to be present from Nova Ger-
man ia, who have thrice been sought and not found.
But out of reyard to ecclesiastical gentleness, let
some be sent to look into the matter.

Balsamon.
The contents of this canon are of a private


character, and therefore have not been com-
mented on.

This canon is Canon vj. of Carthage, a.d.
407.

Johnson.

"Senex " i.e. Primate Xantippus, as is com-
monly believed. He and others have this
title frequently given them in the acts of these
councils. See can. 8.


CANON CI. (Greek civ. his)

Of mahing peace between the Churches of Rome and Alexandria.

It seemed good that a letter be written to the holy Pope Innocent concerning the
dissension between the Churches of Rome and Alexandria, so that each Church might
keep peace with the other as the Lord commanded.


This canon is Canon vij. of Carthage, a.d.
407.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CI.
It seemed good to write to Innocent that the
Rotnan and Alexandrian churches might be at
peace between themselves.

CANON CII. (Greek cv.)

Of those who put away their wives or husbands., that so they remain.

It seemed good that according to evangelical and apostolical discijiline a man who
had been put away from his wife, and a woman put away from her husband should not
be married to another, but so should remain, or else be reconciled the one to the other ;


494 AFKICAX CODE. A.l). 419

but if they spurn this law, they shall be forced to do peuance, covering which case we
must petition that an imperial law be promulgated,

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CIT. i This canon is Canon viij. of Carthage, a.d.

Married people who are loosed must re/Mam j 407, and is found in the Corpus Juris Can-
tinmarried or else he reconciled, otherwise they o"?c/, Gratian's Decretum, P. II., Causa xxxij.,
shall be forced to do penance. I Qusest. vij., can. v.

CANON cm. (Greek cvi.)

Of the prayers to he said at the Altar.

This also seemed good, that the prayers whicli had been approved in synod should
be used by all, whether prefaces, commendations, or laying on of the hand, and that
others contrary to the faith should not be used by any means, but that those only
should be said which had been collected by the learned.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CIII. I time or occasion, as our Church uses in her

[The same as the canon, but omits the last Communion Office before the trisagium, on


phrase.]

This canon is Canon ix. of Carthage, a.d.
407.

Johnson.

That is, such forms fitted for the present


Christmas, Easter, etc. These prefaces were
very ancient in the Christian church. Pray-
ers used to recommend the catechumens,
penitents, and dying souls to God's protec-
tion were styled " Commendations."


CANON CIV. (Greek cvii.)

Of these who asTcfroiri the J^mjxror that secular judges may take cognizance of their
causes.

It seemed good that whoever should seek from the Emperor, that secular judges
should take cognizance of his business, should be deprived of his office ; if however, he
had asked from the Emperor an episcopal trial, no objection should be made.

NOTES.
Ancient Epitome of Canon CIV.


Let not him be a binhop who from the Em-
peror seeks a xniblic judgment.


This canon is Canon X. of Carthage, a.d.
407.

Johnson.

See Canon Ant., 12.


CANON CY. (Greek cviii.)

Of those who do not communicate in Africa and icoidd go across seas.

Whoever does not communicate in Africa, and goes to communicate across seas, let
him be cast out of the clergy.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CV.
^^ll(levcr is cut off from communion in Africa,
and goes to parts across sens that he mag there
communicate, is to be cast out of the clergy.


This canon is Canon j. of Carthage, a.d.
407.


AFKICAN CODE. A.D. 419 495


CANON CVI. (Greek cix.)

That those who are going to carry their case to court should he careful to inform
either the hishojo of Carthage or ' tlie bishop of Borne.

It seemed good that whoever wished to go to court, shoukl give notice in the form
which is sent to the Church of the city of liome, that from thence also he shoukl re-
ceive a formed letter to court. But if receiving only a formed letter to Kome, and say-
ing nothing about the necessity which he had of going to court, he willed immediately
to go thither, let him be cut off from communion. But if while at Rome the necessity
of going to court suddenly arose, let him state his necessity to the bishop of Eome and
let him carry with him a rescript of the same Roman bishop. But let the formed let-
ters which are issued by primates and by certain bishops to their own clergy have the
date of Easter ; but if it be yet uncertain what is the date of Easter of that year, let the
preceding Easter's date be set down, as it is customary to date public acts after the con-
sulship.

It further seemed good that those who were sent as delegates from this glorious coun-
cil should ask of the most glorious princes whatever they saw would be useful against
the Donatists and Pagans, and their superstitions.

It also seemed good to all the bishops that all conciliar letters be signed by your
holiness alone. And they subscribed : I, Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, have consented
to this decree, and having read it, now subscribe my name. Likewise also the rest of
the bishops subscribed.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CVI. a letter dimissory, and otherwise he shall he ex-

communicated.
Wfioever from any necessity was going to \ Whatever shall seem fo the legates useful agaiiist
court, must declare his intention to the bishoj) of the Donatists and Greeks, and their superstitions,
Carthage and to the bishop of Rome, and receive that shall he sought from the Emperor.

(Greek ex.)

Synod against the pagans and heretics.

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the xvith Calends
of July, at Carthage, in the secretarium of the restored basilica.* In this council the
bishop Fortunatian received a second appointment as legate against the pagans and
heretics.

Itein, a council against the pagans and heretics.

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the iii. Ides of
October at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the restored basilica " . In this coiincil the
bishops Restitutus and Florentius received a legation against the pagans and here-
tics, at the time Severus and Macarius were slain, and on their account the bishops
Euodius, Theasius and Victor were put to death.


NOTES.


This canon is Canon xij. of Carthage, a.d.
407.


Johnson.
Of "Formal Letters" see Can. Ap., 10 (13).


CANON CVII. (Greek ex. continued.)

A Council concerning a hishop taking cognizance.

In the consulate of the most glorious Emperors Honorius for the Vllth time and
Theodosius for the Hid, Augusti, xvii. Calends of July, a synod was held at Carthage
in the basilica of the second region. In this council it seemed good that no one bishop

' " And " in the Greek, which omits the preceding " either." • • Between these asterisks all is missing in the Greek.


49G AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

should claim the right to take cognizance of a cause. The acts of this council I have
not here written down, because it was only provincial and not general.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CVII.
One bishop shall vot claim for himself to take cognizance of a cause alone.

(Greek cxi.)

Synod against the Donatists.

After the consulate of the most illustrious Emperors Honorius for the AT^IIth time
and Theodosius for the IVth time, Augusti, xviii. Calends of July, at Carthage in the
basilica of the second region. In this council the bishops, Florentius, Possidius,
Pra^sidius and Benenatus received legation against th(; Donatists, at that time at which
a law was given that anyone might practice tlie Christian worship at his own will.


NOTES

Ancient Epitome of Canon CVII.

Let each one receive the practice of piety of his
oxen free mil.


Tlie two first introductions belong respec-
tively to the Svnods of Carthage of June 16
and of October 13, a.d. 408.

Canon cvij. of the African code and that


which follows it are the introductions to the
Synods of Carthage of June 15, ad. 409, and
of June 14, a.u. 410.


Johnson.
See can. 10, 11, 12, 28 (31), 79 (80). Rec-
ognises, a law of the Empire, that everyone
receive christianitv at his own free choice.


CANON CVIII. (Greek cxii.)

Synod against the heresy of'Pelagius and Celestius.

In the consulate of the most glorious Emj^erors, Honorius for the Xllth time and
Theodosius for the Ylllth, Augusti most exalted, on the Calends of May, at Carthage
in the secretarium of the Basilica of Faustus. AVhen Aurelius the bisho]) presided over
the whole council, the deacons standing by, it pleased all the bishops, whose names and
subscriptions are indicated/ met together in the holy synod of the Church of Carthage
to define — ^

CANON CIX. (Greek cxij. continued.)

That Adam loas not created by God subject to death.

That whosoever says that Adam, the first man, was created mortal, so that whether
he had sinned or not, he would have died in body — that is, he would have gone forth
of the body, not because his sin merited this, but by natural necessity, let him be
anathema.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CIX. Canon CVIII. is the introduction to the

JVhoso shall assert that the protoplast would Synod of Carthage of May 1, a.d. 418; and
have died without sin and through natural ne- \ Canon CIX. is Canon j. of that synod.
cessity, let him be anathema.

CANON ex. (Greek cxii. bis)

That infants are hajytizedfor the remission of sins.

Likewise it seemed good that whosoever denies that infants newly from their
mother's wombs should be ba])tized, or says that ba})tism is for remission of sins, but
that they derive from Adam no original sin, whieh needs to be removed by the laver of

• The Latin here is corrupt. ^ jjere begins Canon CIX. of the Latin text.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


497


regeneration, from whence the conclusion follows, that in them the form of baptism for
the remission of sins, is to be understood as false and not true, let him be anathema.

For no otherwise can be understood what the Apostle says, " By one man sin is come
into the world, and death throuij^h sin, and so death passed upon all men in that all have
" sinned," than the Catholic Church everywhere diti'used has always understood it. For
on account of this rule of faith {regulam fidei) even infants, who could have committed
as yet no sin themselves, therefore are truly baptized for the remission of sins, in order
that what in them is the result of generation may be cleansed by regeneration.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CX.

Wlwso affirms that those newlij born and hup-
tizcd contract nothing from Adam's transgression,
tvhich needs to be ivdshcd fiicaif bi/ baptism, is to
be execrated : for through one both death and sin
invaded the ivhole ivorld.


This is Canon ij. of Carthage, a.d. 418
[Greek Canon 112].

Johnson.

See Can. 63, 104, both which are double,
as this likewise is in the old Greek scholiasts.


[Also it seemed good, that if anyone should say that the saying of the Lord, " In my
Father's house are many mansions " is to be understood as meaning that in the kingdom
of heaven there will be a certain middle place, or some place somewhere, in which in-
fants live in happiness who have gone forth from this life without baptism, without which
they cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, which is eternal life, let him be anathema.
For after our Lord has said : " Except a man be born again of water and of the Holy
Spirit he shall not enter the kingdom of heaven," what Catholic can doubt that he who
has not merited to be coheir with Christ shall become a sharer wdth the devil : for he
who fails of the right hand without doubt shall receive the left hand portion.]

NOTES.


The foregoing, says Surius, is found in this
place in a very ancient codex. It does not


occur in the Greek, nor in Dionysius. Bruns


relegates it to a foot-note.


CANON CXI. (Greek cxiij.)

That the grace of God not only gives remissioji of sins, hut also affords aid that we
sin no more.

Likewise it seemed good, that whoever should say that the grace of God, by which
a man is justified through Jesus Christ our Lord, avails only for the remission of past
sins, and not for assistance against committing sins in the future, let him be anathema.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXI.
Whoever is of ojnnion that the grace of God


only gives remission of those sins we have already
committed, and does not afford aid against sin in
the f (dure, is to be tivice execrated.


CANON CXII. (Greek cxiij. continued.)

That the gi^ace of Christ gives not only the knowledge of our d^ity, hut also insjpires
us with a desire that we may he able to accomjMsh what we hiovj.

Also, whoever shall say that the same grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord
helps us only in not sinning by revealing to us and opening to our understanding the
commandments, so that we may know what to seek, what we ought to avoid, and also
that we should love to do so, but that through it we are not helped so that we are able
to do what we know we should do, let him be anathema. For when the Apostle says :
" Wisdom pufieth up, but charity edifieth " it were trul}' infamous were we to believe


498


AFKICAN CODE. A.D. 419


that we have the grace of Christ for that wliich i)uffeth us up, but have it not for that
which edifieth, since in each case it is the gift of God, both to know what we ought to
do, and to love to do it ; so that wisdom cannot puff us up while charity is edifying us.
For as of (lod it is written, " Who toacheth man knowledge," so also it is written, "Love
is of God."

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXII. Canon cxi. is Canon iij. of Carthage, a.d.

W/ioever says that the grace of God is given ■H^. fi"^^ Canon cxii. is Canon iv. of the same
to xis onlii that ive may know ichnt we ought to synod.
do and what to Jleefrom, but not also thxt we
may love the thing knoicn, and be able to accom-
plish it, let him be anathema. '

CANON CXIII. (Greek cxiiii.)

T/iat loithout the grace of God we can do no good thing.

It seemed good that whosoever should say that the grace of justification was given
to us only that we might be able more readily by grace to perform what we were ordered
to do through our free Avill ; as if though grace was not given, although not easily, yet
nevertheless we could even without grace fulfil the divine commandments, let him be
anathema. For the Lord spake concerning the fruits of the commandments, when he
said : " Without me ye can do nothing," and not " Without me ye could do it but with
difficulty."

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIII. i difficulty, is to be thrice execrated. For the Lord

Wioso preaches that without grace ,^e ^^«Z/s, " m7/wu/ me 3/e can (Zo wo^;i»?,9."
could keep the commandments although with \ This is Canon V. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


CANON CXIV. (Greek cxv.)

TJiat not only humble hut also true is that voice of the Saints : " If we say that we
have no sin we deceive oursefoes.''''

It also seemed good that as St. John the Apostle says, " If w^e shall say that we
have no sin Ave deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us," whosoever thinks that this
should be so understood as to mean that out of humility, we ought to say that we have sin,
and not because it is really so, let him be anathema. For the Apostle goes on to add,
" But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse
us from all iniquity," where it is sufiiciently clear that this is said not only of humility
but also truly. For the Apostle might have said, "If we shall say we have no sins we
shall extoll ourselves, and humility shall have no place in us ; " but when he says, " we
deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us " Ik^ sufficientl}- intimates that he who
affirmed that he had no sin would speak not that which is true but that which is false.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIV.
Wliosoever shall interpret the saying of the
Divine [i.e. St. John] : " If ire shall say that we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves" as not being


really true but as spoken out of humility, let him
be anathema.


This is Canon vj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


CANON CXV. (Greek cxvi.)

That in the Lord's Prayer the Saints say for themselves : " Forgive us our trespasses.^^

It has seemed good that whoever should say that Mhen in the Lord's prayer, the
saints say, " forgive us our trespasses," they say this not for themselves, because they
have no need of this petition, but for the rest who are sinners of the people ; and that


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


499


therefore no one of the saints can say, " Forgive me my trespasses," but " Forgive us
our trespasses ; " so that the just is understood to seek this for others rather than for
himself; let him be anathema. For holy and just was the Apostle James, when he
said, "For in many things we offend all." For why was it added "all," unless that
this sentence might agree also with the ])salm, where we read, " Enter not into judg-
ment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified ; " and
in the prayer of the most wise Solomon : " There is no man that sinneth not; " and
in the book of the holy Job : " He sealeth in the hand of every man, that every man
may know his own infirmity ; " wherefore even the holy and just Daniel when in ])rayer
said several times : " We have sinned, we have done iniquity," and other things which
there truly and humbly he confessed ; nor let it be thought (as some have thought) that
this was said not of his own but rather of the people's sins, for he said further on :
" When I shall pray and confess my sins and the sins of my people to the Lord my
God ; " he did not wish to say our sins, but he said the sins of his people and his OAvn
sins, since he as a prophet foresaw that those who were to come would thus misunder-
stand his words.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXV.

}V7ioso expounds this, "forgive us our tres-
passes " as speaking onh/ of the multitude and
not of individuals let him be anathema : Since


Daniel eren he can behold saying with the multi-
tude "I confessed my sins and the sins of my
people."

This is Canon vij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


CANON CXVI. (Greek cxvii.)

That the Saints say ivith accuracy., " Forgive us our trespasses."

Likewise also it seemed good, that whoever wished that these words of the Lord's
prayer, when we say, "Forgive us our trespasses " are said by the saints out of humility
and not in truth let them be anathema. For who would make a lying prayer, not to
men biit to God ? Who would say with his lips that he wished his sins forgiven him,
but in his heart that he had no sins to be forgiven.


NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVI. I This is Canon viij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

(Lacking.)

CANON CXVII. (Greek cxviii.)

Of peoples converted from the Donatists.

Item, it seemed good, since it was so decreed some years ago by a plenary council,
that whatever churches were erected in a diocese before the laws were made concerning
Donatists when they became Catholic, should pertain to the sees of those bishops through
whom their return to Catholic unity was brought about ; but after the laws whatever
churches commmiicated were to belong there where they belonged when they were Dona-
tists. But because many controversies afterward arose and are still springing up between
bishops concerning dioceses, which were not then at all in prospect, now it has seemed
good to this council, that wherever there was a Catholic and a Donatist party, pertaining
to different sees, at whatever time unity has been or shall be made, whether before or
after the laws, the churches shall belong to that see to which the CathoHc church which
was already there belonged.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVII.

Wlmnever conversions and unions of Donatists
are effected, let them be subject to that throne to


ivhich the Catholic Church which was formerly
there was subject.


This is Canon is.


of Carthage,


A.D. 418.


500 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

CANON CXVIII. (Greek cxix.)

How hishojps as well Catholic as those who have been converted from the Donatists are
to divide hetioeen themselves the dioceses.

So, too, it has seemed good that if a bisliop has heeu converted from the Donatists
to Catholic unity, that equally there should be divided Avliat shall have been so found
where there were two parties ; that is, that sonic ])l:iccs slumld pertain to one and some
to the other ; and let the division be made by him who has been the longest time in the
episcopate, and let the younger choose. But should there be only one place let it belong
to him who is found to be the netu-er. But should the distance be equal to each of the
two cathedrals let it belong to the one the people may choose. But should the old Catho-
lics wish their own bisho]>, and if the same be the case; with the converted Donatists, let
the will of the greater number ])revail, but should the ])arties be equal, let it belong to
him who has been longest bishop. But if so many places be found in which there were
both parties, that an equal division is impossible, as for example, if they are unequal in
number, after those i^laces have been distributed which have an equal number, the place
that remains over shall be disposed of as is })rovided above in the case where there is
but one place to be treated.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXVIII.

Those who have been converted from TJonatus,
let them divide the dioceses ; and let the senior


bishop mal'c the division, and the junior choose
which he will.

This is Canon x. of Carthage, a,d. 418.


CANON CXIX. (Greek exx.)

Tliat if a bishop shall possess a diocese which he has snatched from heresy for three
years, no one may take it from him.

Item, it seemed good that if anyone after the laws should convert any place to Catho-
lic unity and retain it for three years without opposition, it should not be taken away
from him afterw^ards. If however there was during those three years a bishop Avho
could claim it and was silent, he shall lose the op})ortunity. But if there was no bishop,
no prejudice shall happen to the see,^ but it shall be lawful when the place that had none
shall receive a bishop, to make the claim within three years of that day. Item, if a
Donatist bishop shall be converted to the Catholic party, the time that has elapsed shall
not count against him, but from the day of his conversion for three years he shall have
the right of making a claim on the places which belonged to his See.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXIX. from Donatus within three years of its conver-

, _ , , sion seeks his diocese again, let it be returned to
Whoever shall convert a region to Orthodoxy ,^.^,^ ,,^ ^, ^.ay.Vco.)
and shall keep it converted for three years, tet\
Mm be without blame. But if the bishop converted This is Canon xj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

CANON CXX. (Greek cxxi.)

Of those who hitriide upon peoples wJiich they think belong to them, without the con-
sent of those by whom they are held.

Item, it seemed good that whatever bishops seek th(> peopl(>s whom they consider to
pertain to their see, not by bringing their causes before the ei)iscopal judges, l)ut rush in
while another is holding the place, all such, (whether said people are willing to receive

> In the Latin '^ Matrici."


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 501

tliem or no) shall lose their case. And whoever have done this, if the contention
between the two bishops is not yet finished but still going on, let him depart who
intruded without the decree of the ecclesiastical judges; nor let anyone flatter himself
that he will retain [what he has seized] if he shall obtain l(?tters from the primate, but
whether he has such letters or has them not, it is suitable that he who holds and
receives his letters should make it appear then that he has held the church pertaining
to him peaceably. But if he has referred any question, let the cause be decided by the
episcopal judges, whether those whom the primates have appointed for them, or the
neighbouring bishops whom they have chosen by common consent.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXX.

Let no one seize for himself tvJiat he thinks
belongs to him : hut let the bishops judge or
trhom the Primate will give, or ivhom the neigh-
bouring bishops shall give with his consent. But


whosoever has received letters from the primate
concerning the keeping [of such regions and
churches] merely deceives himself

This is Canon xij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


CANON CXXI. (Greek cxxii.)

Of those who neglect the peoples helongi7ig to them.

Item, it seemed good that whoever neglect to bring the places belonging to their
see into Catholic unity should be admonished by the neighbouring diligent bishops,
that they delay no longer to do this ; but if within six months from the day of the con-
vention they do nothing, let them pertain to him who can win them : but with this
proviso however, that if he to whom it seemed they naturally belonged can prove that
this neglect was intentional and more efficacious in winning them than the greater
apparent diligence of others ; when the episcopal judges shall be convinced that this is
the case, they shall restore the places to his see. If the bishops between whom the
cause lies are of different provinces, let the Primate in whose province the place is
situated about which there is the dispute, appoint judges ; but if by mutual consent
they have chosen as judges the neighbouring bishops, let one or three be chosen : so
that if they choose three they may follow the sentence of all or of two.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXI.
If any neglect ivhat belongs to their jurisdiction,
let them he admonished ; and if they shall do noth-
ing within a six month, let them he adjudged to
him tvho can ivin them. But if they have com-
mitted the neglect out of policy so as not to irri-


tate the heretics, and this shall appear to have
heen the case, their sees shall be restored to them,
by the judgment of the bishops either appointed
or elected.

This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


CANON CXXII. (Greek cxxiii.)

The sentence of the elected judges ought not to he sjpurned.

From the judges chosen by common consent of the parties, no appeal can be taken ;
and whoever shall be found to have carried such an appeal and contumaciously to be
nnwilling to submit to the judges, when this has been proved to the primate, let him
give letters, that no one of the bishops should communicate with him until he yield.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXII.


A judge chosen by both parties cannot he
repudiated.


This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

Johnson.
See Canons 76 (79) and 80 (83).


502 AFKICAX CODE. A.D. 41'.)


CANON CXXIII. (Greek cxxiv.)

That if a hishop nefjleda his diocese he is to be deprived of coniniunion.

If in the mother cathedrals a bishop shoiihl have been negli<;ent against the here-
tics, let a meeting be held of the neighbouring diligent bishops, and let his neuligence
be pointed out to him, so that he can have no excuse, lint if within six months after
this meeting, if an execution was in his own province, and he had taken no care to
convert them to Catholic unity, no one sliall communicate with him till he does his
duty. But if no executor shall have come to the places, then the fault shall not be laid
to the bishop.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIII.


Johnson.


So \i.e. "Metroj^oles "] I turn matrices catlie-

A hishop who spurns the care of heretics, and ' {\rrc. I know indeed there were no fixed ec-

if after bci)7g /earned he continues for six months clcsiastiral metropoles, in Africa; but they


in his contempt, and has no care for their con-
version, is to be excommunicated.

This is Canon xv. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


had civil metropoles called by that iianie, can.
80, (89) whicli see.

Of tliese officers [i.e. "Executors"] see can.
97 (100).


CANON CXXIV. (Greek cxxv.)

Of his/tops who shall lie with regard to Donatists' communions.

If it shall be proven that any bishop has lied concerning the communion of those
[who had been Donatists], and had said that they had communicated when he knew it
was an established fact that they had not done so, let him lose his bishoprick.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIV. This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

Wlioso says that a man, whom he knows does
not communiccde, does communicate is to be
deprived of his episcopate.

CANON CXXV. (Greek cxxvi.)

That presbyters and clerics are not to appeal except to African Synods.

Item, it seemed good that ]n-esby ters, deacons, or other of the lower clergy who are
to be tried, if they question the decision of their bishops, the neighbouring bishops
having been invited by them with the consent of their bisho})S, shall hcnir them and
determine whatever separates them. But should they think an appeal should be car-
ried from them, let them not carry the ajipeal except to African councils or to the
]irimates of their ]irovinces. But whoso shall think of carrying an appeal across seas
he shall be admitted to communion by no one in Africa.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of C.vnon CXXV. This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.

A presbyter and deacon, who has' been con-


demned bji his aim lAshop, let him aj)j)Cal to the
neighbouring bishops: but let them not cross the
sea. In Africa they shall be excommunicated.


Johnson.
A repetition of Canon 28 (31).


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 503

CANON CXXVI. (Greek cxxvii.)

That Virgins, even when minors, should he given the veil.

Item, it seemed good that whatever bishop, by the necessity of the dangers of vir-
ginal purity, when either a powerful suitor or some ravisher is feared, or if she shall
be pricked with some scruple of death that she might die unveiled, at the demand
either of her parents or of those to whose care she has been entrusted, shall give the
veil to a virgin, or shall have given it while she was under twenty-live years of age, the
council which has appointed that number of years shall not oppose him.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXVI.


Whosoever has veiled or shall veil a virgin
before she is twenty-five years of aye [that is


have the charge of her so exJwrt, shall receive no
damage from the si/ nod concerning that age.

This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, a.d. 418.


give her the habit, or clothe her), being forced ' The reference to a former canon is to Canon j.
thereto on account of a poioerfid lover, or a i of the second series of the canons of the S}Tiod
ravisher, or deadly disease, provided those who I of Hippo in a.d. 393.


CANON CXXVII. (Greek cxxviii.)

That hishops he not detained too long in council, let them choose thi'ee judges from
themselves of the singular jprovinces.

Item, it seemed good, lest all the bishops who are assembled at a council be kept too
long, that the whole synod should choose three judges of the several provinces ; and they
elected for the province of Carthage Vincent, Fortunatian, and Clarus ; for the province
of Numidia Alypius, Augustine, and Restitutus ; for the province of Byzacena, with the
holy Senex Donatian the Primate, Cresconius, elocundus, and ^milian ; for Mauritania
Sitephensis Severian, Asiaticus, and Douatus ; for the Tripolitan province Plautius, who
alone Avas sent as legate according to custom ; all these were to take cognizance of all
things with the holy senex Aurelius, from whom the whole council sought that he should
subscribe all things done by the council whether acts or letters. And they subscribed :
I, Aui'elius, bishop of the church of Carthage consent to this decree and having read it
sign my name. Likewise also signed they all.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXVII.


Johnson.
Two Saiicti Senes mentioned, who we are
sure wei-e botii primates. See can. 100 (104).
See can. 14.

And here we have an ancient precedent for
synods delegating their authority to a com-
mittee, with the primate of all Africa at the
This is Canon xix. of Carthagre, a.d. 418. | head of it.


Whenever the bishojjs ivho come to synod can
remain no longer in attendance, let three he chosen
from eacJi ■province.


o


Item,, at this council there was present a legation from the Rom,an Church.

After the consulate of the most glorious emperors Honorius for the Xllth. time and
Theodosius for the Vlllth., Augusti, on the III. Calends of June, at Ciirthage, in the
Secretarium of the restored basilica, when Aurelius the bishop together Avith Faustinus
of the church of Potentia in the Italian province of Picenum, a legate of the Roman
Church, Vincent of Calvita ^ (Cidositanus), Fortunatian of Naples, Marianus Uzipparen-

1 Not Calusita.


504 AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419

sis, Adeodatiis of Siinidica, Ptnitadius of Carpi, Pinfinian of Muziiba, Prsetextatus of
Sicily, QuoJvultdeus of Veri (^Vei-Liisis), Caudiilusof Alibiiita, Gallouian of Utica, legates
of the proconsular province ; Alypius of Tagaste, Augustine of Hippo Ivegia and Posid-
ouius of Calania, legates of the province of Niimidia ; Maximiau of Aquae, Jocuudus of
Sufetula, and Hilary of Horrea-Cascilia, legates of the ])r()vince of Byzacena; Novatus
of Sititi and Leo of Mocta, legates of the province of ^Mauritania Sitiphensis ; Ninellus
of Piusucarruni, Laurence of Icosium and Numerian of Pvusguniuni, legates of the Prov-
ince of Mauritania Csiesariensis, the judges chosen by the plenary council, had taken
their seats, the deacons standing by, and when, after certain things had been accom-
pHshed, many bishops complained that it was not possible for them to wait for the com-
l)letion of the rest of the business to be treated of, and that they must hasten to their
own churches ; it seemed good to the whole council, that by all some shoiild be chosen
from each province who should remain to finish up what was left to be done. And it
came about that those were present whose subscriptions testify that they were present.


CANON CXXYIII. (Greek cxxix.)

That those out of coinm union should not he allowed to hring accusation.

It seemed good to all, as it had been decreed by the former councils, concerning
what persons were to be admitted to bring accusations against clerics ; and since it had
not been expressed what persons should not be admitted, therefore we define, that he
cannot properlj' be admitted to bring an accusation, who had been already excommuni-
cated, and was still lying under that censure, whether he that wished to be the accuser
were cleric or layman.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXVIII. But when it met again on the 30th of the

One excommunicated is not to give witness. f ^ ^,\°"*1^' '^ conti^nued the code. The in-

troductiou 111 regard to this new session is
this introduction. The Canons then enacted
The Council of Carthage of 419 had at its were original, viz. numbers 128, 129, 130, 131,
first session on May 2otIi done thus much. 132 and 133.


CANON CXXIX. (Greek cxxx.)

That slaves and freedinen and all infamous pei'sons ought not to hring accusation.

To all it seemed good that no slaves or freedmen, properly so called, be admitted to
accusation nor any of those who by the public laws are debarred from bringing accusa-
tion in criminal proceedings. This also is the case with all those who have the stain
of infamy, that is actors, and persons subject to tur]>itudes, also heretics, or heathen,
or Jews ; but even all those to whom the right of bringing accusation is denied, are
not forbidden to bring accusation in their own suits.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXIX. I However, this is intended as a continuation of

A .s?are, and a freednmn, and lie who hcforr the epitome of the foi-mer canon, the words to

was accused of ami of these crimes on account of be supplied being "are not to give witness."]

irhirh Jip ift not admitted in court, and a player,

and a hi'athen. and a heretic, and a Jew Johnson.

[There is no verb to finish the sentence. See Can., Const., 6.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 41'J 505


CANON CXXX. (Greek cxxxi.)

That he who has failed to prove one charge shall not he allowed to give evidence to
another.

So, too, it seemed good that as often as many crimes were laid to clerics by their
accusers, and one of the first examined could not be proved,' they should not be allowed
to go on giving evidence on the other counts.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXX.
He who makes many accusations and proves nothing [is not to give tvitness].

CANON CXXXI. (Greek cxxxii.)

Who should he allowed to give evidence.

They who are forbidden to be admitted as accusers are not to be allowed to appear
as witnesses, nor any that the accuser may bring from his own household. And none
shall be admitted to give witness under fourteen years of age.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXI.
And whoso is not past fourteen years of age [is
not to give tvitness]. An accuser is not to pro-
duce loitnesses from his own house.


Johnson.
See Can. 129.


CANON CXXXII. (Greek cxxxiii.)

Co7icerning a hishojp who removes a man from communion who says he has confessed
to the hishoj) alone his crime.

It also seemed good that if on any occasion a bishop said that someone had con-
fessed to him alone a personal crime, and that the man now denies it ; let not the
bishop think that any slight is laid upon him if he is not believed on his own word
alone, although he says he is not willing to communicate with the man so denying
through a scruple of his own conscience.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXII. | N.B. The word used for "someone" in
If a bishop sags ''someone has confessed to me t^e Epitome is TrcXa?, which ordinarily means
alone a crime" if the someone denies it, he [i.e. a "neighbour" but may mean "any one."
the bishop] is mt easily to he believed. ' Vide Liddell and Scott.

CANON CXXXIII. (Greek cxxxiv.)

That a hishojp should not rashly deprive anyone of communion.

As long as his own bishop will not communicate with one excommunicated, the
other bishops should have no communion with that bishop, that the bishop may be more
careful not to charge anyone with what he cannot prove by documentary evidence to
others.

(Greek cxxxv.)

Bishop Aurelius said : According to the statutes of this whole assembled council,
and the opinion of my littleness, it seems good to make an end of all the matters of the
whole of the before-manifested title, and let the ecclesiastical acts receive the discus-
sion of the present day's constitution.

' The Latin here is evidently corrupt.


506 AFKICAN CODE. A.J). 419

And what things have not yet been expressed (" treated of " in the Greek) we shall
write on the next day through our brethren, Bishop Faustinus and the Presbyters Philip
and Asellus to our venerable brother and fellow-bishop Boniface ; and they gave their
assent in writing.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXIII. I priests, being legates from the bishop of
If a bishop deprives of communion _ an uncon- "?^;^ ^^,^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^ ^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^ ^.^^.^^^^_


victed wan, he shall likeivise he deprived of com-
munion with hi><fi'lloivs


Johnson.

Never was a more impartial law made, es
pecially when all the legislators were bishops


tions, and reckon no more tlian 135. Aure-
lius, Bishop of Carthage, subscribes first, and
after him 217 bishops, then Asellus and Pliil-
ippus, priests, legates of the church of Kome.
And it does not appear that any other priests
were present in any of the councils, mentioned
in the body of this code ; but there is several
except two. There were 217 bishops, and two | times notice taken of the deacons who stood by.

CANON CXXXIV. (Continuation of cxxxv. in the Greek.)

JTere heyinneih the letter directed f rum the whole African Council to Boniface, hishoj)
of the City of Rome, hy Faustinus the hishop, and Philijp and Asellus the presbyters,
legates of the Roman Church.

To the most blessed lord, and our honourable brother Boniface, Aurelius, Valentine
of the primatial See of Numidia, and others present with us to the number of 217 from
the whole council in Africa.

Since it has pleased the Lord that our humility should write concerning those things
which with us our holy brethren, Faustinus a fellow-bishop and Philip and Asellus, fel-
low presbyters, have done, not to the bishop Zosimus of blessed memory, from whom
they brought commands and letters to us, but to your holiness, who art constituted in
his room by divine authority, we ought briefly to set forth what has been determined
upon by mutual consent; not indeed those things which are contained in the prolix
volumes of the acts, in which, while charity was preserved, yet we loitered not without
some little labour of altercation, dehberating those things in the acts which now pertain
to the cause. However the more gratefully would he have received this news as he would
have seen a more peaceful ending of the matter, my lord and brother, had he been still
in the body! Apiarius the ])resbyter, concerning Avhose ordination, excommunication,
and appeal no small scandal arose not only at Sicca but also in the Avhole African
Church, has been restored to communion upon his seeking pardon for all his sins. First
our fellow bishop Urban of Sicca doubtless corrected whatever in him seemed to need
correction. For there should have l)e(ni kept in mind the peace and quiet of th(> Church
not only in the present but also in the future, since so many evils of such a kind had
gone before, that it was incumbent to take care that like or even graver evils should be
prevented thereafter. It seemed good to us that the presbyter Apiarius should be re-
moved from the church of Sicca, retaining only the honour of his grade, and that he
should exercise the olHce of the presbyterate wherever else he wished and could, having
received a letter to this effect. This we granted without difficulty at his own petition
made in a letter. But truly before this case should be thus closed, among other things
which we were treating of in daily discussions, the nature of the case demanded that we
should ask our brothers, Faustinus our fellow bisho]), and I'hilip and Asellus our fellow
presbyters, to set forth what they had been enjoined to treat of with us that they might
be inserted in the ecclesiastical acts. And they proceeded to make a verbal statement,
but when we earnestly asked that they Avould ju-escnt it rather in writing, then they pro-
duced the Commonitory. This was read to us and also set down in the acts, which they


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419


507


are bringiug with them to you. In this they were bidden to treat of four things with
us, first concerning the appeal of bishops to the Pontiff of the Roman C'liurch, second
that bishops should not unbecomingly be sailing to court, thirdly concerning the treat-
ing the causes of presbyters and deacons by contiguous bishops, if they had been
wrongly excommunicated by their own, and fourthly concerning tlu; bishop Urban who
should be excommunicated or even sent to Rome, unless he should have corrected what
seemed to need correction. Of all which things concerning the first and third, that is
that it is allowed to bishops to appeal to Rome and that the causes of clerics should be
settled by the bishops of their own provinces, already last year we have taken pains to
insinuate, in our letter to the same bishop Zosimus of venerable memory, that we were
willing to observe these provisions for a little while without any injury to him, until the
search for the statutes of the Council of Nice had been finished. And now we ask of
your holiness that you would cause to be observed by us the acts and constitutions of
our fathers at the Council of Nice, and that you cause to be exercised by you there, those
things which they brought in the com monitory : that is to say, If a bishop shall have
been accused, etc. \Here follows Canon vii. of Sardica.^

Item concerning presbyters and deacons. If any bishop has been quickly angered,
etc. [Here follows C'anon xvii. of S'ti'dica.]

These are the things which have been inserted in the acts until the arrival of the
most accurate copies of the Nicene Council, which things,^ if they are contained there
(as in the Commonitory, which our brethren directed to us from the Apostolic See
alleged) and be even kept according to that order by you in Italy, in no way could we be
compelled either to endure such treatment as we are unwilling to mention or could suf-
fer what is unbearable : ' but we believe, through the mercy of our Lord Crod, while your
holiness presides over the Roman Church, we shall not have to suffer that pride {istuia
tiiphuui ■passiiri). And there will be kept toward us, what should be kept with brotherly
love to us who are making no dispute. You will also perceive according to the wisdom
and the justice which the most Highest has given thee, what should be observed,^ if per-
chance the canons of the Council of Nice are other [than you suppose] . For although
we have read very many copies, yet never have we read in the Latin copies that there
were any such decrees as are contained in the commonitory before mentioned. So too,
because we can find them in no Greek text here, we have desired that there should be
brought to us from the Eastern Churches copies of the decrees, for it is said that there


correct copies of the decrees are to be found. For which end we beg your reverence,
that you would deign yourself also to write to the pontiffs of these parts, that is of the
churches of Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople,^ and to any others also if it shall
please your holiness, that thence there may come to us the same canons decreed by the
Fathers in the city of Nice, and thus you would confer by the help of the Lord this most
great benefit upon all the churches of the West. For who can doubt that the copies of
the Nicene Council gathered in the Greek empire are most accurate, which although
brought together from so diverse and from such noble Greek churches are found to agree
when compared together ? And until this be done, the provisions laid down to us in
the Commonitory aforesaid, concerning the appeals of bishops to the pontiff of the Ro-
man Chiu'ch and concerning the causes of clerics which should be terminated by the
bishops of their own provinces, we are willing to allow to be observed until the proof ar-
rives and we trust your blessedness will help us in this according to the will of God.
The rest of the matters treated and defined in our synod, since the aforesaid brethren,
our fellow bishop Faustinus, and the presbyters Philip and Asellvis are carrying the acts
with them, if you deign to receive them, will make known to your holiness. And they
signed.^ Our Lord keep thee to us for many years, most blessed brother. Alypius,
Augustine, Possidius, Marinus and the rest of the bishops [217] also signed.


' The text here is very uncertain. I follow Allies.

" It is evident that the Latin text here is corrnpt in more places
than one. There would seem to be uo doubt that for Migne's read-
ing quae sihu the Greek translators had quce siibi and accordingly
rendered it anva iay e/cei. and so the text stands in Labbe and


Cossart. The following sentence is also clearly in a somewhat al-
tered form from its original.

3 L. and C. insert here wrongly a nisi.

"• This order of naming the sees is worthy of note.

^ So in the Greek : the Latin reads Et al ia manu.


508


AFRICAN CODE. A.l). -il'J


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXIV.
Urban, f/ie bishop of Siccus, is either to be ex-


communicated or else summoned to Borne unless
he corrects tvhat should be corrected by him.


CANON CXXXV. (Not numbered iu the Greek.)

Here hegin the rescrijds to the African Council from Cyril hisJiop of Alexandria in
which he sends the authentic j)rocecdin(/s of the Nicene Coancil^^ translated from the
Greehhy Innocent the 2)resbyter : these letters with the saine Nicene council were also
sent through the aforementioned presbyter Innocent and by MarceUns a subdeacon of
the Church of Carthage, to the holy Boniface, bishop of the Roman Church, on the sixth
day before the calends <f December in the year 41 D.'-^

To the most honourable lords, our holy brethren and fellow bishops, Aurelius,
Valentiuus, as well as to the whole holy synod met in Carthage, Cyril salutes your
holiness in God.

I have received with all joy at the hands of our son, the presbyter Innocent, the
letters of your reverence so full of l)iety, in which you exprt'ss the hope that we will
send you most accurate copies of the decrees of the holy Fathers at the Synod held at
Nice the metropolis of Bithynia from the archives of our church ; with our own
certificate of accuracy attached thereto. In answer to which request, most honourable
lords and brethren, I have tli()Uu;ht it necessary to send to you, wiHi our compliments,
by our son. Innocent the presl)3-ter, the bearer of these, most faithful copies of the
decisions of the synod held at Nice in Bithynia. And when ye have sought in the his-
tory of the church, you will find them there also. Concerning Easter, as you have
written, we announce to you that we shall celebrate it on the xviiith '^ before the calends
of 31ay of the next indiction. The subscription. May God and our Lord preserve
your holy synod as we desire, dear brethren.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXV.
According to your written request, we have sent


to your charity most faithful cojxies of the au-
thentic decrees of the Synod u-hich ivas held at
Nice, a city of BdJiynia.


CANON CXXXVI. (Not numbered in the Greek but Avith a new heading.)
IIe7'e beginneth the letter of Atticus, bishop) of Constantinople to the same.

To our holy lords, and rightly most blessed brethren and fellow bishops, Aurelius,
Valentine, and ^ to the other beloved ones met together in the Synod held at Carthage,
Atticus the bishop.

By our son Marcellus the subdeacon, T have received with all thanksgiving the writings
of your holiness, praising the Lord that I enjoyed the blessing of so many of my breth-
ren. O my lords and most blessed brethren, ye have written asking me to send
you most accurate copies of the canons enacted at the city of Nice, tlie metro])olis of
Bitlij'iiia, by the Fathers for the exposition of the faith. And wlio is there that would
deny to his brethren the common faith, or the statutes decreed by the Fathers. Where-
fore by the same son of mine, Marcellus, your subdeacon, who was in great haste, I
have sent to you the canons in full as they were adoptcxl b}' the Fathers in the city of
Nice ; and I ask of you that your holy synod would have me much in your jjrayers.
The subscription. May our God keep your sanctity, as we desire, most holy brethren.


• The Greek adds " and the canons."

' No year is given in the Greek nor in Migne'e Latin.


' Urnnp n».yt^ "all the books " read " xvij. Kal.," but, as a fact,
Easter was '' xiv. Kal." that year.
* So iu the Greek, vet in Latin.


AFRICAN CODE. A.D. 419 509


CANON CXXXVII. (Continuation of the last in the Greek.)

Here hegin the examples of the Nicene Council, sent on the sixth day before the calends
of December in the year 419,' after the consulate of the most glorious emjjeror Ronoriiis
for the Xllth time, and Theodosius for the IXth time^' Augustuses, to Boniface the
bishoj) of the City of Ronie.

We believe in one God etc. . . . the Catholic and Apostolic Church anathema-
tizes them."

To this symbol of the faith there were also annexed copies of the statutes of the
same Nicene Councils from the aforenamed pontiffs, in all respects as are contained
above ; which we do not think it necessary to write out here again.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXVII.
The Canons of the S//nod of Nice are sent, as
they ivere decreed by the Fathers, in accordance
with your letters.


[Here follows the Nicene Creed in full.]


CANON CXXXVIII. (Not numbered in the Greek.)

Here heginneth the epistle of the African synod to Pope Celestine, bishop of the City of
Rome.

To the lord and most beloved and our honourable brother Celestine, Aurelius,
Palatinus, Antony, Totus, Servusdei, Terentius, Fortunatus, Martin, Januarius, Opta-
tus, Ceticius, Donatus, Theasius, Vincent, Fortunatian, and the rest of us, assembled at
Carthage in the General Council of Africa.


"o^


"We could wish that, like as your Holiness intimated to us, in your letter sent by
our fellow presbyter Leo, your pleasure at the arrival of Apiarius, so we also could
send to you these writings with pleasure respecting liis clearing. Then in truth both
our own satisfaction, and yours of late would be more reasonable ; nor would that lately
expressed by you concerning the hearing of him then to come, as well as that ah-eady
past, seem hasty and inconsiderate. Upon the ari'ival, then, of our holy Brother and
fellow-Bishop Faustiuus, we assembled a council, and believed that he was sent with
that man, in order that, as he [Apiarius] had before been restored to the presbyterate
by his assistance, so now he might with his exertions be cleared of the very great crimes
charged against him by the inhabitants of Tabraca. But the due course of examina-
tion in our council discovered in him such great and monstrous crimes as to overbear
even Faustinus, who acted rather as an advocate of the aforementioned person than as
a judge, and to prevail against what was more the zeal of a defender, than the justice of
an inquirer. For first he vehemently opposed the whole assembly, inflicting on us
many injuries, under pretence of asserting the privileges of the Koman Church, and
wishing that he should be received into communion by us, on the ground that your
Holiness, believing him to have appealed, though unable to prove it, had restored him
to communion. But this Ave by no means allowed, as you will also better see by read-
ing the acts. After however, a most laborious inquiry carried on for three days, during
which in the greatest affliction we took cognizance of various charges against him, God
the just Judge, strong and long suffering, cut short by a sudden stroke both the delays
of our fellow-bishop Faustinus and the evasions of Apiarius himself, by which he was
endeavouring to veil his foul enormities. For his strong and shameless obstinacy was


' No year in the Greek nor in Migne's Latin.
^ Bruns notes with Justellus and Hardouin and the Codd. Hisp.
this should read viii. for ix.


' In the Greek the creed is not given here in full, hut as fol-
lows : •' We believe in one God the Father ; and then the holy
creed as written in the first synod. "


510 AFRICAX CODE. A.D. 419


overcome, by which he endeavoured to cover, throuf];h an impudent denial, the mire of
his hists, and Clod so wrought upon his conscience and puljlished, even to the eyes of
men, the secret crimes which he was already condemning in that man's heart, a very
sty of wickedness, that, after his false denial he suddenly burst forth into a confession
of all the crimes he was charged with, and at length ccjuvicted him sell' of his own
accord of all infamies beyond belief, and changed to groans even the hope we had
entertained, believing and desiring that he might be cleared from such shameful blots,
except indeed that it was so far a relief to our sorrow, that he had delivered us from the
lal)c)ur of a longer inquiry, and by confession had a])])licHl some sort of remedy U) his
own wounds, tliough, lord and brother, it was unwilling, and done Avith a struggling
conscience. Premising, therefore, our due regards to you, we earnestly conjure you,
that for the future you do not readily admit to a hearing persons coming hence, nor
choose to receive to your communion those who have ])een cxcommimicated b}' us,
because you, venerable Sir, will readily perceive that this has been prescribed even by
the Nicene council. For though this seems to be there forbidden in respect of the
inferior clergy, or the laity, how much more did it will this to be observed in the case
of bishops, lest those who had been suspended from eonimunion ni their own Province
might seem to be restored to communion hastily or unfitly by your Holiness. Let your
Holiness reject, as is worthy of you, that unprincipled taking shelter with you of pres-
byters likewise, and the inferior clergy, both because by no ordinance of the Fathers
hath the Church of Africa been deprived of this authority, and the iSiceiie decrees have
most ]ilainly committed not only the clergy of inferior rank, but the bishops themselves
to their own Metropolitans. For they have ordained with great wisdom and justice,
that all matters should be terminated in the places where they arise ; and did not think
that the grace of the Holy Spirit would be wanting to any Province, for the bishops of
Christ (Sacerdotihus) wisely to discern, and firmly to maintain the right : es]>ecially
since whosoever thinks himself Avronged by any judgment may appeal to the council of
his Province, or even to a General Council [i.e. of Africa] unless it be imagined that
God can inspire a single individual with justice, and refuse it to an innumerable multi-
tude of bishops {saccnlotitiii) assembled in council. And how shall we be able to rely
on a sentence passed beyond the sea, since it will not be j)OSsible to send thither the
necessaiT witnesses, whether from the weakness of sex, or advanced age, or any other
impediment? For that your Holiness should send any on your part we can find
ordained by no couiu-il of Fathers. Because with regard to what you have sent us by
the same our brother bishop Faustinus, as being contained in the Nicene Council, we
can find nothing of the kind in the more authentic coi)ies of that council, which we have
received from the holy Cyril our brother. Bishop of the Alexandrine Church, and from
the venerable Atticus the Prelate of Constantinople, and which we formerly sent by
Innocent the presbyter, and Marcellus the subdeacon through whom we received them,
to Ijoniface the Bishop, your predecessor of venerable memory. Moreover whoever
desires you to delegate any of your clergy to execute j'our orders, do not comply, lest it
seem that we are introducing the pride of secular dominion into the Church of Christ
which exhibiteth to all that (h^sire to see God the light of simplicity and the day of
humility. For now that the miserable Apiarins has been removed out of the Church
of Christ for his horrible crimes, we feel confident res])ecting our brother Faustinus,
that through the uprightness and moderation of your Holiness, Africa, without violating
brotherly charity, will by no means have to endure him any longer. Lord and brother,
may our Lord long preserve your Holiness to pray for us.'

Ancient Epitome of Canon CXXXVIII. \For Apiariua, tvho was restored hy ynu, has
Those excommunicaterl hy us, ye are not fo ms/^^/^vn/if- .S>»rtrf, «»f7 /rm^erf ?7 ?r///i 5cor», a«rf
he u-iUing to admit afterwards to eomynunion, «' '^'"i/'^' ^"'^ ''''^" converted and confessed hivi-
according to tJie decree of the Nicene Synod. I f<elf guilty tvith sighs and tears.

> Tbis tranelation is by Allies.


COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE HELD UNDER NECTARIUS.


AD. 394.


Introductory Note.
Extracts from, the Acts.


ElenchiLS.

Ancient Epitome and Motes.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

The acts of this Couucil are found iu Bal.saiuou, pa^e 7(51 of the Paris edition, with
Hervetus's translation. Labbe ' has taken Balsamon's text and inserted it into his Collec-
tion, from which the following translation is made. There is another version extant in
Leunclavius, Jus Grceco- Roman, p. 247,

On September the twenty-ninth of the year 394, a magnificent church, dedicated to SS.
Peter and Paul, built by the munificence of Rutinus the Prtetoreal prefect, and situated at
a place called "the Oaks," a suburb of Chalcedon, was consecrated. Most scholars have
adopted Tillemont's suggestion that this was the occasion which brought the patriarchs of
Alexandria and Antioch to Constantinople, and that occasion was taken advantage of to hold
a synod with regard to the dispute as to the see of Bostra. At this council, in accordance
with the canon of the Second Ecumenical Council, adopted only a dozen years before, Con-
stantinople took the first place and its bishop presided, but so strong was the hold of Alex-
andria that three centuries afterwai'ds the Quinisext Synod speaks of this council as held
" under Nectarius and Theophilus." In passing it may not be amiss to remark that St.
Gregoi'y of Nyssa and Theodore of Mopsuestia, and Flavian were present at this council !
Well may Tillemont - exclaim, "It is remarkable to see Theophilus there with Flavian,
although they were not in communion with each other."


' Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. II., col. 1151. " Tillemont. Memoires, ix., 592.


COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE UNDEK NECTAEIUS OF CONSTANTI-
NOPLE AND THEOPHILUS OF ALEXANDEIA.

A.D. 394.


{Found in Beveridije, Synodicon. Tom. I., p. G78 ; Lahhe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. Il.y

col. 1151. Both taken from, Balsamon.)


In the consulate of our most religious and
beloved-of-God Emperors, Flavius Arcadius
Augustus, for the third time, and Honorius
for the second time, on the third day before
the calends of October, in the baptistery of
the most holy church of Constantinople,
when the most holy bishops had taken their
seats [here follow the names], Nectarius, the
bishop of Constantinople, said : Since by
the grace of God this synod has met in this
holy place, if the synod of my holy brethren
and fellow ministers in holy things thinks
good, since I see our brothers Bagadius and
Agapius, who contend between themselves
about the bishopric of Bostra, are also pres-
ent, let these begin to set forth their mutual
rights. And after some things had been
done by them for the sake of this cause, and
it had been shewn that the afore- named
Bagadius was deposed by only two bishops,
both of whom were dead, Arabian us, bishop
of Ancyra, said : Not on account of this
judgment, but fearing henceforth for my
whole life, I desire the holy Synod to make
a decree, whether or no, a bishop can be
deposed by only two bishops, and whether
the Metropolitan is absent or not, without
prejudice to the present cause. For I fear
that some, taking their power from these
acts, may dare to attempt such things. I
wish therefore your response.

Nectarius, the bishoj) of Constantinople,
said : The most religious bishop Arabianus
hath spoken most laudably. But since it is
impossible to go backward in judgment, let
us, without condemning that which is past,
establish things for the future. Arabianus,
bishop of Ancyra, said : The synod of blessed
fathers who met at Nice condemns what has
taken place, for it orders that not less than


three shall ordain, nor even so without the
metropolitan. But of the future I, full of
fear, have made this question. I would
wish therefore that you would say clearly
and without delay or doubt, that a bishop
could not. according to the decree of the
Synod of Nice, lawfully be ordained or de-
posed by two men.

And, after some further debate, The-
ophilus, the bishop of Alexandria, said :
Against those who have gone forth, no
sentence of indignation can be pronounced,
since those to be condemned were not pres-
ent. But if any one were to consider those
who are to be deposed in future, it seems to
me that not only these ought to assemble,
but so far as possible all the other provin-
cials, that by the sentence of many there
may be rendered a more accurate condem-
nation of him who is present and is being
judged, and who deserves deposition. Nec-
tarius, the bishop of Constantinople, said :
Since, the controversy is concerning legiti-
mate institutions and decrees, it follows that
nothing must be decreed on account of per-
sonal causes. Wherefore as the most holy
bishop Arabianus has said, wishing to make
the future certain, the sentence of the most
holy bishop Theophilus hath consistently
and considerately decreed that for the future
it shall be lawful not even for three, far less
for two bishops to depose him who is exam-
ined as a defendant : but by the sentence of
the greater synod and of the bishops of the
province, according to the Apostolic Canons.
Flavian, the bishop of Antioch, said : Wliat
things the most holy bishop Nectarius, and
the most holy bishop Theophilus have set
forth are clearly right. And all the ecclesi-
astics agreed with these.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome.
In future when a defendant is examined, lie
ought not to he deposed hy two or three bishops :


but by the sentence of the greater Synod and of
his own provincials, as also the Apostolic Canons
provide.


514


CONSTANTINOPLE UNDER NECTARIUS. A.D. 394


Balsamon.

As Bagadius, the bishop of Bostra, had
been deposed by only two bishops, the mat-
ter was considered in the synod at Constan-
tinople, whether that deposition had been
rightly decreed. Agapius, the elect, laying
claim to it under the decision. And it was
decreed that the deposition was not canoni-
cal, since not two but a ni;mber should judge
of those accusations which are made against
bishops. But know that this constitution has


no force to-day, for by the twelfth canon of
the synod of Carthage, which is much later,
crimes charged against bishops are to be
judged of by twelve bishops. Read that can-
on, and know that this synod was held in the
time of tlie Emperor Arcadius, while that of
Carthage was in the days of Theodosius the
younger.

Zonaras explains that by the words " have
gone forth " in the speech of Theophilus of
Alexandria is to be understood have died.


THE COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE HELD UNDER CYPRIAN.


A.D. 257.


Elenchus.


Introductory Note.

The refnains of the Acts.


Notes, with St. Cyprian's Epistle to Janu-
arius et al.


INTEODUCTORY NOTE.


It is commonly supposed by the commentators that what follows is the "Canon of St.
Cyprian " referred to in the Second canon of the Synod in Trullo. Johnson ' thinks that
that canon comes down to us as Canon XXXIX. of the Apostolic Canons. Baronius ~ agrees
with Asseman ^ in thinking that from hatred to Rome the Greeks adopted the theory of the
non-validity of heretical baptism. "But," as Hefele * well remarks, "in that case they would
have contradicted themselves."

Zonaras remarks : " This is the most ancient of all the synods. For that which was held
at Antioch in Syria concerning Paul of Samorata was more ancient than the others, being
holden in the time of the Roman Emperor Aurelius, but this one is still earlier. For the
great Cyprian finished his martyr course in the time of the Emperor Decius : but there was
a long interval between Aurelian and Decius. For many emperors reigned after the death
of Decius, to whom at last Aurelian succeeded on the throne. Therefore this is by far the
most ancient of all synods. In it moreover above eighty-four bishops were gathered to-
gether, and considered the question as to what was to be done about the baptism of those
who came to the Church after abandoning their heresies, and of schismatics who returned
to the Church."


' Johnson.
'Baroniue.


CIertjpman''s Vade Mecum. Notes in loc.
A nnal. ad ann., 692.


' Asseman. Bib. Jur. Orient. Tom. I., p. 414.
* Hefele. Hist. Councils, Vol. V., p. 224, note 2.


THE SYNOD HELD AT CARTHAGE OVER WHICH PRESIDED THE
GREAT AND HOLY MARTYR CYPRIAN, BISHOP OF CARTHAGE.


A.D. 257.


{Found in Beveridge,Synodicon, Tom. I., p. 365, and in Lahhe and Cossart, Concilia,
Tom. /., col 786.)


When very many bishops were met to-
gether at Carthage on the Calends of Sep-
tember from the province of Africa, Numidia
and Mauritania, with the presbyters and
deacons (the greater part of the people being
likewise present) and when the holy letters
of Jubaianus to Cyprian had been read, and
Cyprian's answers to Jubaianus, concerning
heretical baptisms, as well as what the same
Jubaianus afterwards wrote to Cyprian,

Cyprian said : Ye have heard, my dearly
beloved colleagues, what our fellow bishop
Jubaianus has written to me, taking counsel
of my littleness concerning the illicit and
profane baptisms of heretics, and the an-
swer which I made him ; being of the same
opinion as we have been on former occasions,
that heretics coming to the Church should
be baptized and sanctified with the Church's
baptism. Moreover there has been read to
you also the other letter of Jubaianus, in
which answering for his sincere and pious
devotion to our letter, not only he agrees
therewith but offered thanks that he has
been so instructed by it. It only remains
therefore that we, each one of us, one by
one, say what our mind is in this matter,
without condemning any one or removing
any one from the right of communion who
does not agree with us.


For no one [of us ^] has set himself up [to
be] bishop [of bishops],^ or attempted with
tyrannical dread to force his colleagues to
obedience to him, since every bishop has, for
the license of liberty and power, his own
will, and as he cannot be judged by another,
so neither can he judge another. But we
await the judgment of our universal Lord,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who one and alone
hath the power, both of advancing us in
the governance of his Church, and of judging
of our actions [in that position].


{The bishops then one hy one declared
against heretical ha'ptism? Last of all (col.
796)] :

Cyprian, the Confessor and Martyr of
Carthage, said : The letter which was written
to Jubaianus, my colleague, most fully set
forth my opinion, that heretics who, ac-
cording to the evangelical and apostolic wit-
ness, are called adversaries of Christ's and
anti-Christs, when they come to the Church,
should be baptized with the one (unico) bap-
tism of the Church, that they may become
instead of adversaries friends, and Chris-
tians instead of Antichrists.


NOTES.


ZONARAS.


These are the opinions therefore of the
fathers, which assembled in council with the
great Cyprian : but they do not apply to all
heretics nor to all schismatics. For the Sec-
ond Ecumenical Council, as we have just said
[i.e. in the Preface he has placed to the acts
of the synod. Vide L. and C, Cone, Tom. i.,
col. 801] makes an exception of some heretics,
and give its sanction to their reception without
baptism, only requiring their anointing with
the holy chrism, and then anathematizing at
the same time their own and all heresies.


Balsamon does not print the acts of the
Council at all but only the letter of St. Cyprian
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. I., col.
' 799.) I have not thought it worth while to
place here the remarks of the eighty-six bish-
ops, (1)9 /XT] dvayKatai, ola jur^Se cvepyowai, to quote

Zonaras's words.

BiNIUS.

The allusion here is to the decree of Stephen,

who was wont, according to the custom of his

elders, to be styled " Bishop of bishops," and

because he had acrimoniously threatened ex-

I communication to all not agreeing with him.


' These words are omitted in Zonaras's Greek ! The very gist
of the matter for the EaBterna.
^ These will be found translated in full in the Oxford " Library


of the Fathers," Vol. 17. " St. Cyprian's Epistles," p. 286 ; also
in the American reprint of the " Ante-Nicene Fathers," Vol. V.
'' Hippolitus, Cyprian, etc.," p. 565.


518


CARTHAGE UNDEK CYPEIAN. A.D. 257


On the disputed historical fact as to whether I place here St. Cyprian's Seventieth Epis-
St. Cyprian died in or out of the communion tie in the Oxford Translation {Epistle of St.
of the See of Rome the reader will do well to GyjMan, pp. 232 ei scqq.). This letter is ad-
consult Puller, ThePrttnitive Saints and the See \ dressed to Januarius, Satterninus, etc., and is
of Rome. \ headed in Beveridge's Synodicon "Canon I."


EPISTLE LXX.

Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldouius, etc., to their brethren Januarius, etc. Greeting.


When we were together in council, dear-
est brethren, we read the letter which you
addressed to us respecting those who are
thought to be baptized by heretics and
schismatics, whether, when they come to
the one true Catholic Church, they ought
to be baptized. Wherein, although ye your-
selves also hold the Catholic rule in its
truth and fixedness, yet since, out of our
mutual affection, ye have thought good to
consult us, we deliver not our sentence as
though new but, by a kindred harmony, we
unite with you in that long since settled by
our predecessors, and observed by us; think-
ing, namely, and holding for certain, that
no one can be baptized without the Church,
in that there is one Baptism appointed in
the holy Church, and it is written, the Lord
himself speaking, " They have forsaken me,
the Fountain of living water, and hewed
them out broken cisterns that can hold no
water." Again, holy Scripture admonishes
us, and says, " Keep thee from the strange
water, and drink not from a fountain of
strange water." The water then must first
be cleansed and sanctified by the priest,
that it may be able, by Baptism therein, to
wash away the sins of the baptized, for the
Lord says by the prophet Ezekiel, " Then
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be cleansed from all your filthiness,
and from all your idols wall I cleanse you ;
a new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you." But how can
he cleanse and sanctify the water, who is
himself unclean, and with whom the Spirit
is not ? whereas the Lord says in Numbers,
" And whatsoever the unclean person touch-
eth shall be unclean." Or how can he that
baptizeth give remission of sins to another,
who cannot himself free himself from his
own sins, out of the Chiirch ?

Moreover, the very interrogatory which is
put in Baptism, is a witness of the truth.
For when we say, "Dost thou believe in


eternal life, and remission of sins through
the holy Church ? " we mean, that remis-
sion of sins is not given, except in the
Church ; but that, with heretics, ^A'here the
Chiu'ch is not, sins cannot be remitted.
They, therefore, w'ho claim that heretics can
baptize, let them either change the inter-
rogatory, or maintain the truth ; unless in-
deed they ascribe a Church also to those
who they contend have Baptism.

Anointed also must he of necessity be,
who is baptized, that having received the
chrism — that is, unction, he may be the
anointed of God, and have within him the
grace of Christ. Moreover, it is the Eu-
charist through w'hich the baptized are
anointed, the oil sanctified on the altar.
But he cannot sanctify the creature of oil,
who has neither altar nor church. Whence
neither can the spiritual unction be with
heretics, since it is acknowledged that the
oil cannot be sanctified nor the Eucharist
celebrated among them. But we ought to
know and remember that it is written, "Let
not the oil of a sinner anoint my head ; "
which the Holy Ghost forewarned in the
Psalms, lest any, quitting the track, and
wandering out of the path of truth, be
anointed by heretics and adversaries of
Christ. Moreover, when baptized, what
kind of prayer can a profane priest and a
sinner offer ? in that it is written, " God
heareth not a sinner ; but if any man be a
worshipper of God, and doetli his will, him
he heareth."

But who can give what himself hath not?
or how can he perform spiritual acts, who
hath himself lost the Holy Si)irit '? AVhere-
fore he is to be baptized and received, who
comes uninitiated to the Church, that within
he may be hallowed through the holy ; for
it is written, " Be ye holy, for I am holy,
saitli the Lord." So that he who has been
seduced into error and washed without
should, in the true Baptism of the Church,


CAETHAGE UNDER CYPRIAN. A.D. 257


519


put off this veiy thing also ; that lie, a man
coming to God, while seeking for a priest,
fell, through the deceit of error, upon one
profane. But to acknowledge any case
where they have baptized, is to approve the
baptism of heretics and schismatics.

For neither can part of what they do be
void and part avail. If he could baptize, he j
could also give the Holy Ghost. But if he j
cannot give the Holy Ghost because, being '
set without, he is not with the Holy Ghost, '
neither can he baptize any that cometh :
for that there is both one Baptism, and one
Holy Ghost, and one Church, founded by
Christ the Lord upon Peter, through an
original and principle of unity ; so it re-
sults, that since all among them is void and
false, nothing that they have done ought to
be approved by us. For what can be rati-
fied and confirmed by God, which they do
whom the Lord calls his enemies and ad-
versaries, propounding in his Gospel, "He
that is not wdth me, is against me ; and he
that gathereth not with me, scattereth."
And the blessed Apostle John also, keeping


the commandments and precepts of the
Lord, has written in his Epistle, " Ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come ; even
now are there many Antichrists, whereby
we know that it is the last time. They
went out from us, but were not of us ; for
if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us." "Whence we, too,
ought to infer and consider, whether they
who are the adversaries of the Lord, and
are called Antichrists, can give the grace of
Christ. Wherefore we who are with the
Lord, and who hold the unity of the Lord,
and according to this vouchsafement admin-
ister his priesthood in the Church, ought to
repudiate and reject and account as pro-
fane, whatever his adversaries and Anti-
christs do ; and to those who, coming from
error and Avickedness, acknowledge the true
faith of the one Church, we should impart
the reality of unity and faith by all the sac-
raments of Divine grace.

We bid you, dearest brethren, ever heart-
ily farewell.


THE SEVENTH ECUMENICAL COUNCIL.


THE SECOND COUNCIL OF NICE.


A.D. 787.

Emperors. — Coxstantine VI. and Irene.
Pojie. — Hadeian.

Elenchus.


Introduction. *

The Sacra to Hadrian.

The Sacra read at Session I.

Extracts from the Acts, Session I.

Session II.

Session III.

Session IV.

Session YT. co7itaining the Ejntome of the
decree of the iconoclastic Conciliabulum.

Excursus On the Conciliabulum.

The dogmatic Decree of the Synod.

Excursus On the present teaching of the
Latin and Greek Churches on the subject of
images.


Tlie Canons, xoith the Ancient Ejyitorae
and Notes.

Synodal Letter to the Emjperors.

Excursus On the Two Letters of Gregory
IL to the Em/peror Leo.

Excursus On the Recejption of the Seventh
Council.

Excursus On the Council of Franlfort,
A.D. 7H.

Excursus On the Convention of Paris ^
A.D. 825.

Historical Note On the so-called " Eighth
General Council " and subsequent councils.


INTRODUCTION.

Gibbon thus describes the Seventh Ecumenical Council of the Christian Church: "The
decrees were framed by the president ' Tarasius, and ratified by the acclamations and sub-
scriptions of three hundred and fifty bishops. They unanimously pronounced that the wor-
ship of images is agreeable to Scripture and reason, to the Fathers and councils of the Church ;
but they hesitated whether that worship be relative or direct ; whether the godhead and the
figure of Christ be entitled to the same mode of adoration.^ Of this second Nicene Council
the acts are still extant ; a curious monument of superstition and ignorance, of falsehood and
folly." [Decline and Fall, chapter xlix.)

And this has been read as history, and has passed as such in the estimation of the over-
whelming majority of educated English-speaking people for several generations, and yet it
is a statement as full of absolute and inexcusable errors as the passage in another part of
the same work which the late Bishop Lightfoot so unmercifully exposed, and which the most
recent editor, Bury, has taken pains to correct.

I do not know whether it is worth while to do so, but perhaps it may be as well to state,
that whatever may be his opinion of the truths of the conclusions arrived at by the council,
no impartial reader can fail to recognize the profound learning ^ of the assembly, the singular
acumen displayed in the arguments employed, and the remarkable freedom from what Gibbon
and many others would consider " superstition." So radical is this that Gibbon would have
noticed it had he read the acts of the synod he is criticising (which we have good reason for
believing that he never did). There he would have found the Patriarch declaring that at that
time the venerable images worked no miracles, a statement that would be made by no prelate
of the Latin or Greek Church to-day, even in the light of the nineteenth century.

As I have noted in the previous pages my task is not that of a controversialist. To me
at present it is a matter of no concern whether the decision of the council is true or false.
I shall therefore strictly confine myself to two points : 1. That the Council was Ecumenical.
2. What its decision was ; explaining the technical meaning of the Greek words employed
during this controversy and finally incorporated in the decree.


1. This Council was certainly Ecumenical.

It seems strange that any person familiar with the facts of the case could for a moment
entertain a doubt as to the ecumenical character of the council which met at Nice in 787.

(a) It was called by the Roman Emperors to be an Ecumenical Council. Vide letter of
Tarasius.

(6) It was called with the approval of the Pope (not like I. Constantinople, without his
knowledge ; or like Chalcedon, contrary to his expressed wish), and two papal legates were
present at its deliberations and signed its decrees.

(c) The Patriarch of Constantinople was present in person.

{d) The other Patriarchates were represented, although on account of the Moslem tyranny
the Patriarchs could not attend in person, nor could they even send proctors.

(e) The decrees were adopted by an unanimous vote of the three hundi'ed and fifty bishops.


• Who was possibly at least not the president, vide Michaud,
Sept. Cone. (Ecumeniqtws, p. 330.

"^ Worship is " relative " or " absolnte," what Gibbon means by
"direct" would be hard to say. How entirely false the whole
statement is. Gibbon himself would have recognized had he read
the acts.

3 Dr. Neale complains that the acts display a painful lack of
critical knowledge and that several spurious "passages are attrib-


uted to the Fathers. But I confess this does not seem to me either
surprising or disgraceful. The attributing of books, even in our
critical days, to persons who were not their authors is not so un-
common as to make us wonder such a thing might have occurred
in such stormy times, when learning of this sort must have suf-
fered by the adversities of the Church and State, the Iconoclastic
persecutions and the Moslem incursions.


524 II. NICE. A.D. 787


{f) They were immediately received in all the four Eastern Patriarchates.^

{g) They were immediately accepted by the Pope.

(k) For a full thousand years they have been received by the Latin and Greek Churches
with but a few exceptions altogether iusigniticant, save the Frankish kingdom.

In the face of such undisputed facts, it would be strange were anyone to doubt the his-
torical fact that the Second Council of Nice is one of the Ecumenical Councils of the Catho-
lic Church, and indeed so far as I am aware none have done so except such as have been
forced into this position for doctrinal consistency.

Nor have all Protestants allowed their judgment to be warped in this matter. As a
sample I may quote from that stanch Protestant whom Queen Elizabeth apj^ointed a chaplain
in ordinary in 1598, and who in 1610 was made Dean of Gloucester, the profoundl}^ learned
Eichard Field. In his famous "Book of the Church" (Book V. chap. Ij.), he says: "These"
[six, which he had just described] " were all the lawful General Councils (lawful, I say, both
in their beginning and proceeding and continuance) that ever were holden in the Christian
Church, touching matters of faith. For the Seventh, which is the Second of Nice, was not
called about any question of faith but of manners. ... So that there are but Seven
General Councils that the whole Church acknowledgeth, called to determine matters of faith
and manners. For the rest that were holden afterwards, which our adversaries [the Roman
Catholics] would have to be acknowledged general, they are not only rejected by us but by
the Grecians also, as not general, but patriarchal only, etc."

Of course there are a number of writers (principally of the Anglican Communion), who
have argued thus : " The doctrine taught by the Second Council of Nice we reject, ergo it
cannot have been an Ecumenical Council of the Catholic Church." And they have then gone
on to prove their conclusion. With such writers I have no concern. My simple contention
is that the Council is admitted by all to have been representative of East and West, and to
have been accepted for a thousand years as such, and to be to-day accej^ted as Ecumenical by
the Latin and Greek Churches. If its doctrines are false, then one of the Ecumenical
Synods set forth false doctrine, a statement which should give no trouble, so far as I can un-
derstand, to anyone who does not hold the necessary infallibility of Ecumenical Synods.^

Among those who have argued against the ecumenical character of the Seventh Council
there are, however, two whose eminent learning and high standing demand a consideration
of anything they may advance on any subject they treat of, these are the Rev. John Mason
Neale and the Rev. Sir William Palmer.

Dr. Neale considers the matter at some length in a foot-note to his History of the Eastern
Church (Vol. II., pp. 132-135), but I think it not improper to remark that the author ingen-
uously confesses in this very note that if he came to the conclusion that the council was
ecumenical, " it would be difficult to clear our own Church from the charge of heresy."
Entertaining such an opinion at the start, his conclusion could hardly be unbiassed.

The only argument which is advanced in this note which is different from those of other
opponents of the Council, is that it had not the authentication of a subsequent Ecumenical
Synod. The argument seems to me so extraordinary that I think Dr. Neale's exact words
should be cited : " In the first place, we may remark that the Second Council of Nicsea wants
one mark of authority, shared according to the more general belief by the six — according to
the opinions which an English Churchman must necessarily embrace by the first five Coun-


' " It is certain," confesses Dr. Neale (History of the Holy East-
ern church. Vol. II., p. 133 ; in his attempt to overthrow the au-
thority of this council) " that Politian approved (S. Theod. Stud.
Ep. xviij.) although he was not present at the Council of Nicsea ;
and the controversy, which had never much disturbed Africa, may
henceforth be considered as terminated in the Diocese of Alex-
andria."


2 As a sample* of all that bigotry and dishonesty can do when
writing on such a subject, the reader is referred to a little book
by the Rev. F. Meyrick (a canon of the Church of England) pub-
lished in Paris for the Anglo-Continental Society, 1877, entitled,
Die Schisme d' Orient et de Vauthorite dupretenduseptieme con-
cile.


II. NICE. A.D. 787 525


cils — its recognition as Ecumenical by a later Council undoubtedly so." But surely this
involves an absurdity, for if it is not known whether the last one is ecumenical or no, how will
its approval of the next to the last give that council any certainty ? If III. Constantinople
is doubtful being the sixth, because there is no seventh to have confirmed it ; then II. Con-
stantinople, the fifth, is doubtful because it has only been confirmed by a synod itself doubt-
ful and so on, which is absurd. The test of the ecumenicity of a council is not its accej)t-
ance by a subsequent synod, but its acceptance by the whole Church, and this Dr. Neale
frankly confesses is the case with regard to II. Nice : "It cannot be denied," he admits,
" that at the present day both the Eastern and the Latin Churches receive it as Ecumenical "
(p. 132). He might have added, "and have done so without any controversy on the subject
for nearly a thousand years."

I do not think there is any need of my delaying longer over Dr. Neale's note, which I
have noticed at all only because of his profound scholarship, and not because on this par-
ticular point I thought he had thrown any new light upon the matter, nor urged any argu-
ment really calling for an answer.

Sir William Palmer's argument {A Treatise on the Church of Christ, Pt. IV., Chapter X.,
Sect. IV.) is one of much greater force, and needs an answer. He points out how, long after
the Council of Nice, the number of the General Councils was still spoken of as being Six,
and that in some instances this council is referred to as the " pseudo " General Council of
Nice. Now at first sight this argument seems to be of great force. But upon further con-
sideration it will be seen to be after all of no great weight. We may not be able to explain,
nor are we called upon to do so, why in certain cases writers chose still to speak of Six
instead of Seven General Councils, but we would point out that the same continuance of the
old expression can be found with regard to others of the General Councils. For example,
St. Gregory the Great says that he " revered the four Ecumenical Councils as he did the
four Gospels," but the fifth Ecumenical Synod had been held a number of years before.
Will anyone pretend from this to draw the conclusion that at that time the Eciimenical
character of the Fifth Synod (II. Constantinople) was not recognized at Rome ? Moreover,
among the instances cited (and there are but a very few all told) one of them is fatal to the
argument. For if Pope Hadrian in 871 still speaks of only six Ecumenical Synods, he omits
two (according to Roman count), for this date is after the synod which deposed Photius — a
synod rejected indeed afterwards by the Greeks, but always accepted by the Latins as the
Eighth of the Ecumenical Councils. Would Sir William pretend for an instant that Hadrian
and the Church of Rome did not recognize that Council as Ecumenical and as the Eighth
Synod ? He could not, for on page 208 he ingenuously confesses that that Council " had
been approved and confirmed by that Pope."

But after all, the contention fails in its very beginning, for Sir William frankly recog-
nizes that the Popes from the first espoused the cause of the council and were ready to
defend it. Now this involved the acknowledgment of its ecumenical character, for it was
called as an Ecumenical Synod, this we expressly learn from the letter of Tarasius to the
other Eastern Patriarchs (Labbe, Cone, Tom. VII., col. 165), from the letter of the Emperor
and Empress to the bishops throughout the empire (L. and C.,' Cone, Tom. VII., col. 53),
and (above all) ftom the witness of the Council itself, assuming the style of the " Holy Ecu-
menical Synod." In the face of such evidence any further proof is surely uncalled for.

We come now to the only other argument brought against the ecumenical character of
this council — to wit, that many wi'iters, even until after the beginning of the XVIth century,
call the Seventh a "pseudo-Council." But surely this proves too much, for it would seem
to imply that even down to that time the cultus of images was not established in the West,
a proposition too ridiculous to be defended by anyone. It is indeed worthy of notice that


526 II. NICE. A.D. 787


all the authors cited are Frankish, (1) the Annalcs Francormn (a.d. 808) in the continuation
of the same (a.d. 814), in an anonymous life of Charlemagne, and the Annules written after
819 ; (2) Eginhard in his Annalcs Francormn (a.d. 829) ; (3) the Galilean bishops at Paris,
824 ;' (4) Hincmar of Rheims ; (5) Ado, bishop of Vienne (died 875) ; (6) Anastasius ac-
knowledges that the French had not accepted the veneration of the sacred images ; (7) The
Chronicle of St. Bertinus (after 884) ; (8) The Annalcs Francorum after the council still
speak of it as pseudo ; (9) Regiuo, Abbot of Frum (circa 910) ; (10) the Chronicle of St.
Bertinus, of the Xth Centuiy. (11) Hermanns Contractus : (12) the author who continued
the Gestes Francorum to a.d. 1165 ; (13) Roger Hoverden (a.d. 1204) ; (14) Conrade a Lichte-
nau, Abbot of Urspurg (circa 1230) ; (15) Matthew of Westminster.

No doubt to these, given in Palmer, who has made much use of Lannoy, others could be
added ; but they are enough to shew that the council was very little known, and that none
of these writers had ever seen its acts.

Sir William is of opinion that by what precedes in his book he has " proved that for at
least five centuries and a half the Council of Nice remained rejected in the Western Church."
I venture to think that the most he has proved is that during that period of time he has been
able to find fifteen individuals who for one reason or another wrote rejecting that council,
that is to say three in a century, a number which does not seem quite sufficient to make the
foundation of so considerable a generalization as "the Western Church." The further con-
clusion of Sir William, I think, every scholar will reject as simply preposterous, viz. : " In
fact the doctrine of the adoration of images [by which he means the doctrine taught by the
II. Council of Nice] was never received in the West, except where the influence of the Roman
See was predominant" (p. 211).

Sir William is always, however, honest, and the following quotation which he himself
makes from Cardinal Bellarmine may well go far toward explaining the erroneous or imper-
fect statements he has so learnedly and laboriously gathered together. " Bellarmine says :
' It is very credible that St. Thomas, Alexander of Hales, and other scholastic doctors had
not seen the second synod of Nice, nor the eighth general synod ; ' he adds that they ' were
long in obscurity, and were first published in our own age, as may be known from their not
being extant in the older volumes of the councils ; and St. Thomas and the other ancient
schoolmen never make any mention of this Nicene Synod.' (Bell. De Imag. Sanct. Lib. II.
cap. xxij.)"

2. What the Council decreed.

The council decreed that similar veneration and honour should be paid to the represen-
tations of the Lord and of the Saints as was accustomed to be paid to the " laurata " and
tablets representing the Chi-istian emperors, to wit, that they should be bowed to, and saluted
with kisses, and attended with lights and the offering of incense.^ But the Council was most
explicit in declaring that this was merely a veneration of honour and affection, such as can
be given to the creature, and that under no circumstances could the adoration of divine wor-
ship be given to them but to God alone.

The Greek language has in this respect a great advantage over the Hebrew, the Latin
and the English ; it has a word which is a general word and is properly used of the affection-
ate regard and veneration shown to any person or thing, whether to the divine Creator or to
any of his creatures, this word is 7rpoo-Kwr;o-ts ; it has also another word which can properly be
used to denote only the worship due to the most high God, this word is \arpda. When then
the Council defined that the worship of "latria"was never to be given to any but God alone,


' The true date is 825. » Vide Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, torn, vii., col. 69.


11. NICE. A.D. 787 537


it cut oflf all possibility for idolatri/, maviolatri/, iconolatry, or any other " latry " except " theo-
latry." If therefore any of these other " lati'ies " exist or ever have existed, they exist or
have existed not in accordance with, but in defiance of, the decree of the Second Council of
Nice.

But unfortunately, as I have said, we have neither in Hebrew, Latin, nor English any
word with this restricted meaning, and therefore when it became necessary to translate the
Greek acts and the decree, great difficulty was experienced, and by the use of " adoro " as
the eqviivalent of Trpoo-Kwew many were scandalized, thinking that it was divine adoration
which they were to give to the sacred images, which they knew would be idolatry. The same
trouble is found in rendering into English the acts and decrees ; for while indeed properly
speaking " worship " no more means necessarily divine worship in English than " adoratio "
does in Latin (e.g. I. Chr. xxix. 20, "All the congregation bowed down their heads and
worshipped the Lord and the King " [i.e. Solomon] ; Luke xiv. 10, " Then shalt thou have
woi-ship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee"), yet to the popular mind "the
worship of images " is the equivalent of idolatry. In the following translations I have uni-
formly translated as follows and the reader from the English will know what the word is in
the original.

IIpoo-Kwctu, to venerate ; Ti/xaw, to honour ; Aarpevw, to adore ; do-Tra^o/Aat, to salute ; SouAeuo),
to serve ; ct/cwv, an image.

The relative force of 7rpotr/cwr;cri? and Xarpda cannot better be set forth than by Archbishop
Trench's illustration of two circles having the same centre, the larger including the less
{New Testament Synonyms, sub voce Aarpcuw).

To make this matter still clearer I must ask the reader's attention to the use of the words
abadh and shachah in the Hebrew ; the one abadh, which finds, when used with reference to
God or to false gods its equivalent in Aarpcvw ; the other shachah, which is represented by
TTpoaKvviui. Now in the Old Testament no distinction in the Hebrew is drawn between these
woi'ds when applied to creator or creature. The one denotes service primarily for hire ; the
other bowing down and kissing the hand to any in salutation. Both words are constantly
used and sometimes refer to the Creator and sometimes to the creature — e.g., we read that
Jacob served (abadh) Laban (Gen. xxix. 20) ; and that Joshua commanded the people not to
serve the gods of their fathers but to serve (abadh) the Lord (Josh. xxiv. 14). And for the
use of shachah the following may suffice : " And all the congregation blessed the Lord God
of their fathers and bowed down their heads and worshipped (Hebrew, shachah ; Greek, Trpoo--
Kvveo) ; Latin, adoro) the Lord and the King " (I. Chr. xxix. 20). But while it is true of
the Hebrew of the Old Testament that there is no word which refers alone to Divine Worship
this is not true of the Septuagint Greek nor of the Greek of the New Testament, for in both
TTpoo-Kwco) has always its general meaning, sometimes applying to the creature and sometimes
to the Creator ; but Xarpevw is used to denote divine worship alone, as St. Augustine pointed
out long ago.

This distinction comes out very clearly in the inspired translation of the Hebrew found
in Matthew iv. 10, " Thou shalt worship (Trpoo-Kw^o-tis) the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve (XarpevVcis)." "Worship " was due indeed to God above all but not exclusively to
him, but latria is to be given to "him only." ^

I think I have now said enough to let the reader understand the doctrine taught by the
council and to prove that in its decree it simply adopted the technical use of words found in
the Greek of the Septuagint and of the New Testament. I may then close this introduction
with a few remarks upon outward acts of veneration in general.


' Vide the Synod's Letter to the Emperor and Empress.


528 11. NICE. A.D. 787


Of course, the outward manifestation in bodily acts of reverence will vary with times and
with the habits of peoples. To those accustomed to kiss the earth on which the Emperor
had trodden, it would be natural to kiss the feet of the image of the King of Kings. The
same is manifestly true of any outward acts whatever, such as bowing, kneeling, burning of
lights, and oflfering of incense. All these when oifered before an image are, according to
the mind of the Council, but outward signs of the reverence due to that which the image
represents and pass backward to the prototype, and thus it defined, citing the example of
the ser2:»ent in the wilderness, of which we read, "For he that turned himself toward it was
not saved by the thing that he saw, but by thee, that art the Saviour of all " (Wisdom xvi.
17). If anyone feels disposed to attribute to outward acts any necessarj^ religious value he
is falling back into Judaism, and it were well for him to remember that the nod which the
Quakers adopted out of protest to the bow of Christians was once the expression of divine
worship to the most sacred idols ; that in the Eastern Church the priest only bows before
the Lord believed to be present in the Holy Sacrament while he prostrates himself before
the infidel Sultan ; and that throughout the Latin communion the acolytes genuflect before
the Bishop, as they pass him, with the same genuflection that they give to the Holy Sacra-
ment upon the Altar. Li this connexion I cjuote in closing the fine satire in the letter of
this very council to the Emperor and Empress. St. Paul " says of Jacob (Heb. xi. 21), ' He
worshipped the top of his staff,' and like to this is that said by Gregory, surnamed the theo-
logian, ' Kevere Bethlehem and worshij) the manger.' But who of those truly understanding
the Divine Scriptures would suppose that here was intended the Divine worship of latria ?
Such an opinion could only be entertained by an idiot or one ignorant of Scriptural and
Patristic knowledge. Would Jacob give divine worship to his staff ? Or would Gregory, the
theologian, give command to worship as God a manger ! " '

' The treatise of St. John Damascene on The Holy Images has very recently been published in an English translation by M. H.
Allies. (London. Thos. Baker, 1898.)


THE DIVINE 1 SACRA- SENT BY THE EMPERORS CONSTANTINE AND
/ IRENE TO THE MOST HOLY AND MOST BLESSED HADRIAN,
(^ POPE OF OLD ROME.

{Found in Lahhe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 32.)


They who receive the dignity of the em-
pire, or the honour of the j3rincipal priest-
hood from our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to
provide and to care for those things which
please him, and rule and govern the people
committed to their care according to his
will and good pleasure.

Therefore, O most holy Head (Caput), it
is incumbent upon us and you, that irrepre-
hensibly we know the things which be his,
and that in these we exercise ourselves,
since from him we have received the im-
peratorial dignity, and you the dignity of
the chief priesthood.

But now to speak more to the point.
Your paternal blessedness knows what hath
been done in times past in this our royal
city against the venerable images, how
those who reigned immediately before us
destroyed them and subjected them to dis-
grace and injury : (O may it not be imput-
ed to them, for it had been better for them
had they not laid their hands upon the
Church !) — and how they seduced and
brought over to their own opinion all the
people who live in these parts — yea, even
the whole of the East, in like manner, up
to the time in which God hath exalted us
to this kingdom, who seek his glory in
truth, and hold that which has been handed
down by his Apostles together with all
other teachers. Whence now with pure
heart and unfeigned religion we have, to-
gether with all our subjects and our most
learned divines, had constant conferences
respecting the things which relate to God,
and by their advice have determined to
summon a General Council. And we en-
treat your paternal blessedness, or rather
the Lord God entreats, " who will have all
men to be saved and to come to the knowl-
edge of the truth," that you will give your-
self to us and make no delay, but come up
hither to aid us in the confirmation and es-
tablishment of the ancient tradition of ven-


erable images. It is, indeed, incumbent on
your holiness to do this, since you know
how it is written — " Comfort ye, comfort
ye, my people, ye priests, saith the Lord,"
and " the lips of the priest shall keep
knowledge, and the law shall go forth out
of his mouth, for he is the angel of the
Lord of Hosts." And again, the divine
Apostle, the preacher of the truth, who,
" from Jerusalem and round about unto II-
lyricum, preached the Gospel," hath thus
commanded — "Feed with discipline the
flock of Christ which he purchased with his
own blood." As then you are the verita-
ble chief priest (primus sacerdos) who pre-
sides in the place and in the see of the
holy and superlaudable Apostle Peter, let
your paternal blessedness come to us, as we
have said before, and add your presence to
all those other priests who shall be assem-
bled together here, that thus the will of the
Lord may be accomplished. For as we are
taught in the Gospels our Lord saith —
" When two or three are met together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them "
— let your paternal and sacred blessedness
be certified and confirmed by the great God
and King of all, our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by us his servants, that if you come up
hither you shall be received with all honour
and glory, and that everything necessary
for you shall be granted. And again, when
the definition {capitulum) shall be com-
pleted, which by the good pleasure of Christ
our God we hope shall be done, we take
upon us to provide for you every facility of
returning with honour and distinction. If,
however, your blessedness cannot attend
upon us (which we can scarcely imagine,
knowing what is your zeal about divine
things), at least, pray select for us men of
understanding, having with them letters ,
from your holiness, that they may be pres-
ent here in the person of your sacred and
paternal blessedness. So, when they meet


' " Divine" here, as usually in such connections, means " im-
perial."

' Mendham ( The Seventh General Council, the Second of Ni-
cma. Loudon, s.d.) by a curious blunder takes the adjective for


the substantive, and translates " The Sacred Divalis." This is a
mere trip, for he knows the word " sacra," as appears a few pages
further on.


530


11. NICE. A.D. 787


with the other priests who are here, the
ancient tradition of our holy fathers may
be synodically confirmed, and every evil
phmt of tares may be rooted out, and the
Avords of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
may be fulfilled, that " the gates of hell
shall not prevail against her." And after
this, may there be no further schism and
separation in the one holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, of which Christ our true
God is the Head.

We have had Constantine, beloved in
Christ, most holy Bishop of Leontiua in our
beloved Sicily, with whom your paternal
blessedness is well acquainted, into our
presence ; and, having spoken with him
face to face, have sent him with this our
present venerable jussio to you. Whom,


after that he hath seen you, forthwith dis-
miss, that he may come back to us, and
write us by him concerning your coming —
what time we may expect will be spent in
your journeying thence and coming to us.
Moreover, he can retain with him the most
holy Bishop of Naples, and come up hither
together with him. And, as your journey
will be by way of Naples and Sicily we
have given orders to the Governor of Sicily
about this, that he take due care to have
every needful preparation made for your
honour and rest, which is necessary in or-
der that your paternal blessedness may
come to us. Given on the ivth before the
calends of September, the seventh indic-
tion, from the Royal City.


THE IMPERIAL SACRA.


BEAD AT THE FIRST SESSION.


{Found in Labhe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. Jf.9.)


Constantine and Irene — Sovereigns of
the Romans in the Faith, to the most holy
Bishops, who, by the grace of God and by
the command of our pious Sovereignty,
have met together in the Council of Nice.

The Wisdom which is truly according to
the nature of God and the Father — our
Lord Jesus Christ, our true God — who, by
his most divine and wonderful dispen-
sation in the flesh, hath delivered us from
all idolatrous error : and, by taking on him
our nature, hath renewed the same by the
co-operation of the Spirit, which is of the
same nature with himself ; and having him-
self become the first High Priest, hath ac-
counted you holy men, worthy of the same
dignity.

He is that good Shepherd who, bearing
on his own shoulders that wandering sheep
— fallen man, hath brought him back to
liis own peculiar fold — that is, the com-
pany of angelic and ministering powers
(Eph. ii. 14, 15), and hath reconciled us
in himself and having taken away the wall
of partition, hath broken down the enmity
through his flesh, and hath bestowed upon
us a rule of conduct tending to peace ;
wherefore, preaching to all, he saith in the
Gospel, Blessed are the peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God


(Matt. V. 9), Of Avhich blessedness, con-
firming as it does the exaltation of the
adoption of sons, our pious Sovereignty
desiring above all things to be made
partakers, hath ever applied the utmost
diligence to direct all our Roman Com-
monwealth into the ways of unity and
concord ; and more especially have we
been solicitous concerning the right regula-
tion of the Church of God, and most
anxious in every way to promote the unity
of the priesthood. For which cause the
Chiefs of the Sacerdotal Order of the East
and of the North, of the West and of the
South, are present in the person of their
Representative Bishops, who have with
them respectively the replies written in
answers to the Synodical Epistle sent from
the most holy Patriarch ; for such was
from the beginning the synodical regulation
of the Church Catholic, which, from the one
end of the earth to the other, hath received
the Gospel. On this account we have, by
the good will and permission of God, caused
3'ou, his most holy Priests, to meet together
— you who are accustomed to dispense his
Testimony in the unbloody sacrifice — that
your decision may be in accordance with
the definitions of former councils who de-
creed rightly, and that the splendour of the


II. NICE. A.D. 787


531


Spirit may illumine you in all things, for, as
our Lord teaches. No man lighteth a can-
dle and putteth it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, that it may give light to all
that are in the house ; even so, should ye
make such use of the various regulations
which have been piously handed down to
us of old by our Fathers, that all the Holy
Churches of God may remain in peaceful
order.

As for us, such was our zeal for the truth
— such our earnest desire for the interests
of religion, our care for ecclesiastical order,
our anxiety that the ancient rules and or-
ders should maintain their ground — that
though fully engaged in military coun-
cils— though all our attention was occupied
in political cares — yet, treating all these af-
fairs as but of minor importance, we would
allow nothing whatever to interfere with
the convocation of your most holy council.
To every one is given the utmost freedom
of expressing his sentiments without the
least liesitation, that thus the subject under
enquiry may be most fully discussed and
truth may be the more boldly spoken, that
so all dissensions may be banished from
the Church and we all may be united in the
bonds of peace.

For, when the most holy Patriarch Paul,
by the divine Avill, was about to be liberated
from the bands of mortality and to ex-
change his earthly pilgrimage for a heav-
enly home with his Master Christ, he abdi-
cated the Patriarchate and took upon him
the monastic life, and when we asked him,
Whv hast thou done this? he answered,
Because I fear that, if death should surprise
me still in the episcopate of this royal and
heaven- defended city, I should have to
carry with me the anathema of the whole
Catholic Church, which consigns me to that
outer darkness which is prepared for the
devil and his angels ; for they say that a
certain synod hath been held here in order
to the subversion of pictures and images
which the Catholic Church holds, embraces,
and receives, in memory of the persons whom
they represent. This is that which distracts
my soul — this is that which makes me
anxiously to enquire how I may escape the
judgment of God — since among such men
I have been brought up and with such am
I numbered. No sooner had he thus spoken
in the presence of some of our most illustri-
ous nobles than he expired.


When our Pious Sovereignty reflected on
this awful declaration (and truly, even be-
fore this event, we had heard of similar
questionings from many around), we took
counsel with ourselves as to what ought to
be done ; and we determined, after mature
deliberation, that when a new Patriarch
had been elected, we should endeavour
to bring this subject to some decisive
conclusion. Wherefore, having summoned
those whom Ave knew to be most experi-
enced in ecclesiastical matters, and having
called upon Christ our God, we consulted
with them who was worthy to be exalted to
the chair of the Priesthood of this Royal
and God-preserved city ; and they all with
one heart and soul gave their vote in favour
of Tarasius — he who now occupies the Pon-
tifical Presidency. Having, therefore, sent
for him, we laid before him our delibera-
tions and our vote ; but he would by no
means consent, nor at all yield to that
which had been determined. And when
■we enquired. Wherefore he thus refused his
consent ? — at first he ansAvered evasively,
That the yoke of the Chief Priesthood
was too much for him. But we, know-
ing this to be a mere pretext covering
his unwillingness to obey us, would not de-
sist from our importunity, but persisted in
pressing the acceptance of the dignity of the
Chief Priesthood upon him. When he
found how urgent we were with him, he
told us the cause of his refusal. It is (said
he) because I perceive that the Church
wdiich has been founded on the rock, Christ
our God, is rent and torn asunder by
schisms, and that we are unstable in our
confession, and that Christians in the East,
of the same faith with ourselves, decline
communion with us, and unite themselves
; with those of the West ; and so we are es-
j tranged from all, and each day are anathe-
matized by all : and, moreover, I should
demand that an Ecumenical Council should
be held, at which should be found Legates
i from the Pope of Rome and from the Chief
Priests of the East. We, therefore, fully
understanding these things, introduced him
to the assembled company of the Priests —
of our most illustrious Priuces — and of all
our Christian people ; and then, in their
presence, he repeated to them all that he
had before said to us ; which, when they
heard, they received him joyfully, and
earnestly entreated our peace-making and


532


11. NICE. AA). :b]


pious Sovereignty that an Ecumeuical
Council might be assembled. To this their
request, we gave our hearty consent ; for,
to speak the truth, it is by the good will
and under the direction of our God that
we have assembled you together. Where-
fore as God, willing to establish his own
counsel, hath for this purpose brought you
together from all parts of the world, behold
the Gospels now lying before you, and
plainly crying aloud, " Judge justly ; " stand
firm as champions of religion, and be ready
with unsparing hand to cut away all inno-
vations and new faugled inventions. And,
Peter the Chief of the Apostolic Col-
struck the mad slave and cut off his
Jewish ear with the sword, so in like man-
ner do ye wield the axe of the Spirit, and
every tree which bears the fruit of conten-
tion, of strife, or newly-imported innova-
tion, either renew by transplanting through
the words of sound doctrine, or la}' it low
with canonical censure, and send it to the
fires of the future Gehenna, so that the


as
lege


peace of the Spirit may evermore protect
the whole body of the Church, compacted
and united in one, and confirmed by the
traditions of the Fathers ; and so may
all our Roman State enjoy peace as well as
the Church.

We have received letters from Hadrian,
most Holy Pope of old Rome, by his Le-
gates — namely, Peter, the God-beloved
\ Archpresbyter, and Peter, the God - be -
loved Presbyter and Abbot — who will be
present in council with you ; and we com-
mand that, according to sy nodical custom,
these be read in the hearing of 3'ou all ; and
that, having heard these with becoming si-
lence, and moreover the Epistles contained
in two octavos sent by the Chief Priest and
other Priests of the Eastern dioceses by
John, most pious Monk and Chancellor
of the Patriarchal throne of Antioch, and
Thomas, Priest and Abbot, who also are
present together with you, ye may by these
understand what are the sentiments of the
Church Catholic on this point.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION I.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 53.)


[ Certain bishops who had been led astray
by the Iconoclasts came, asking to be received
back. Thefii'st of these was Basil of An-
cyra.]

The bishop Basil of Ancyra read as fol-
lows from a book ; Inasmuch as ecclesi-
astical legislation has canonically been
handed down from past time, even from the
beginning from the holy Apostles, and from
their successors, who were our holy fathers
and teachers, and also from the six holy
and ecumenical synods, and from the local
synods which were gathered in the interests
of orthodoxy, that those returning from any
heresy whatever to the orthodox faith and
to the tradition of the Catholic Church,
might deny their own heresy, and confess
the orthodox faith.

Wherefore I, Basil, bishop of the city of
Ancyra, proposing to be united to the Catho-
lic Church, and to Hadrian the most holy
Pope of Old Rome, and to Tarasius the most
blessed Patriarch, and to the most holy
apostolic sees, to wit, Alexandria, Antioch,
and the Holy City, as well as to all orthodox
high-priests and priests, make this written
confession of my faith, and I offer it to you
as to those who have received power by
apostolic authority. And in this also I beg
pardon from your divinely gathered holiness
for my tardiness in this matter. For it was
not right that I should have fallen behind
in the confession of orthodoxy, but it arose
from my entire lack of knowledge, and sloth-
ful and negligent mind in the matter.
Wherefore the rather I ask your blessed-
ness to grant me indulgence in God's sight.

I believe, therefore, and make my con-
fession in one God, the Father Almighty, and
in one Lord Jesus Christ, his onl}^ iDegotten
Son, and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and
Giver of Life. The Trinit}', one in essence
and one in majesty, must be worshipped
and glorified in one godhead, power, and
authority. I confess all things pertaining
to the incarnation of one of the Holy Trinity,
our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, as the
Saints and the six Ecumenical Synods have


handed down. And I reject and anathema-
tize every heretical babbling, as they also
have rejected them. I ask for the interces-
sions (7r/3ecr/3eta<?) of our spotless Lady the
Holy Mother of God, and those of the holy
and heavenly powers, and those of all the
Saints.'

And receiving their holy and honourable
reliques with all honour {rt/x?}?), I salute and
venerate these with honour (Tt/LiT^rtAcw? irpoa-
Kvvioi), hoping to have a share in their holi-
ness. Likewise also the venerable images
(eUova^) of the incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the humanity he assumed for our
salvation ; and of our spotless Lady, the holy
Mother of God ; and of the angels like unto
God; and of the holy Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, and of all the Saints — the sacred
images of all these, I salute and venerate —
rejecting and anathematizing with my whole
soul and mind the synod which was gath-
ered together out of stubbornness and mad-
ness, and which styled itself the Seventh
Synod, but which by those who think ac-
curately was called lawfully and canonically
a pseudo-synod, as being contrary to all
truth and piety, and audaciously and teme-
rariously against the divinely handed do^n
ecclesiastical legislation, yea, even impious-
ly having yelped at and scoffed at the holy
and venerable images, and having ordered
these to be taken away out of the holy
churches of God ; over which assembly pre-
sided Theodosius with the pseudonym of
Ephesius, Sisinnius of Perga, with the sur-
name Pastillas, Basilius of Pisidia, falsely


' Thus far there was no expression of opinion from which the
Iconoclasts would have dissected, for in all that regarded the
Blessed Virgin and the Saints and their invocation and patronage,
the heretics agreed with the orthodox. Protestants have been in
the habit of treating the Iconoclasts as if they were substantially
agreed with them with regard to the ciiltus of the Blessed Virgin
and of the other Saints. What an error this is, is easily proved by
citing two of the anathematisms of their Conciliabulum.

"If anyone shall not confess that the Ever- virgin Mary is prop-
erly and "truly the Mother of God, and more exalted than every
creature, whether visible or invisible, and does not seek her inter-
cessions with sincere faith, because she has confidence in ap-
proaching our God. who was born of her, let him be anathema."
(L. and C. Cone, Tom. VII,, col. 524.)

" [f anyone does not confess that all the Saints from the begin-
ning down to now, who whether before the Law, or under the
Law, or in grace pleased God. should be honoured in his presence
both with soul and body ; and does not seek their prayers, accord-
ing to the tradition of "the Church as of those ha\ing confidence
to plead for the world, let him be anathema." (Ibid. col. 528.)


534


II. NICE. A.D. 787


called " tricaccabus ; " with whom the
wretched Constantine, the then Patriarch,
was led (e/AaTatcobT^j astra}'.

These things thus I confess and to these
I assent, and therefore in simplicity of heart
and in upriglitness of mind, in the presence
of God, I have made the subjoined anatii-
ematisms.

Anathema to the calumniators of the
Christians, that is to the image breakers.

Anathema to those who apply the words
of Holy Scripture which were spoken
against idols, to the venerable images.

Anathema to those who do not salute the
holy and venerable images.

Anathema to those who say that Chris-
tians have recourse to the images as to gods.

Anathema to those who call the sacred
images idols.

Anathema to those who knowingly com-
municate with those who revile and dishon-
our the venerable images.

Anathema to those who say that another
than Christ our Lord hath delivered us
from idols.

Anathema to those who spurn the teach-
ings of the holy Fathers and the tradition
of the Catholic Church, taking as a pretext
and making their own the arguments of
Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and Dioscorus,
that unless we were evidently taught by
the Ohl and New Testaments, we should
not follow the teachings of the holy Fa-
thers and of the holy Ecumenical Synods,
and the tradition of the Catholic Church.

Anathema to those who dare to say that
the Catholic Church hath at any time sanc-
tioned idols.

Anathema to those who say that the mak-
ing of images is a diabolical invention and
not a tradition of our holy Fathers.

This is my confession [of faith] and to
these propositions I give my assent. And
I pronounce this with my whole heart, and
soul, and mind.


And if at any time by the fraud of the
devil (which may God forbid !j I volunta-
rily or involuntarily shall be opposed to
what I have now professed, may I be anath-
ema from the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, and from the Catholic Church
and every hierarchical order a stranger.

I will keep myself from every acceptance
of a bribe and from filthy lucre in accord-
ance with the divine canons of the holy
Apostles and of the a})proved Fathers.

Tarasius, the most holv Patriarch, said :
This whole sacred gathering yields glory
and thanks to God for this confession of
yours, which you have made to the Catho-
lic Church.

The Holy Synod said : Glory to God
which maketli one that which was severed.

[Theodo7'e, hishop of Myra, then read the
same covfts.non, and was 7'ecewed. The
nednt hishoj) who asked to be received read as
follows: {col. 60)]

Theodosius, the humble Christian, to the
holy and Ecumenical Synod : I confess and
I agree to (avvTiSefjiac) and I receive and I
salute and I venerate in the first place the
spotless image of our Lord Jesus Christ,
our true God, and the holy image of her
who bore him without seed, the holy Moth-
er of God, and her help and protection and
intercessions each day and night as a sin-
ner to mv aid I call for, since she has con-
fidence with Christ our God, as he was
born of her. Likewise also I receive and
venerate the images of the holy and most
laudable Apostles, prophets, and martyrs
and the fathers and cultivators of the des-
ert. Not indeed as gods (God forbid!) do
I ask all these Avith my whole heart to pray
for me to God, that he may grant me through
their intercessions to find mercy at his
hands at the day of judgment, for in this
I am but showing forth more clearly the
affection and love of my soul which I have
borne them from the first. Likewise also I
venerate and honour and salute the reliques
of the Saiuts as of those who fought .for
Christ and who have received grace from
him for the healing of diseases and the cur-
ing of sicknesses and the casting out of
devils, as the Christian Church has received
from the holy Apostles and Fathers even
down to us to-day.


II. NICE. A.D. 787


535


Moreover, I am well pleased that there
should be images in the churches of the
faithful, especially the image of our Lord
Jesus Christ and of the holy Mother of
God, of every kind of material, both gold
and silver and of every colour, so that his
incarnation may be set forth to all men.
Likewise there may be painted the lives of
the Saints and Prophets and Martyrs, so
that their struggles and agonies may be set
forth in brief, for the stirring up and teach-
ing of the people, especially of the un-
learned.

For if the people go forth with lights and
iucense to meet the " laurata " and images
of the Emperors when they are sent to cities
or rural districts, they honour surely not
the tablet covered over with wax, but the
Emperor himself. How much more is it
necessary that in the churches of Christ
our God, the image of God our Saviour and
of his spotless Mother and of all the holy
and blessed fathers and ascetics should be
painted ? Even as also St. Basil says :
" Writers and painters set forth the great
deeds of war ; the one by word, the other
by their pencils ; and each stirs many to
courage." And again the same author,
" How much pains have you ever taken
that you might find one of the Saints who
was willing to be your importunate inter-
cessor to the Lord?"i And Chrysostom
says, " The charity of the Saints is not di-
minished by their death, nor does it come to
an end with their exit from life, but after
their death they are still more powerful
than when they were alive," and many other
things without measure. Therefore I ask
you, O ye Saints ! I call out to you. I have
sinned against heaven and in your sight.
Receive me as God received the luxurious
man, and the harlot, and the thief. Seek

' Mendham seems to have reversed the sense here altogether.


me out, as Christ sought out the sheep
that was lost, which he carried on his
shoulders ; so that there may be joy in the
presence of God and of his angels over my
salvation and repentance, through your in-
tervention, O all-holy lords ! Let them
who do not venerate the holy and venerable
images be anathema ! Anathema to those
who blaspheme against the honourable and
venerable images ! To those who dare to
attack and blaspheme the venerable images
and call them idols, anathema ! To the
calumniators of Christianity, that is to say
the Iconoclasts, anathema ! To those who
do not diligently teach all the Christ-loving
people to venerate and salute the venerable
and sacred and honourable images of all the
Saints who pleased God in their several
generations, anathema ! To those who have
a doubtful mind and do not confess with
their whole hearts that they venerate the
sacred images, anathema !

Sabbas, the most reverend hegumenus of
the monastery of the Studium, said: Ac-
cording to the Apostolic precepts and the
Ecumenical Synods he is worthy to be re-
ceived back.

Tarasius, the most holy Patriarch, said :
Those who formerly were the calumniators
of orthodoxy, now are become the advocates
of the truth.

\_Near the end of this session, (col. 77)]

John, the most reverend bishop and leg-
ate of the Eastern high priests said : This
heresy is the worst of all heresies. Woe
to the iconoclasts ! It is the worst of her-
esies, as it subverts the incarnation
{oLKovofiiav) of our Saviour.^

2 In the EngUsh Hefele (Vol. V., p. 363) this appears in the fol-
lowing most extraordinary form "John . . . declared that the
veneration of images was the wori?t of all heresies ' because it de-
tracted from the Economy (Incarnation) of the Redeemer.' " (!)


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION 11.

\The Papal Letters were presented hy the Legates. First was read that to Constan-
tine and Irene, hut not in its entirety, if we may trust Anastasius tJie Librariaii, loho
gives rohat he says is the original Latin text. Here folloxos a translation of tliis and of
the Greek., also a translation of the Latin jpassage altogether omitted, {as we are told)
with the consent of the Roman Legates^

PART OF POPE HADRIAN'S LETTER.


\As written hy the Fope.]


[As read in Greek to the Council.^


(Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. XCVI., col. 1217.) \ (Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. XCVL, col. 1218.)


If yon persevere in that orthodox Faith in
Avhicli 30U have begun, and the sacred and
venerable images be by your means erected
again in those parts, as by the lord, the
EmjDeror Constantine of pious memory, and
the blessed Helen, who promulgated the
orthodox Faith, and exalted the holy Cath-
olic and Apostolic Roman Church your
spiritual mother, and with the other ortho-
dox Emperors venerated it as the head of
all Churches, so will your Clemency, that is
protected of God, receive the name of an-
other Constantine, and another Helen,
through whom at the beginning the holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church derived
strength, and like whom your own imperial
fame is spread abroad by triumphs, so as
to be brilliant and deeply fixed in the whole
world. But the more, if following the tra-
ditions of the orthodox Faith, you embrace
the judgment of the Church of blessed Peter,
chief of the Apostles, and, as of old your
predecessors the holy Emperors acted, so
you, too, venerating it with honour, love with
all your heart his Vicar, and if your sacred
majesty follow by preference their ortho-
dox Faith, according to our holy Roman
Church. May the chief of the Apostles
himself, to whom the power was given by
our Lord God to bind and remit sins in
heaven and earth, be often your protector,
and trample all barbarous nations under
your feet, and everywhere make you con-
querors. For let sacred authority lay open
the marks of his dignity, and how great
veneration ought to be shewn to his, the
highest See, by all the faithful in the world.
For the Lord set him who bears the keys


If the ancient orthodoxy be perfected
and restored by your means in those re-
gions, and the venerable icons be placed
in their original state, you will be partakers

! with the Lord Constantine, Emperor of old,

j now in the Divine keeping, and the Em-
press Helena, who made conspicuous and

j confirmed the orthodox Faith, and exalted
still more your holy mother, the Catholic
and Roman and spiritual Church, and with
the orthodox Emperors who ruled after

! them, and so your most pious and heaven-
protected name likewise will be set forth

' as that of another Constantine and another
Helena, being renowned and praised
through the whole world, by whom the
holy Catholic and Apostolic Church is re-
stored. And especially if you follow the
tradition of the orthodox Faith of the
Church of the holy Peter and Paul, the
chief Apostles, and embrace their Yicar, as
the Emperors who reigned before you of
old both honoured their Vicar, and loved
him with all their heart: and if 3'our
sacred majesty honour the most holy
Roman Church of the chief Apostles, to
whom was given 230wer by God the Word
himself to loose and to bind sins in
heaven and earth. For they will extend
their shield over your power, and all bar-
barous nations shall be put under your
feet : and Avherever you go they will make
you conquerors. For the holy and chief
Apostles themselves, who set up the Catho-
lic and orthodox Faith, have laid it down
as a written law that all who after them are
to be successors of their seats, should hold
their Faith and remain in it to the end.


11. NICE. A.D. 787


537


of the kiugdom of heaven as chief over all,
and by Him is he honoured with this privi-
lege, by which the keys of the kiugdom of
heaven are entrusted to him. He, there-
fore, that was preferred with so exalted an
honour was thought worthy to confess that
Faith on which the Church of Christ is
founded. A blessed reward followed that
blessed confession, by the preaching of
which the holy universal Church was illu-
mined, and from it the other Churches of
God have derived the proofs of Faith. For
the blessed Peter himself, the chief of the
Apostles, who first sat in the Apostolic See,
left the chiefship of his Apostolate, and
pastoral care, to his successors, who are to
sit in his most holy seat for ever. And
that power of authority, which he received
from the Lord God our Saviour, he too be-
stowed and delivered by divine command
to the Pontiffs, his successors, etCo


[The part which was never read to the Council at all-l
(Found in L. and C, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 117.)


We greatly wondered that in your impe-
rial commands, directed for the Patriarch
of the royal city, Tarasius, we find him
there called Universal : but we know not
whether this was written through ignorance
or schism, or the heresy of the wicked.
But henceforth we advise your most mer-
ciful and imperial majesty, that he be by
no means called Universal in your writings,
because it appears to be contrary to the in-
stitutions of the holy Canons and the de-
crees of the traditions of the holy Fathers.
For he never could have ranked second,
save for the authority of our holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church, as is plain to iill.'
Because if he be named Universal, above
the holy Roman Church which has a prior
rank, which is the head of all the Churches
of God, it is certain that he shews himself
as a rebel against the holy Councils, and
a heretic. For, if he is Universal, he is
recognized to have the Primacy even over
the Church of our See, which appears ri-
diculous to all faithful Christians : because
in the whole world the chief rank and
power was given to the blessed Apostle


' This statement seems somewhat open to criticism in view of
the position taken by St. Leo, anrl of the assiertion of Pope Gela-
6iU8 that Constantinople was a suffragan see to Heraclea.


Peter by the Redeemer of the world him-
self ; and through the same Apostle, whose
place we unworthily hold, the holy Catholic
and Apostolic Roman Church holds the
first rank, and the authority of power, now
and for ever, so that if any one, which we
believe not, has called him, or assents to his
being called Universal, let him know that
he is estranged from the orthodox Faith,
and a rebel against our holy Catholic and
AjDostolic Church.

[After the reading was ended (col. 120)]

Tarasius the most holy patriarch said :
Did you yourselves receive these letters
from the mostifioly Pope, and did you carry
them to our pious Emperor ?

Peter and Peter the most beloved -of-God
presbyters who held the place of Hadrian,
the most holy pope of Rome, said : We
ourselves received such letters from our
apostolic father and delivered them to the
pious lords.

John, the most magnificent Logothete,
said : That this is the case is also known
to the Sicilians, the beloved of God Theo-
dore, the bishop of Catanea, and the most
revered deacon Epiphanius who is with him,


538


11. NICE. A.D. 787


who holds the place of the archbishop of
Sardinia. For both of these at the bidding
of our pious Emperors, went to Eome with
the most reverend apocrisarius of our most
holy patriarch.

Theodore the God-beloved bishop of Ca-
tanea, standing in the midst, said : The
pious emperor, by his honourable jussio, bid
send Leo, the most god-beloved presbyter
(who together with myself is a slave of
your holiness), with the precious letter of
his most sacred majesty ; and he who re-
veres our [sic in Greek, " your," in Latin]
holiness, being the governor {arparri'yo<=;) of
my province of Sicily, sent me to Rome
with the pious jussio of our orthodox
Emperors.^

And when we were gone, we announced
the orthodox faith of the pious emperors.

And when the most blessed Pojje heard
it, he said : Since this has come to pass in
the days of their reign, God has magnified
their pious rule above all former reigns. And
this suggestion (dvacpopav) which has been
read he sent to our most pious kings to-
gether with a letter to your holiness and
with his vicars who are here present and
presiding.

Cosmas, the deacon, notary, and cham-
berlain {Ouhuclesius) said: And another
letter was sent by the most holy Pope of
Old Rome to Tarasius, our most holy and
oecumenical Patriarch. Let it be disposed
of as your holy assembly shall direct.

The Holy Synod said, Let it be read.

[ Then was read Hadrian'' s letter to Tara-
sius of Constantiiioyle^ which ends hy say-
ing that, " our dearly-loved proto-presbyter
of the Holy Church of Rome, and Peter, a
monk, a presbyter, and an abbot, Avho have
been sent by us to the most tranquil and
pious emperors, we beg yout^f 'ill deem them
worthy of all kindness and humane amenity
for the sake of St. Peter, corojiheus of the
Apostles, and for our sakes, so that
for this we may be able to ofier you our
sincere thanks." '^ The letter heing ended
(col. 128),]

Peter and Peter, the most reverend pres-
byters and representatives of the most holy

1 The meaning of the passage is obscure, but Mendham's trans-
lation BeemB clearly wTone.

" Compare with this the statement of the famous historian. Gib-
bon (Chapter XLIX., N. 79j, "The pope's legates were casual


Pope of Old Rome said : Let the most holy
Tarasius, Patriarch of the royal city, say
whether he agrees {(jTOi')(el) with the letters
of the most holy Pope of Old Rome or
not.

Tarasius the most holy patriarch said :
The divine Apostle Paul, who was tilled with
the light of Christ, and who hath begotten
us through the gospel, in writing to the
Romans, commending their zeal for the
true faith which they had in Christ our
true God, thus said: "Your faith is gone
forth into all the world." It is necessary
to follow out this witness, and he that would
contradict it is without good sense. Where-
fore Hadrian, the ruler of Old Rome, since
he was a sharer of these things, thus borne
witness to, wrote expressly and truly to our
religious Emperors, and to our humility,
confirming admirably and beautifully the
ancient tradition of the Catholic Church.
And we also ourselves, having examined
both in writing,^ and by inquisition, and
syllogistically and by demonstration, and
having been taught by the teachings of the
Fathers, so have confessed, so do confess,
and so will confess ; and shall be fast, and
shall remain, and shall stand firm in the
sense of the letters which have just been
read, receiving the imaged rej)resentations
according to the ancient tradition of our
holy fathers ; and these we venerate with
firmly-attached^ affection, as made in the
name of Christ our God, and of our Spot-
less Lady the Holy Mother of God, and
of the Holy Angels, and of all the Saints,
most clearly giving our adoration and faith
to the one only true God.

And the holy Synod said : The whole holy
Synod thus teaches.


messengers, two priests without any special commission, and who
were disavowed on their return. Some vagabond monks were
persuaded by the Catholics to represent the Oriental patriarchs.
This ciu-ious' anecdote is revealed by Theodore Studites, one of
the warmest Iconoclasts of the age." And yet to this tissue of
false statements Bury, in his just-published edition of Gibbon
(1898), has no note of "correction to make ! And this has passed,
and will pass, for history among the overwhelming majority of
English readers ! Nor does there seem to be any possible excuse
for Gibbon in either particular, the first statement is proved
to be false by the letters of Hadrian, the second statement is
equally disproved by the letters of the " high priests of the
East," in which it is quite clear that no claim was set up that
they represented the Patriarchs, but the Patriarchates, which they
did. as they proved, in a very real sense. This letter Gibbon
must have seen, if indeed he ever took the trouble to read the Acts,
for it is spread out in full in Actio Secunda and was read at
length to the Council.

3 Mendham here has translated " The Scriptures," following the
Latin, the (Jreek is ypa<j>iKu>i.

* Mendham translates cx^ti-kw "relative," which is a quite possi-
ble rendering.


V


II. NICE. A.D. 787


539


Peter aud Peter, the God-loved presby-
ters and legates of the Apostolic See, said :
Let the holy Synod say whether it receives
the letters of the most holy Pope of Old
Rome.


The holy Synod said : We follow, we re-
ceive, we admit them.

\^The Mshops then give one hy one their

votes all in the same sense.']


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION HI.
(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 188.)


CoNSTANTiNE, the most holy bishop of
Constantia in Cyprus, said : Since I, un-
worthy that I am, find that the letter which
has just been read, which was sent from the
East to Tarasius the most holy archbishop
and ecumenical patriarch, is in no sense
changed from that confession of faith which
he himself had before made, to these I con-
sent and become of one mind, receiving and
saluting with honour the holy and venerable


images


But the worship of adoration I re-
serve alone to the supersubstantial and life-
giving Trinity. And those who are not so
minded, and do not so teach I cast out of
the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
and I smite them with anathema, and I de-
liver them over to the lot of those who deny
the incarnation aud the bodily economy of
Christ our true God.


NOTES

Hefele.
{Hist. Councils, Vol. V., p. 366.)
By false translation and misunderstanding


the Frankish bishops subsequently at the
Synod of Frankfort, a.d. 794, and also in the
Carolingian books (iii. 17), understood this
to mean that a demand had been made at


Nicpea that the same devotion should be of-
fered to the images as to the Most Holy Trin-
ity.


Under these circumstances it is clear that
the Franks could do nothing but reject the
decrees. I have treated of this whole matter
elsewhere.


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS,


SESSION IV.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 204.)


[Among numerous passages of the Fathers
one was read from a sermon hy St. Gregory
J^yssen in which he describes a painting rep-
resenting the sacrifice of Isaac and tells how
he could not pass it ^'without tea?'s."]

The most glorious princes said : See
how our father grieved at the depicted his-
tory, even so that he wept.

Basil, the most holy bishop of Ancyra,
said : Many times the father had read the
story, but perchance he had not wept ; but
when once he saw it painted, he wept.

John the most reverend monk and pres-
byter and representative of the Eastern high


priests, said : If to such a doctor the picture
was helpful and drew forth tears, how much
more in the case of the ignorant and simple
will it bring compunction and benefit.

The holy Synod said : We have seen in.
several places the history of Abraham
painted as the father says.

Theodore the most holy bishop of Cata-
nea, said : If the holy Gregory, vigilant ^ in
divine cogitation, was moved to tears at the
sight of the story of Abraham, how much
more shall a painting of the incarnation of
our Lord Christ, who for us was made man,

' It is impossible in English to reproduce the play upon the
words rpjjyopios 6 -^priyopuiv eis To 0€ia fOTJ/aara, K. T. A.


540


II. NICE. A.D. 787


move the beholders to their profit and to
tears ?

Tarasiiis the most holy Patriarch said:
Shall Ave not weep when we see an image of
our crucified Lord ?

The holy Synod said : We shall indeed
— for in that shall be found perfectly the
profundity of the abasement of the incarnate
God for our sakes.

\^Post nonnulla a passage is read from St.
Athanasius in which he describes the mira-
cles roorked at Berytus, after which there is
found the folloioiny (col. 224),]

Tarasius, the most holy Patriarch, said :
But perhaps someone will say, Why do not
the images which we have work miracles ?
To which we answer, that as the Apostle
has said, signs are for those w^ho do not be-
lieve, not for believers. For they who ap-
proached that image were unbelievers.
Therefore God gave them a sign through
the image, to draw them to our Christian
faith. But " an evil and adulterous gener-
ation that seeketh after a sign and no sign
shall be given it."

l^After a number of oilier quotations, ivas
read the Canon of the Council in Tridlo as
a canon of the Sixth Synod (col. 233).]

Tarasius, the most holy Patriarch said :
There are certain affected with the sickness
of ignorance who are scandalized by these
canons [viz. of the Trullan Synod] and say,
And do you really think they were adopted
at the Sixth Synod ? Now let all such know
that the holy great Sixth Synod was assem-
bled at Constantinople concerning those
who said that there w'as but one energy and
will in Christ. These anathematized the
heretics, and having expounded the ortho-
dox faith, they went to their homes in the
fourteenth year of Constautine. But after
four or five years the same ' fathers came
together under Justinian, the son of Con-
stautine, and set forth the before-mentioned
canons. And let no one doubt concerning
them. For they avIio subscribed under
Constantine Avere the same as they wdio
under Justinian signed the present chart,
as can manifestly be established from the
unchangeable similarity of their own hand-


' We have seen that this is an error.
Trullan Canons.


Vide Introduction to


writing. For it was right that they who
had appeared at an ecumenical synod
should also set forth ecclesiastical canons.
They said that we should be led as (by the
hand) by the venerable images to the recol-
lection of the incarnation of Christ and of
his saving death, and if by them we are led
to the realization of the incarnation of Christ
ovir God, Avliat sort of an opinion shall we
have of them who break down the venerable
images?

\_At the close of the Session, after a num-
ber of ajiathematisms had been pronounced,
the following vkis read, to which all the
bishojjs subscribed {col. 317).]

Fulfilling the divine precept of our God
and Saviour Jesus Christ, our holy Fathers
did not hide the light of the divine knowl-
edge given by him to them under a bushel,
but they set it upon the candlestick of
most useful teaching, so that it might give
light to all in the house — that is to say, to
those Avho are born in the Catholic Church ;
lest perchance anyone of those who piously
confess the Lord might strike his foot
against the stone of heretical evil doctrine.
For they expelled every error of heretics
and they cut off the rotten member if it was
incurably sick. And with a fan they purged
the floor. And the good wheat, that is to
say the word which nourisheth and which
maketh strong the heart of man, they laid
up in the granary of the Catholic Church ;
but throwing outside the chaff of heretical
evil opinion they burned it with unquench-
able fire. Therefore also this holy and ecu-
menical Synod, met together for the second
time in this illustrious metropolis of Nice,
by the will of God and at the bidding of
our pious and most faithful Emperors, Irene
a new Helena, and a ncAV Constantine, her
God-protected offspring, having considered
by their j^erusal the teachings of our ap-
proved and blessed Fathers, hath glorified
God himself, from Avhom there was given to
them wisdom for our instruction, and for
the perfecting of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church : and against those Avho do not be-
lieve as they did, but have attempted to
overshadow the truth through their novelty,
they have chanted the words of the psalm : ^
" Oh how much evil have thine enemies done

"^ The reference is to Pe. Ixxiv. 3, but the text is quite different
from ours.


II. NICE. A.D. 787


541


in thy sanctuary ; and have glorified them-
selves, saying, There is not a teacher any
more, and they shall not know that we
treated with guile the word of truth." But
we, in all things holding the doctrines and
precepts of the same our God-bearing Fath-
ers, make proclamation with one mouth and
one heart, neither adding anything, nor tak-
ing anything away from those things which
have been delivered to us by them. But in
these things we are strengthened, in these
things we are confirmed. Thus we confess,
thus we teach, just as the holy and ecumen-
ical six Synods have decreed and ratified.
We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
maker of all things visible and invisible ;
and in one Lord Jesus Christ, his only-be-
gotten Son and Word, through whom all
things were made, and in the Holy Ghost,
the Lord and giver of life, consubstantial
and coeternal with the same Father and
with his Son who hath had no beginning.
The unbuilt-up, indivisible, incomprehen-
sible, and non-circumscribed Trinity ; he,
wholly and alone, is to be worshipped and
revered with adoration; one Godhead, one
Lordship, one dominion, one realm and dy-
nasty, which without division is appor-
tioned to the Persons, and is fitted to the
essence severally. For we confess that one
of the same holy and consubstantial Trin-
ity, our Lord Jesus Christ the true God, in
these last days was incarnate and made
man for our salvation, and having saved our
race through his saving incarnation, and
passion, and resurrection, and ascension
into heaven ; and having delivered us from
the error of idols ; as also the prophet says,
Not an ambassador, not an angel, but the
Lord himself hath saved us. Him we also
follow, and adopt his voice, and cry aloud ;
No Synod, no power of kings, no God-hated
agreement hath delivered the Church from
the error of the idols, as the Jewdaizing
conciliabulum hath madly dreamed, which
raved against the venerable images ; but
the Lord of glory himself, the incarnate
God, hath saved us and hath snatched us
from idolatrous deceit. To him therefore
be glory, to him be thanks, to him be eu-
charists, to him be praise, to him be mag-
nificence. For his redemption and his sal-
vation alone can perfectly save, and not that
of other men who come of the earth. For
he himself hath fulfilled for us, upon whom
the ends of the earth are come through the


economy of his incarnation, the words
spoken beforehand by his prophets, for he
dwelt among us, and went in and out
among us, and cast out the names of idols
from the earth, as it was written. But we
salute the voices of the Lord and of his
Apostles through which we have been taught
to honour in the first place her who is prop-
erly and truly the Mother of God and ex-
alted above all the heavenly powers ; also
the holy and angelic powers ; and the IdIcss-
ed and altogether lauded Apostles, and the
glorious Prophets and the triumphant Mar-
tyrs which fought for Christ, and the holy
and God-bearing Doctors, and all holy men ;
and to seek for their intercessions, as able
to render us at home with the all-royal God
of all, so long as we keep his command-
ments, and strive to live virtuously. More-
over we salute the image of the honourable
and life-giving Cross, and the holy reliques
of the Saints ; and we receive the holy and
venerable images : and we salute them, and
we embrace them, according to the ancient
traditions of the holy Catholic Church of
God, that is to say of our holy Fathers, who
also received these things and established
them in all the most holy Churches of God,
and in every place of his dominion. These
honourable and venerable images, as has
been said, we honour and salute and rever-
ently venerate : to wit, the image of the
incarnation of our great God and Saviour
Jesus Christ, and that of our spotless Lady
the all-holy Mother of God, from whom he
pleased to take flesh, and to save and de-
liver us from all impious idolatry ; also the
images of the holy and incorporeal Angels,
who as men appeared to the just. Like-
wise also the figures and effigies of the di-
vine and all-lauded Apostles, also of the
God-speaking Prophets, and of the strug-
gling Martyrs and of holy men. So that
through their representations we may be
able to be led back in memory and recol-
lection to the prototype, and have a share
in the holiness of some one of them.

Thus we have learned to think of these
things, and we have been strengthened by
our holy Fathers, and we have been
strengthened by their divinely handed down
teaching. And thanks be to God for his
ineffable gift, that he hath not deserted us
at the end nor hath the rod of the ungodly
come into the lot of the righteous, lest the
righteous put their hands, that is to say


542


II. :MCE. A.D. 787


their actual deeds,^ unto wickedness. But shall lead them forth with the evil doers
he doeth well mito those who are good and | and peace shall be upon the Israel of God
true of heart, as the psalmist David melo


diously has sung ; with whom also we sing
the rest of the psalm : As for such as turn


back imto their own wickedness, the Lord | 346).]


{The subscriptions follow immsdiately
and close the acts of this session {col' 321-


EXTRACTS FROM THE ACTS.


SESSION VI.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 389.)


Leo the most renowned secretary said :
The holy and blessed Synod know how at
the last session we examined divers sayings
of the God -forsaken heretics, who had
brought charges against the holy and spot-
less Church of the Christians for the set-
ting up of the holy images. But to-day we
have in our hands the ^^Titten blasphemy
of those calumniators of the Christians, that
is to say, the absurd, and easily answered,
and self-convicting definition (opov) of the
pseudosyllogus, in all respects agreeing
with the impious opinion of the God-hated
heretics. But not only have we this, but
also the artful and most drastic refutation
thereof, which the Holy Spirit had super-


vised. For it was right that this definition
should be made a triumph by wise contra-
dictions, and should be torn to pieces with
strong refutations. This also we submit so
as to know your pleasure with regard to it.

The holy Synod said : Let it be read.

John, the deacon and chancellor [of the
most holy great Church of Constantinople,
in Led. only] read.


. [fohn, the deacon, then read the orthodox
refutation, and Gregory, the hishop of Neo-
c(£sarea, the Definition of the Mock Council,
the one reading the heretical statement and
the other the orthodox answer.]


i This obscure phrase Mendham omits altogether.


EPITOME OF THE DEFINITION OF THE ICONOCLASTIC CONCILIA-
BULUM, HELD IN CONSTANTINOPLE, A.D. 754.>

THE DEFINITION OF THE HOLY, GEEAT, AND ECUMENICAL SEVENTH SYNOD.


The holy and Ecumenical synod, which by
the grace of God and most pious command
of the God-beloved and orthodox Emperors,
Constantine and Leo,^ now assembled in the
imperial residence city, in the temple of the
holy and inviolate Mother of God and Vir-
gin Mary, surnamed in Blachernee, have
decreed as follows.

Satan misguided men, so that they wor-
shipped the creature instead of the Crea-
tor. The Mosaic law and the prophets co-
operated to undo this ruin ; but in order to
save mankind thoroughly, God sent his
own Son, who turned us away from error
and the worshipping of idols, and taught
us the worshipping of God in spirit and
in truth. As messengers of his saving doc-
trine, he left us his Apostles and disciples,
and these adorned the Church, his Bride,
with his glorious doctrines. This orna-
ment of the Church the holy Fathers and
the six Ecumenical Councils have preserved
inviolate. But the before-mentioned demi-
urgos of wickedness could not endure the
sight of this adornment, and gradually
brought back idolatry under the appearance
of Christianity, As then Christ armed his
Apostles against the ancient idolatry with
the power of the Holy Spirit, and sent them
out into all the world, so has he awakened
against the new idolatry his servants our
faithful Emperors, and endowed them with
the same wisdom of the Holy Spirit. Im-
pelled by the Holy Spirit they could no
longer be witnesses of the Church being
laid waste by the deception of demons, and
summoned the sanctified assembly of the
God-beloved bishops, that they might in-
stitute at a synod a scriptural examination
into the deceitful colouring of the pictures
{ofioicofidrcop) which draws down the spirit
of man from the lofty adoration (Xarpeia^;)
of God to the low and material adoration
(Xarpeiav) of the creature, and that they,
under divine guidance, might express their
view on the subject.

Our holy synod therefore assembled, and


we, its 338 members, follow the older sy-
nodal decrees, and accept and proclaim joy-
fully the dogmas handed down, principally
those of the six holy Ecumenical Synods.
In the first place the holy and ecumenical
great synod assembled at Nice, etc.

After we had carefully examined their
decrees under the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, we found that the unlawful art of
painting living creatures blasphemed the
fundamental doctrine of our salvation —
namely, the Incarnation of Christ, and con-
tradicted the six holy synods. These con-
demned Nestorius because he divided the
one Son and Word of God into two sons,
and on the other side, Arius, Dioscorus,
Eutyches, and Severus, because they main-
tained a mingling of the two natures of the
one Christ.

Wherefore we thought it right, to shew
forth Avith all accuracy, in our present defi-
nition the error of such as make and ven-
erate these, for it is the unanimous doc-
trine of all the holy Fathers and of the six
Ecumenical Synods, that no one may imag-
ine any kind of separation or mingling in
opposition to the unsearchable, unspeak-
able, and incomprehensible union of the
two natures in the one hypostasis or per-
son. What avails, then, the folly of the
painter, who from sinful love of gain de-
picts that which should not be depicted —
that is, with his polluted hands he tries to
fashion that which should only be believed
in the heart and confessed with the mouth ?
He makes an image and calls it Christ.
The name Christ signifies God and man.
Consequently it is an image of God and
man, and consequently he has in his fool-
ish mind, in his representation of the cre-
ated flesh, depicted the Godhead which can-
not be represented, and thus mingled what
should not be mingled. Thus he is guilty
of a double blasphemy — the one in making
an image of the Godhead, and the other by
mingling the Godhead and manhood. Those
fall into the same blasphemy who venerate


' In this epitome of the verbose definition of the council, I have followed for the most part Hefele. (Hist, of the Councils, Vol.
v., p. ^metseqq.)

* Now four years old.


544


COXCILIABULUiM OF C. P. A.D. 754


the image, and the same woe rests upon
both, because they err with Arius, Dioscorus,
and Eutyches, and with the heresy of the
Acephali. When, however, they are blamed
for undertaking to depict the divine nature of
Christ, which should not be depicted, they
take refuge in the excuse : We represent
only the flesh of Christ which we have seen
and handled. But that is a Nestorian error.
For it should be considered that that flesh
was also the flesh of God the Word, with-
out any separation, perfectly assumed by
the divine nature aucl made wholly divine.
How could it now be separated and repre-
sented apart ? So is it with the human
soul of Christ which mediates between the
Godhead of the Son and the dulness of the
flesh. As the human flesh is at the same
time flesh of God the Word, so is the hu-
man soul also soul of God the Word, and
both at the same time, the soul being dei-
fied as well as the body, and the Godhead
remained undivided even in the separation
of the soul from the body in his voluntary
passion. For where the soul of Christ is,
there is also his Godhead ; and where the
body of Christ is, there too is his God-
head. If then in his passion the divinity re-
mained inseparable from these, how do the
fools venture to separate the flesh from
the Godhead, and represent it by itself as
the image of a mere man ? They fall into
the abyss of impiety, since they separate the
flesh from the Godhead, ascribe to it a
subsistence of its own, a personality of its
own, which they depict, and thus introduce
a fourth person into the Trinity. More-
over, they represent as not being made di-
vine, that which has been made divine by
being assumed by the Godhead. Whoever,
then, makes an image of Christ, either de-
picts the Godhead which cannot be depict-
ed, and mingles it with the manhood (like
the Monophysites), or he represents the
body of Christ as not made divine and sep-
arate and as a person apart, like the Nesto-
rians.

The only admissible figure of the human-
ity of Christ, however, is bread and wine in
the holy Supper. This and no other form,
this and no other type, has he chosen to
represent his incarnation. Bread he or-
dered to be brought, but not a representa-
tion of the human form, so that idolatry
might not arise. And as the body of Christ
is made divine, so also this figure of the


body of Christ, the bread, is made divine by
the descent of the Holy Spirit ; it becomes
the divine body of Christ by the mediation
of the priest who, separating the oblation
from that which is common, sanctifies it.

The evil custom of assigning names to
the images does not come down from Christ
and the Apostles and the holy Fathers ; nor
have these left behind them any prayer by
which an image should be hallowed or
made anything else than ordinary matter.

If, however, some say, we might be right
in regard to the images of Christ, on ac-
count of the mysterious union of the two
natures, but it is not right for us to forbid
also the images of the altogether spotless
and ever-glorious Mother of God, of the
prophets, apostles, and martyrs, who were
mere men and did not consist of two nat-
ures ; we may reply, first of all : If those
fall away, there is no longer need of these.
But we will also consider w^iat may be said
against these in particular. Christianity
has rejected the ivliole of heathenism, and
so not merely heathen sacrifices, but also
the heathen worship of images. The Saints
live on eternally with God, although they
have died. If anyone thinks to call them
back again to life by a dead art, discovered
by the heathen, he makes himself guilty of
blasphemy. Who dares attempt with hea-
thenish art to paint the Mother of God,
who is exalted above all heavens and the
Saints ? It is not permitted to Christians,
who have the hope of the resurrection, to
imitate the customs of demon-worshippers,
and to insult the Saints, who shine in so
great glory, by common dead matter.

Moreover, we can prove our view by Holy
Scripture and the Fathers. In the former
it is said : " God is a Spirit : and they that
worship him must worship him in spirit
and in truth ; " and : " Thou shalt not make
thee any graven image, or any likeness of
any thing that is in lieaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath;" on which account
God spoke to the Israelites on the Mount,
from the midst of the fire, but showed them
no image. Further: "They changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into an image
made like to corruptible man, . . . and
served the creature more than the Creator."
{Several of lier 2:)assages, even less to the point,
are cited.'] '

' These are Hefele's words.


CONCILIABULUM OF C. P. A.D. 754


545


The same is taught also by the holy
Fathers. {The Synod appeals to a spuri-
ous passage from EpiphaniiLS and to one
inserted into the toritlngs of Theodotus of
Ancyra, a friend of St. (JyriVs ; to utter-
ances— in no way striking — of Gregory of
Wazianzum, of SS. Ckrysostoin, Basil,
Athanasius, of Ainphilochius and of Ense-
hius Pamphili , from his Letter to the Em-
press Constantia, who had asked him for a
picture of Chritit.~\ '

Supported by the Holy Scriptures and
the Fathers, we declare unanimously, in the
name of the Holy Trinity, that there shall
be rejected and removed and cursed out of
the Christian Church every likeness which
is made out of any material and colour
whatever by the evil art of painters.

Whoever in future dares to make such a
thing, or to venerate it, or set it up in a
church, or in a private house, or possesses
it in secret, shall, if bishop, presbyter, or
deacon, be deposed ; if monk or layman,
be anathematised, and become liable to be
tried by the secular laws as an adversary of
God and an enemy of the doctrines handed
down by the Fathers. At the same time
we ordain that no incumbent of a church
shall venture, under pretext of destroying
the error in regard to images, to lay his
hands on the holy vessels in order to have
them altered, because they are adorned
with figures. The same is provided in re-
gard to the vestments of churches, cloths,
and all that is dedicated to divine service.
If, however, the incumbent of a church
wishes to have such church vessels and
vestments altered, he must do this only
with the assent of the holy Ecumenical
patriarch and at the bidding of our pious
Emperors. So also no ]3rince or secular
official shall rob the churches, as some have
done in former times, under the pretext of
destroying images. All this we ordain, be-
lieving that we speak as doth the Apostle,
for we also believe that we have the spirit
of Christ ; and as our predecessors who
believed the same thing spake what they
had synodically defined, so Ave believe and
therefore do we speak, and set forth a def-
inition of what has seemed good to us fol-
lowing and in accordance with the defini-
tions of our Fathers.

(1) If anyone shall not confess, according

' These are Hefele's words.


to the tradition of the Apostles and Fathers,
in the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost
one godhead, nature and substance, will and
operation, virtue and dominion, kingdom
and power in three subsistences, that is in
their most glorious Persons, let him be
anathema.

(2) If anyone does not confess that on©
of the Trinity was made flesh, let him be
anathema.

(3) If anyone does not confess that the
holy Virgin is truly the Mother of God, etc.

(4) If anyone does not confess one Christ
both God and man, etc.

(5) If anyone does not confess that the
flesh of the Lord is life-giving because it
is the flesh of the Word of God, etc.

(6) If anyone does not confess two nat-
ures in Christ, etc.

(7) If anyone does not confess that Christ
is seated with God the Father in body and
soul, and so will come to judge, and that he
will remain God forever without any gross-
ness, etc.

(8) If anyone ventures to represent the
divine image {-xapaKrrjp) of the Word after
the Incarnation with material colours, let
him be anathema !

(9) If anyone ventures to represent in
human figures, by means of material colours,
by reason of the incarnation, the substance
or person (ousia or hypostasis) of the Word,
which cannot be depicted, and does not
rather confess that even after the Incarna-
tion he [i.e., the Word] cannot be depicted,
let him be anathema!

(10) If anyone ventui'es to represent the
hypostatic union of the two natures in a
picture, and calls it Christ, and thus falsely
represents a union of the two natures, etc. !

(11) If anyone separates the flesh united
with the person of the Word from it, and
endeavours to represent it separately in a
picture, etc. !

(12) If anyone separates the one Christ
into two persons, and endeavours to repre-
sent Him who was born of the Virgin sepa-
rately, and thus accepts only a relative
{a')(erLKr}) union of the natures, etc.

(13) If anyone represents in a picture the
flesh deified by its union with the Word,
and thus separates it from the Godhead,
etc.

(14) If anyone endeavours to represent
by material coloiirs, God the Word as a
mere man, who, although bearing the form


546


CONCILIABULUM OF C. P. A.D. 754


of God, yet has assumed the form of a ser-
vant in his own person, and thus endeavours
to separate him from his inseparable God-
head, so that he thereby introduces a qua-
ternity into the Holy Trinity-, etc.

(15) If anyone shall not confess the holy
ever-virgin Mary, truly and properly the
Mother of God, to be higher than every
creature whether visible or invisible, and
does not with sincere faith seek her inter-
cessions as of one having confidence in her
access to our God, since she bare him, etc.

(16) If anyone shall endeavour to repre-
sent the forms of the Saints in lifeless pict-
ures with material colours which are of no
value (for this notion is vain and intro-
duced by the devil), and does not rather
represent their virtues as living images in
himself, etc,

(17) If anyone denies the profit of the
invocation of Saints, etc,

(18) If anyone denies the resurrection of
the dead, and the judgment, and the con-
dign retribution to everyone, endless tor-
ment and endless bliss, etc.

(19) If anyone does not accept this our
Holy and Ecumenical Seventh Synod, let
him be anathema from the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost, and from the
seven holy Ecumenical Synods!

[Then follows the 'prohibition of the mak-
ing or teaching any other faith, and the


2)enalties for disobedience. After this fol-
low the acclatiiations.^

The divine Kings Constantine and Leo
said : Let the holy and ecumenical synod
say, if with the consent of all the most holy
bishops the definition just read has been set
forth.

The holy synod cried out : Thus we all
believe, we all are of the same mind. We
have all with one voice and voluntarily sub-
scribed. This is the faith of the Apostles.
Many years to the Emperors ! They are
the light of orthodoxy ! Many years to the
orthodox Emperors ! God preserve your
Empire ! You have now more firmly pro-
claimed the inseparabilit}- of the two natures
of Christ ! You have banished all idolatry !
You have destroyed the heresies of Ger-
manus [of Constantinople], George and
Mansur \p,avaovp, John Damascene]. Anath-
ema to Germauus, the double-minded, and
worshipper of wood ! Anathema to George,
his associate, to the falsifier of the doctrine
of the Fathers ! Anathema to Mansur, who
has an evil name and Saracen opinions ! To
the betrayer of Christ and the enemy of the
Empire, to the teacher of impiety, the per-
verter of Scripture, Mansur, anathema ! The
Trinity has deposed these three ! ^

' These are not given in full but are sufficient to give the true
gist.


EXCUKSUS ON THE CONCILIABULUM STYLING ITSELF THE SEVENTH
ECUMENICAL COUNCIL, BUT COMMONLY CALLED THE MOCK SYNOD
OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

A,D. 754.


The reader will find all the information he desires with regard to the great iconoclastic
controversy in the ordinary churcli-hi stories, and the theological side of the matter in the
writings of St. John Damascene. It seems, however, that in order to render the meaning of
the action of the last of the Ecumenical Councils clear it is necessary to provide an account of
the synod which was held to condemn what it so shortly afterward expressly approved. I
quote from Hefele in loco, and would only further draw the reader's attention to the fact that
the main thing objected to was not (as is commonly supposed) the outward veneration of the
sacred icons, but the making and setting up of them, as architectural ornaments ; and that it
was not only representations of the persons of the Most Holy Trinity, and of the Divine
Son in his incarnate form that were denounced, but even pictures of the Blessed Virgin and
of the other saints ; all this is evident to anyone reading the foregoing abstract of the
decree.


CONCILIABULUM OF C. P. A.D. 754 547


(Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 308 et seqq.)
The Emperor, after the death of the Patriarch Anastasius (a.d. 753), summoned the bishops
of his Empire to a great synod in the palace Hieria, which lay opposite to Constantinople on
the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, between Chrysopolis and Chalcedon, a little to the noi'th
of the latter. The vacancy of the patriarchate facilitated his plans, since the hope of succeed-
ing to this see kept down, in the most anabitious and aspiring of the bishops, any possible
thought of opi^osition. The number of those present amounted to 338 bishops, and the jslace
of president was occupied by Archbishop Theodosius of Ephesus, already known to us as son
of a former Emperor — Apsimar, from the beginning an assistant in the iconoclastic movement.
Nicephorus names him aione as president of the synod ; Theophanes, on the contrary, men-
tions Bishop Pastillas of Perga as second president, and adds, "The Patriarchates of Rome,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem were not represented [the last three were then in the
hands of the Saracens], the transactions began on February 10th, and lasted until August 8th
(in Hieria) ; on the latter date, however, the synod assembled in St. Mary's Church in
Blachei-nse, the northern suburb of Constantinople, and the Emperor now solemnly nomi-
nated Bishop Constantine of Sylseum, a monk, as patriarch of Constantinoisle. On August
27th, the heretical decree [of the Synod] was published."

We see from this that the last sessions of this Conciliabulum were held no longer in
Hieria, but in the Blachernse of Constantinople. We have no comj^lete Acts of this assem-
bly, but its very verbose opos (decree), together with a short introduction, is preserved among
the acts of the Seventh Ecumenical Council.

This decree was by no means suffered to remain inoperative.

(W. M. Sinclair. Smith and Wace, Dictionary of Chr. Biog., sub voce Constantinus VI.)
The Emperor singled out the more noted monks, and required them to comply' with the
decrees of the synod. In a.d. 766 he exacted an oath against images from all the inhabitants
of the empire. The monks refused with violent obstinacy, and Copronymus appears to have
amused himself by treating them with ruthless harshness. The Emperor, indeed, seems to
have contemplated the extirpation of monachism. John the Damascene he jjersuaded his
bishops to excommunicate. Monks were forced to appear in the hippodrome at Constanti-
nople hand in hand with harlots, while the popvilace spat at them. The new patriarch Con-
stantinus, presented by the emperor to the council the last day of its session, was forced to
foreswear images, to attend banquets, to eat and drink freely against his monastic vows, to
wear garlands, to witness the coarse spectacles and hear the coarse language which enter-
tained the Empei'or. Monasteries were destroyed, made into barracks, or secularized.
Lachanodraco, governor of the Thracian Theme, seems to have exceeded Copronymus in
his ribaldry and injustice. He collected a number of monks into a plain, clothed them with
white, presented them with wives, and forced them to choose between mari'iage and loss of
eyesight. He sold the property of the monasteries, and sent the price to the Emperor. Co-
pronymus publicly thanked him, and commended his example to other governors.

(Harnack. History of Dogma, Vol. V., p. 325 [Eng. Tr.].)
The clergy obeyed when the decrees were published ; but resistance was offered in the
ranks of the monks. Many took to flight, some became martyrs. The imperial jDolice
stormed the churches, and destroyed those images and pictures that had not been secured.
The iconoclastic zeal by no means sprang from enthusiasm for divine service in spirit and in
truth. The Emperor now also directly attacked the monks ; he meant to extii'pate the hated
order, and to overthrow the throne of Peter. We see how the idea of an absolute military
state rose powerfully in Constantinople ; how it strove to establish itself by brute force.
The Emperor, according to trustworthy evidence., made the inhabitants of the city swear


548 CONCILIABULUM OF C. P. A.D. 754

that they would henceforth worship no image, and give up all intercourse with monks.
Cloisters were turned into arsenals and barracks, relics were hurled into the sea, and the
monks, as far as possible, secularized. And the politically far-seeing Emperor, at the same
time entered into correspondence with France (Synod of Gentilly, a.d. 707), and sought to
win Pepin. History seemed to have suffered a violent rupture, a new era was dawning which
should supersede the history of the Church.

But the Church was too powerful, and the Emperor was not even master of Oriental
Christendom, but only of part of it. The orthodox Patriarchs of the East (under the rule
of Islam) declared against the iconoclastic movement, and a Church without monks or pict-
ures, in schism with the other orthodox Churches, was a nonentity. A s^Diritual reformer was
wanting. Thus the great reaction set in after the death of the Emperor (a.d. 775), the ablest
ruler Constantinople had seen for a long time. This is not the place to describe how it was
inaugurated and cautiously carried out by the skilful policy of the Emj^ress Irene ; cautiously,
for a generation had already grown up that was accustomed to the cultus without images.
An important part was played by the miracles performed by the re-emerging relics and pict-
ures. But the lower classes had always been really favourable to them ; only the army and
the not inconsiderable number of bishops who were of the school of Constantine had to be
carefully handled. Tarasius, the new Patriarch of Constantinople and a supporter of images,
succeeded, after overcoming much difficulty, and especially distrust in Rome and the East,
after also removing the excited army, in bringing together a General Council of about 350
bishops at Nicsea, a.d. 787, which reversed the decrees of a.d. 754. The proceedings of the
seven sittings are of great value, because very important patristic passages have been pre-
served in them which otherwise would have perished ; for at this synod also the discussions
turned chiefly on the Fathers. The decision (opos) restored orthodoxy and finally settled it.

I cannot do better than to cite in conclusion the words of the profoundly learned Ai'ch-
bishop of Dublin, himself a quasi-Iconoclast.

(Trench. Led. Medieval Ch. Hist, p. 93.)
It is only fair to state that the most zealous favourers and promoters of this ill-directed
homage always disclaimed with indignation the charge of offering to the images any rever-
ence which did not differ in kind, and not merely in degree, from the worship which they
offered to Almighty God, designating it as they did by altogether a different name. We
shall very probably feel that in these distinctions which they drew between the one and the
other, between the "honour" which they gave to these icons and the "worship " which they
withheld from these and gave only to God, there lay no slightest justification of that in which
they allowed themselves ; but these distinctions acquit them of idolatry, and it is the merest

justice to remember this.

(Trench. Ut supra, p. 99.)

I can close this Lecture with no better or wiser words than those with which Dean Mil-
man reads to us the lesson of this mournful story : " There was this irremediable weakness
in the cause of iconoclasm ; it was a mere negative doctrine, a proscriiDtion of those senti-
ments which had full possession of the popular mind, without any strong countervailing ex-
citement. The senses were robbed of their habitual and cherished objects of devotion, but
thei'e was no awakening of an inner life of intense and passionate piety. The cold, naked
walls from whence the Scriptural histories had been effaced, the despoiled shrines, the muti-
lated images, could not compel the mind to a more pure and immaterial conception of God
and the Saviour. Hatred of images, in the process of the strife, might become, as it did, a
fanaticism, it could never become a religion. Iconoclasm might proscribe idolatry ; but it
had no power of kindling a purer faith."


THE DECREE OF THE HOLY, GREAT, ECUMENICAL SYNOD, THE

SECOND OF NICE.

{Found in Lahhe and Oossart, Concilia. Tom. VII., col. 552.)


The lioly, great, aud Ecumenical Synod
which by the grace of God and the will of
the pious and Christ-loving Emperors, Con-
stantine and Irene, his mother, was gathered
together for the second time at Nice, the
illustrious metropolis of Bithynia, in the
holy church of God Avhich is named So-
phia, having followed the tradition of the
Catholic Church, hath defined as follows :

Christ our Lord, who hath bestowed
upon us the light of the knowledge of
himself, and hath redeemed us from the
darkness of idolatrous madness, having
espoused to himself the Holy Catholic
Church without spot or defect, promised
that he would so preserve her : and gave
his word to this effect to his holy disciples
when he said : " Lo ! I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world," which
promise he made, not only to them, but to
us also who should believe in his name
through their word. But some, not con-
sidering of this gift, and having become
fickle through the temptation of the wily
enemy, have fallen from the right faith ;
for, withdrawing from the traditions of the
Catholic Church, they have erred from the
truth and as the proverb saitli : " The hus-
bandmen have gone astray in their own
husbandry aud have gathered in their hands
nothingness," because certain priests,
priests in name only, not in fact, had
dared to speak against the God-approved
ornament of the sacred monuments, of
whom God cries aloud through the prophet,
" Many pastors have corrupted my vine-
yard, they have polluted my portion."

And, forsooth, following profane men,
led astray by their carnal sense, they have
calumniated the Church of Christ our God,
which he hath espoused to himself, and
have failed to distinguish between holy and
profane, styling the images of our Lord and
of his Saints by the same name as the
statues of diabolical idols. Seeing which
tilings, our Lord God (not willing to behold
his people corrupted by such manner of
plague) hath of his good pleasure called us
together, the chief of his priests, from ev-
ery quarter, moved with a divine zeal and


brought hither by the will of our princes,
Constantiue and Irene, to the end that the
traditions of the Catholic Church may re-
ceive stability by our common decree.
Therefore, with all diligence, making a
thorough examination and analysis, and
following the trend of the truth, we di-
minish nought, we add nought, but we pre-
serve unchanged all things which pertain
to the Catholic Church, and following the
Six Ecumenical Synods, especially that
which met in this illustrious metropolis of
Nice, as also that which was afterwards
gathered together in the God-protected
Royal City.

We believe . . . life of the world to
come. Amen.^

We detest and anathematize Arius and
all the sharers of his absurd opinion ; also
Macedonius and those who following him
are well styled " Foes of the Spirit " {Pneu-
matomachi). We confess that our Lady,
St. Mary, is properly and truly the Mother
of God, because she was the Mother after
the flesh of One Person of the Holy Trin-
ity, to wit, Christ our God, as the Council
of Ephesus has already defined when it
cast out of the Church the impious Nesto-
rius with his colleagues, because he taught
that there were two Persons [in Christ].
With the Fathers of this synod we confess
that he who was incarnate of the immacu-
late Mother of God and Ever- Virgin Mary
has two natures, recognizing him as perfect
God and perfect man, as also the Council
of Chalcedon hath promulgated, expelling
from the divine Atrium [ai^Xry?] as blas-
phemers, Eutychesand Dioscorus; and plac-
ing in the same category Severus, Peter aud
a number of others, blaspheming in divers
fashions. Moreover, with these we anathe-
matize the fables of Origen, Evagrius, aud

' Anastasius in his Tntf.rpretatw (Miame, Pat. Lat., Tom.
CXXIX., col. 458), gives the Creed with the words, "Filioque."
Cardinal Julian in the Fifth Session of the Council of Florence
gave evidence that there was then extant a very ancient codex
containing these words ; and this MS., which was in Greeli, was
actually shovsTi. The Greelc scholar Gemistius Pletho remarlced
that if this were so, then the Latin theologians, lilje St. Thomas
Aquinas would long ago have appealed to the Synod. (Of. Hefele,
Hist. Councils, VoK V., p. 374, Note 2.) This reasoning is not
conclusive if Cardinal Bellarmine is to be believed, who says that
St. Thomas had never seen the Acts of this synod. {De Imag.
Hand., Lib. ii., cap. xxii.)


550


II. NICE. A.D. 787


Didymiis, iu accordance with the decision
of the Fifth Council held at Constantino-
ple. "VVe affirm tiiut in Christ tliere be two
Avills and two oj^erations according to the
reality of each nature, as also the Sixth
Synod, held at Constantinople, taught, cast-
ing out Sergius, Honorius, Cyrus, Pyrrhus,
Macarius, and those who agree with them,
and all those who are unwilling to be rev-
erent.

To make our confession short, we keep
unchanged all the ecclesiastical traditions
handed down to us, whether in writing or
verbally, one of which is the making of pic-
torial representations, agreeable to the his-
tory of the preaching of the Gospel, a
tradition useful in many respects, but espe-
cially in this, that so the incarnation of the
Word of God is shewn forth as real and
not merely phantastic, for these have
mutual indications and without doubt have
also mutual significations.

We, therefore, following the royal path-
way and the divinely inspired authority of
our Holy Fathers and the traditions of the
Catholic Church (for, as we all know, the
Holy Spirit indwells her), define with all
certitude and accuracy that just as the fig-
ure of the precious and life-giving Cross, so
also the venerable and holy images, as well
in painting and mosaic as of other fit ma-
terials, should be set forth in the holy
churches of God, and on the sacred vessels
and on the vestments and on hangings and
in pictures both in houses and by the way-
side, to wit, the figure of our Lord God and
Saviour Jesus Christ, of our spotless Lady,
the Mother of God, of the honourable An-
gels, of all Saints and of all pious people.
For by so much more frequently as they
are seen in artistic representation, by so
much more readily are men lifted up to the
memory of their prototypes, and to a long-
ing after them ; and to these should be
given due salutation and honourable rev-
erence {acriraafjiov Kal rLfxrjTLKrjv TrpoaKvvr]-
atv), not indeed that true worship of faith
(Xarpeiav) which pertains alone to the di-
vine nature ; but to these, as to the figure
of the precious and life-giving Cross and
to the Book of the Gospels and to the other
holy objects, incense and lights may be of-
fered according to ancient pious custom.
For the honour which is paid to the image
passes on to that which the image repre-
sents, aud he who reveres the image reveres


in it the subject represented. For thus
the teaching of our holy Fathers, that is the
tradition of the Catholic Church, which
from one end of the earth to the other hath
received the Gospel, is strengthened. Thus
we follow Paul, who spake in Christ, and
the whole divine Apostolic company and
the holy Fathers, holding fast the traditions
which we have received. So we sing pro-
phetically the triumphal hymns of the
Church, " Rejoice greatly, O daughter of
Sion ; Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem.
Rejoice and be glad with all thy heart.
The Lord hath taken away from thee the
oppression of thy adversaries ; thou art
redeemed from the hand of thine enemies.
The Lord is a King in the midst of thee ;
thou shalt not see evil any more, and peace
be unto thee forever."

Those, therefore who dare to think or
teach otherwise, or as wicked heretics to
spurn the traditions of the . Church and to
invent some novelty, or else to reject some
of those things which the Church hath re-
ceived {e.g., the Book of the Gospels, or the
image of the cross, or the pictorial icons, or
the holy reliques of a martyr), or evilly and
sharply to devise anything subversive of
the lawful traditions of the Catholic Church
or to turn to common uses the sacred ves-
sels or the venerable monasteries,' if they
be Bishops or Clerics, we command that
they be deposed ; if religious or laics, that
they be cut ofl" from communion.

[^After all had signed, the accla7nations
began (col. 576).]

The holy Sj'nod cried out : So w^e all be-
lieve, we all are so minded, we all give our
consent and have signed. This is the faith
of the Apostles, this is the faith of the or-
thodox, this is the faith which hath made
firm the whole world. Believing in one
God, to be celebrated in Trinity, we salute
the honourable images ! Those who do not
so hold, let them be anathema. Those who
do not thus think, let them be driven far
away from the Church. For we follow the
most ancient legislation of the Catholic
Church. We keep the laws of the Fathers.
We anathematize those who add anything
to or take anything away from the Catholic


' CoTistantine Copronymue turned many monasteries into sol-
diers' barracks. In this he has been followed by other crowned
enemies of Christ.


II. NICE. A.D. 787


551


Cliurcli. We anathematize the introduced
novelty of the revilers of Christians. We
sahite the venerable images. We place
under anathema those who do not do this.
Anathema to them who presume to apply
to the venerable images the things said in
Holy Scripture about idols. Anathema to
those who do not salute the holy and ven-
erable images. Anathema to those who


call the sacred images idols. Anathema
to those who say that Christians resort
to the sacred images as to gods. An-
athema to those Avho say that any other
delivered us from idols except Christ our
God. Anathema to those Avho dare to say
that at any time the Catholic Church re-
ceived idols.

Many years to the Emperors, etc., etc.


EXCURSUS ON THE PRESENT TEACHING OF THE LATIN AND GREEK

CHURCHES ON THE SUBJECT.


To set forth the present teaching of the Latin Church upon the subject of images and
the cultus which is due them, I cite the decree of the Council of Trent and a passage from
the Catechism set forth by the authority of the same synod.

(Cone. Trid., Sess, xxv. December 3d and 4th, 1563. [Buckley's Trans.])

The holy synod enjoins on all bishops, and others sustaining the oflSce and charge of
teaching that, according to the usage of the Catholic and Apostolic Church received from
the primitive times of the Christian religion, and according to the consent of the lioly
Fathers, and to the decrees of sacred councils, they especially instruct the faithful diligently
touching the intercession and invocation of saints ; the honour paid to relics ; and the law-
ful use of images — teaching them, that the saints, who reign together with Christ, offer i;p
their own prayers to God for men ; that it is good and useful suppliantly to invoke them,
and to resort to their prayers, aid and help, for obtaining benefits from God, through his
Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, who alone is our Redeemer and Saviour ; but that they think
impiously, who deny that the saints, who enjoy eternal happiness in heaven, are to be in-
voked ; or who assert either that they do not pray for men ; or, that the invocation of them
to pray for each of us, even in particular, is idolatry ; or, that it is repugnant to the word of
God, and is oj)posed to the honour of the one mediator between God and men, Christ Jesus,
or, that it is foolish to supplicate, orally or inwardly, those who reign in heaven. Also, that
the holy bodies of holy martyrs and of others now living with Christ, which were the living
members of Christ, and the temples of the Holy Ghost, and which are by him to be raised unto
eternal life, and to be glorified, are to be venerated by the faithful, through which [bodies]
many benefits are bestowed by God on men ; so that they who affirm that veneration and
honour are not due to the relics of saints ; or, that these, and other sacred monuments, are
uselessly honoured by the faithful ; and that the places dedicated to the memories of the
Saints are vainly visited for the purpose of obtaining their aid ; are wholly to be condemned,
as the Church has already long since condemned, and doth now also condemn them.

Moreover, that the images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God and of the other
Saints, are to be had and retained particularly in temjjles, and that due honour and venera-
tion are to be awarded them ; not that any divinity or virtue is believed to be in them, on
account of which they are to be worshipped ; or that anything is to be asked of them ; or
that confidence is to be reposed in images, as was of old done by Gentiles, who placed their
hope in idols ; but because the honour which is shown unto them is referred to the proto-
types which they represent; in such wise that by the images which we kiss, and before
which we uncover the head, and prostrate ourselves, we adore Christ, and venerate the


552 11. NICE. A.D. 787


Saints, whose similitude they bear. And this, by the decrees of councils, and especially of
the second synod of Nicsea, has been ordained against the opponents of images.

And the bishops shall carefully teach this ; that, by means of the histories of the mys-
teries of our Redemption, depicted by paintings or other representations, the people are
instructed, and strengthened in remembering, and continually reflecting on the articles of
faith ; as also that great profit is derived from all sacred images, not only because the peo-
ple are thereby admonished of the benefits and gifts which have been bestowed upon them
by Christ, but also because the miracles of God through the means of the Saints, and their
salutary examples, are set before the eyes of the faithful ; that so, for those things they may
give God thanks ; may order their own life and manners in imitation of the Saints ; and may
be excited to adore and love God, and to cultivate piety. But if any one shall teach or
think contrary to these decrees, let him be anathema. And if any abuses have crept in
amongst these holy and salutary observances, the holy synod earnestly desires that they be
utterly abolished ; in such wise that no images conducive to false doctrine, and furnishing
occasion of dangerous error to the uneducated, be set up. And if at times, when it shall be
expedient for the unlearned people, it happen that the histories and narratives of Holy
Scripture are pourtrayed and represented ; the people shall be taught, that not thereby is the
Divinity represented, as though it could be perceived by the eyes of the body, or be depict-
ured by colours or figures. Moreover, in the invocation of saints, the veneration of relics,
and the sacred use of images, every superstition shall be removed, all filthy lucre be abol-
ished, finally, all lasciviousuess be avoided ; in such wise that figures shall not be painted or
adorned with a wantonness of beauty : nor shall men also pervert the celebration of the
saints, and the visitation of relics, into revellings and drunkenness ; as if festivals are cele-
brated to the honour of the saints by luxury and wantonness. Finally, let so great care and
diligence be used by bishops touching these matters, as that there appear nothing disor-
derly, or unbecoming!}^ or confusedly arranged, nothing profane, nothing indecorous ; since
holiness hecomeih the house of God.

And that these things may be the more faithfully observed, the holy synod ordains, that
it be lawful for no one to place, or cause to be placed, any unusual image in any place, or
church, howsoever exempted, except it shall have been approved of by the bishop : also, that
no new miracles are to be admitted, or new relics received, unless the said bishop has taken
cognizance and approved thereof ; who, as soon as he has obtained some certain informa-
tion in regard of these matters shall, after having taken advice with theologians, and other
pious men, act therein as he shall judge to be agreeable to truth and piety. But if any
doubtful, or difficult abuse is to be extirpated, or, in fine, if any more serious question shall
arise touching these matters, the bishop, before he decides the controversy, shall await the
sentence of the metropolitan and of the bishops of the same pi-ovince, in a provincial coun-
cil ; yet so, that nothing new, or that has not previously been usual in the Church, shall be
decreed, without the most holy Roman Pontiff having been first consulted.

(Catechism of the Council of Trent.i Pt. IV., Chap. VI. [Buckley's trans.])

Question III.

God and the Saints addressed differently.

From God and from the Saints we implore assistance not after the same manner : for
we implore God to grant us the blessing which we want, or to deliver us from evils ; but the
Saints, because favourites with God, we solicit to undertake our advocacy with God, to obtain

' The reader will remember that while of great weight the Catechism was not set forth by the Council, nor are its statements
defide in the Latin Church.


II. NICE. A.D. 787 553


of him for us those things of which we stand in need. Hence we employ two different

forms of jn-ayer : for to God, we properly say, Have mercy on us, hear us ; to the saints,

Fray for us.

Question IV.

In ivhat Planner we may beseech the Saints to have mercy on iis.

We may, however, also ask the saints themselves to have mercy ou us, for they are most
merciful ; but we do so on a different princij)le, for we may beseech them that, touched with
the misery of our condition, they would interpose, in our behalf, their favour and interces-
sion with God. In the performance of this duty, it is most strictly incumbent on all, to
beware lest they transfer to any creature the right which belongs exclusively to the Deity ;
and when we repeat before the image of any Saint the Lord's Prayer, our idea must then be
to beg of the Saint to pray with us, and ask for us those favours that are contained in the
form of the Lord's Prayer, to become, in fine, our interpreter and intercessor with God ;
for that this is an ofiice which the saints discharge, St. John the apostle has taught in the
Revelation.

The doctrine of the Eastern Church may be seen from the following from The Orthodox
Confession of the faith of the GatJwUc and Apostolic Church of the East.

{Covfes. Orthodox. P. III. Q. LII. [apud Kimmel, Lihri Symbolici Eeclesice Orientalis^.)

Eightly therefore do we honour the Saints of God, as it is written (Ps. cxxxix. 17)
"How dear are thy friends unto me, O God." And divine assistance we ask for through
them, just as God ordered the friends of Job to go to his faithful servant, and that he should
offer sacrifice and pray for them that they might obtain remission of sin through their pat-
ronage. And in the second place this [First] commandment forbids men to adore any
creature with the veneration of adoration (Aarpetas). For we do not honour the Saints as
though adoring them, but we call upon them as our brothers, and as friends of God, and
therefore we seek the divine assistance through these, our brethren. For they go between
the Lord and us for our advantage. And this in no respect is opposed to this commandment
of the decalogue.

Wherefore just as the Isi'aelites did not sin when they called upon Moses to mediate be-
tween them and God, so neither do we sin, when we call for the aid and intercession of the

Saints.

(Ihid. Quffistio LIV.)

This [Second] Commandment is separate from the first. For that treated of the Unity
of the true God, forbidding and taking away the multitude of gods. But the present treats
of extei-nal religious ceremonies. For besides the not honouring of false gods, we ought to
dedicate no carved likeness in their honour, nor to venerate with adoration such things, nor
to offer the sacrifices of adoration to them. Therefore they sin against this commandment
who venerate idols as gods, and offer sacrifices to them, and place their whole confidence and
hope in them ; as also the Psalmist says (Ps. cxxxv. 15), " The images of the heathen are silver
and gold, etc," They also transgress this precept who are given up to covetousness, etc.

(Ibid. Quaestio LV.)

There is a great distinction between idols and images (twv dSwXwv koI twv etKovwv). For
idols are the figments and inventions of men, as the Apostle testifies when he says (1 Cor.

• This is not found in SchafFs. The Creeds of Chriatemiom. Vol. 1 doctrinal part in full." and has omitted the rest because it " be-
ll., although part of the Orthodox Confession (viz. Pt. I.) is re- lon^s to Ethics rather than Symbolics." A somewhat extraordi-
printed. The editor explains (p. 2T5) that he has printed "the nary opinion to be held by anyone who has read the omitted parts.


554 n. ^"ICE. A.D. 787


viij. 4), "We know that an idol is nothing in the world." But an image is a representation
of a true thing having a real existence in the world. Thus, for example, the image of our
Saviour Jesus Christ and of the holy Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints. Moreover, the
Pagans venerated their idols as gods, and offered to them sacrifices, esteeming the gold and
silver to be God, as did Nebuchadnezzar.

But when we honour and venerate the images, we in no way venerate the colours or the
wood of which they are made ; but we glorify with the veneration of dulia (SorXct'as), those
holy beings of which these are the images, making them by this means present to our minds
as if we could see them with our eyes. For this reason we venerate the image of the cruci-
fixion, and place before our minds Christ hung upon the cross for our salvation, and to such
like we bow the head, and bend the knee with thanksgiving. Likevsdse we venerate the image
of the Virgin Mary, we lift up our mind to her the most holy Mother of God, bowing both
head and knees before her ; calling her blessed above all men and women, with the Archangel
Gabriel. The veneration, moreover, of the holy images as received in the orthodox Church,
in no respect transgresses this commandment.

But this is not one and the same with that we offer to God ; nor do the orthodox give it
to the art of the painting, but to those very Saints whom the images represent. The
Cherubim which overshadowed the mercy-seat, representing the true Cherubim which stand
before God in heaven, the Israelites revered and honoured without any violation of the
commandment of God, and likewise the children of Israel revered the tabernacle of witness
with a suitable honour (II. Sam. vi. 13), and yet in no respect sinned nor set at naught this
precept, but rather the more glorified God. From these considerations it is evident that when
we honour the holy images, we do not transgress the commandment of the decalogue, but
we most especially' f)i'3,ise God, who is "to be admired in his Saints" (Ps. Ixviii. 35). But
this only we should be careful of, that every image has a label, telling of what Saint it is,
that thus the intention of him who venerates it may be the more easily fulfilled.

And for the greater establishment of the veneration of the holy images, the Church of
God at the Seventh Ecumenical Synod anathematized all those who made war against the
images, and set forth the veneration of the august images, and established it forever, as is
evident from the ninth canon of that sjoiod.

{Hid. Qusestio LVI.)

Why was he praised in the Old Testament who broke down the brazen serpent (II. Kgs.
xviii. 4) which long before Moses had set up on high ? Answer : Because the Jews were
beginning an apostasy from the veneration of the true God, venerating that serpent as the
true God ; and offering to it incense as the Scripture saith. Therefore wishing to cut off
this evil, lest it might spread further, he broke up that serpent in order that the Israelites
might have no longer that incentive to idolatry. But before they honoured the serpent with
the veneration of adoration, no one was condemned in that resj^ect nor was the serpent
broken.

But Christians in no respect honour images as gods, neither in their veneration do they
take anything from the true adoration due to God. Nay, rather they are led by the hand,
as it were, by the image to God, while under their visible representations they honour the
Saints with the veneration of dulia (SovXtKoj?) as the friends of God ; asking for their media-
tion {iJAcriTivovcnv) to the Lord. And if jjerchance some have strayed, from their lack of
knowledge, in their veneration, it were better to teach such an one, i-ather than that the ven-
eration of the august images should be banished from the Church.


THE CANONS OF THE HOLY AND ECUMENICAL SEVENTH

COUNCIL.^

CANON I.

That the sacred Canons are in all things to he observed.

The pattern for those who have received the sacerdotal dignity is found in the tes-
timonies and instructions laid down in the canonical constitutions, which we receiving
with a glad mind, sing unto the Lord God in the words of the God-inspired David, say-
ing: "I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies as in all manner of
riches." "Thou hast commanded righteousness as thy testimonies for ever." "Grant
me understanding and I shall live." Now if the word of prophesy bids us keep the
testimonies of God forever and to live by them, it is evident that they must abide un-
shaken and without change. Therefore Moses, the prophet of God, speaketh after this
manner : " To them nothing is to be added, and from them nothing is to be taken
away." And the divine Apostle glorying in them cries out, " which things the angels
desire to look into," and, " if an angel preach to you anything besides that which ye
have received, let him be anathema," Seeing these things are so, being thus well-testi-
fied unto us, we rejoice over them as he that hath found great spoil, and press to our
bosom with gladness the divine canons, holding fast all the precepts of the same, com-
plete and without change, whether they have been set forth by the holy trumpets of the
Spirit, the renowned Apostles, or by the Six Ecumenical Councils, or by Councils locally
assembled for promulgating the decrees of the said Ecumenical Councils, or by our holy
Fathers. For all these, being illumined by the same Spirit, defined such things as were
expedient. Accordingly those whom they placed under anathema, we likewise anathe-
matize ; those whom they deposed, we also depose ; those whom they excommunicated,
we also excommunicate ; and those whom they delivered over to punishment, we sub-
ject to the same penalty. And now " let your conversation be without covetousness,"
crieth out Paul the divine Apostle, who was caught up into the third heaven and heard
unspeakable words.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon I. j simply, and be unselfish, and to attend to the

We gladhi embrace the Divine Canons, vis. : \ cure of souls ; the monks to observe order,
tlwse of the Hohi Apostles, of the Six Ecumeni- ' decorum, and also to be unselfish. With the
cat Synods, as also of the local synods a7id of wir State and the Emperor no compromise was
Hohj Fathers, as inspired by one and the same made ; on the contrary, the demands of Max-
ffoh/ Spirit, miom they anathematize we also iiii^s Confessor and John of Damascus are
anathematize; tvhom they depose, ive ffei;o.9e ; , fieard, though in mufiled tones, from the
whom they cut off, we cut off ; and ivhom they
subject to penalties, we also so subject


Harnack {Hist, of Dogma [Eng. Trans.], Vol.
v., p. 327).
Just as at Trent, in addition to the restora-
tion of mediaeval doctrine, a series of reform- their true authors, conformably to the Trul-


canons.

Van Espen.

From the wording of this canon it is clearly
seen that by the Fathers of this Council the
canons commonly called "Apostolical" are
attributed to the Apostles themselves as to


ing decrees was published, so this Synod
promulgated twenty-two canons which can
be similarly described. The attack on mon-
achism and the constitution of the Church
had been of some use. They are the best
canons drawn up by an Ecumenical Synod.
The bishops were enjoined to study, to live


Ian Synod ' and to the opinion then preva-
lent among the Greeks.

For since the Fathers were well persuaded
that the discipline and docti'ine contained in
these canons could be received and confirmed,
they cared but little to enquii-e anxiously who
were their true authors, being content in this


' This is the caption as g^iven in the Greek of Beveridge's Synod. * But see notes to canon of that synod.


556


II. NICE. A.D.


question to follow and embrace the then com-
monly received oj^inion, and to ascribe these
canons to them, just as, the other day, the
Tridentine Synod (Sess. XXV,, cap. j., De
Keform) calls these, without any explanation,
the "Canons of the Apostles," because then
as now they were commonly called by that
name.

Beveridge {Annotat., p. 166, at end of Vol.

II.).
Here are recognized and confirmed the
canons set forth by the Six Ecumenical
Councils. And although all agree that the
fifth and sixth Synods adopted no canons,
unless that those of the Council in Trullo be
attributed to them, yet when Tarasius the


Patriarch of Constantinople claimed Canon 82
of the Trullan Canons as having been set
forth by the sixth synod (as is evident from
the annotations on that canon), all the canons
of Trullo seem to be confirmed as having
issued from the Sixth Synod. Or else, per-
chance, as is supposed by Balsamon and Zo-
naras, as also by this present synod, the Trul-
lan was held to be Quinisext (-n-evdeKTyj), and
the canons decreed by it to belong to both
the fifth and the sixth council. Otherwise I
do not see what meaning these words [" of
the Six Ecumenical Synods "] can have, for
it will be remembered that the reference is to
the ecclesiastical canons of the Six Ecumen-
ical Synods, and not to their dogmatic de-
crees.


CANON II.

That he who is to he ordained a Bishop must he steadfustly resolved to ohserve the
canons, otherwise he shall not he ordained.

When we recite the psalter, we promise God : " I will meditate upon thy statutes,
and will not forget thy words." It is a salutary thing for all Christians to observe this,
but it is especially incumbent upon those who have received the sacerdotal dignity.
Therefore we decree, that every one who is raised to the rank of the episcopate shall
know the psalter by heart, so that from it he may admonish and instruct all the clergy
who are subject to him. And diligent examination shall be made b}' the metropolitan
whether he be zealously inclined to read diligently, and not merely now and then, the
sacred canons, the holy Gospel, and the book of the divine Apostle, and all other
divine Scripture ; and whether he lives according to God's commandments, and also
teaches the same to his people. For the special treasure (ovala) of our high priesthood
is the oracles which have been divinely delivered to us, that is the true science of the
Divine Scriptures, as says Dionysius the Great. And if his mind be not set, and even
glad, so to do and teach, let him not be ordained. For says God by the prophet, " Thou
hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me."

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon II.

Wliocver is to be a bishop must know the Psal-
ter by heart : he must thorouglily loiderstand
what he reads, and not merely superjiciall//, but
vith diligent care, that is to say the Sacred
Canons, the Holy Gospel, the book of the Apos-
tle, and the ivhole of the Divine Scripture. And
should lie not have such knoivledge, he is not to
be ordained.

Aristenus.

Whoso is to be elevated to the grade of the
episcopate should know . . . the book of
the Apostle Paul, and the whole divine script-
ure and search out its meaning and under-
stand the things that are written. For the
very foundation and essence of the high
priesthood is the true knowledge of holy


Scripture, according to Dionysius the Great.
And if he has this knowledge let him be or-
dained, but if not, not. For God hath said
by the prophet : " Thou hast put away from
thee knowledge, therefore I have also put
thee away from me, that thou mayest not be
my priest."

Fleury.

The persecution of the Iconoclasts had
driven all the best Christians into hiding, or
into far distant exile ; this had made them
rustic, and had taken from them their taste for
study. The council therefore is forced to be
content with a knowledge of only what is ab-
solutely necessary, provided it was united
with a willingness to learn. The examination
with which the ceremony of the ordination of


11. NICE. A.D. 787


557


bishops begins seems to be a remains of this
discipline.

Van Espen.

The Synod teaches in this canon that "all
Christians " will find it most profitable to
meditate upon God's jnstifyings and to keep
his words in remembrance, and especially is
this the case -svith bishops.

And it should be noted that formerly not
only the clergy, but also the lay people,
learned the Psalms, that is the whole Psalter,
by heart, and made a most sweet sound by
chanting them while about their work.

But as time went on, little by little this


pious custom of reciting the Psalter and of
imposing its recitation and a meditation
thereon at certain intervals, slipped away to
the clergy only and to monks and nuns, as to
those specially consecrated to the service of
God and to meditation upon the divine words,
as Lupus points out. And from this disci-
I pline and practice the appointment of the Ec-
clesiastical or Canonical Office had its rise,
I which imposes the necessity of reciting the
Psalms at certain intervals of time.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
xxxviij., C. vj., in Anastasius's translation.


CANON III.

That it does not pertain to princes to choose a Bishop.

Let every election of a bishop, presbyter, or deacon, made by princes stand null,
according to the canon which says : If any bishop making use of the secular powers
shall by their means obtain jurisdiction over any church, he shall be deposed, and also
excommunicated, together wdth all who remain in communion with him. For he who is
raised to the episcopate must be chosen by bishops, as was decreed by the holy fathers
of Nice in the canon which says : It is most fitting that a bishop be ordained by all the
bishops in the province ; but if this is difficult to arrange, either on account of urgent
necessity, or because of the length of the journey, three bishops at least haying met to-
gether and given their votes, those also who are absent having signified their assent by
letters, the ordination shall take place. The confirmation of what is thus done, shall in
each province be given by the metropolitan thereof.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon III.
Eoery election made hy a secular magistrate is
null.

This is a canon of a synod recognized by
East and West as ecumenical ! The reader
can hardly resist the reflection that in this
case there have been and are a great many in-
truding clergymen in the world, whose ap-
pointment to their several offices is " null."
Van Espen, however, suggests an ingenious
way out of the difficulty, which is followed
with great approval by Hefele.

Van Espen.
Canon xxix. of those commonly called Apos-


tolic, and canon iv. of Nice are renewed in this
canon.

From the words of this canon it is sufficient-
ly clear that in this canon the synod is treat-
ing of the choice and intrusion of persons into
ecclesiastical offices which the magistrates and
Princes had arrogated to themselves under the
title of Domination [Bominatio) ; and by no
means of that choice or rather nomination
which Catholic princes and kings have every-
where and always used.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
xciii., C. vij.


CANON IV.

TJiat Bishops are to abstain from all receiving of gifts.

The Church's herald, Paul the divine Apostle, laying down a rule {Kavova) not only
for the presbyters of Ephesus but for the whole company of the priesthood, speaks thus
explicitly, saying, "I have coveted no man's silver or gold, or apparel. I have shewed


558


II. NICE. A.D. 787


you all tilings, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak ; " for he accounted
it more blessed to give. Therefore we being taught by him do decree, that under no
circumstances, shall a Bishop for the sake of til thy lucre invent feigned excuses for sins,
and exact gold or silver or other gifts from the bishops, clergy, or monks who are subject
to him. For says the Apostle, "The unrighteous shall not possess the kingdom of God,"
and, " The children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the [parents for the children."
If then any is found, who for the sake of exacting gold or any other gift, or Avho from
personal feeling, has suspended from the ministry, or even excommunicated, any of the
clergy subject to his jurisdiction, or who has closed any of the venerable temples, so that
the service of God may not be celebrated in it, pouring out his madness even upon things
insensible, and thus shewing himself to be without understanding, he shall be subjected
to the same punishment he devised for others, and his trouble shall return on his own
head, as a transgressor of God's commandment and of the apostolic precepts. For Peter
the supreme head {-q Kepvcfiaia dKporrjf;) of the Apostles commands, " Feed the flock of
God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly ;
not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind ; neither as being lords over the clergy (tmv kXtj-
pcov [A. V. God's heritage]) ; but being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief
shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away."


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.


We decree that no hishop shall extort gold or
silver, or annthiitg else from bishops, clerics, or
monks subject to his Jurisdiction. And if cniyone
through the power of gold or of any other thing
or through his own whims, shall be found to Itave
prevented any one of the clergy who are subject to
him, from the celebration of the holy offices, or
shall hare shut up a venerable temple so that the
sacred worship of God could not be performed in
it, he shall be subject to the lex talionis. For
Peter the Apostle says : Feed the flock of God,
not of necessity but willingly, and according to
God ; not for filthy lucre's sake, but ivith aijrompt
mind; not exercising lordship over the clergy,
but being an example to the flock.

Balsamon.

Note the present canon, which punishes
those bishops by the lex talionis, who for filthy
lucre's sake, or out of private affection, sepa-
rate any from themselves, or close temples.
Wherefore he who cuts off others thus, let him
be cut off. But he who shuts off a temple
shall be punished even more than by cutting
off. But lest any one should say, by the ar-
gument d contrario, that a bishop should not


be punished who neither for the sake of filthy
lucre nor out of private spite, but lawfully
cuts some off, or closes temples, I answer that
this argument only holds good of the cutting
off. For a bishop) who for any reason, whether
just or unjust, shuts up a temple, should be
punished, so it seems to me, as I have said
above.

Van Espen.

It would seem that at that time among the
Greeks the use of local interdict [intcrdicti
localis) was not known. But very many the-
ologians wish to find a vestige of this interdict
in the IVth century, m St. Basil's epistle cclxx.
(otherwise ccxliv. ), where the holy doctor
teaches that the person who carries off" by
force a virgin, and those who are cognizant
of this wickedness ought to be smitten with
excommunication, and that the village or its
inhabitants, to which the ravisher shall escape
and where he shall be kept in safety, shall be
shut out from the j^rayers.

This canon, or rather the first part of it, is
found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's
Decretum, Pars II., Causa XVI., Q. I., Canon
Ixiv.; all the latter part is represented by the
words "et infra."


CANON Y.

That they toho cast contumely upon clerics because they have been ordained in the church
witliout bringing a gift laith them, are to he punished with a fine.

It is a sin unto death when men incorrigibly continue in their sin, but they sin more
deeply, who proudly lifting themselves up opjiose piety and sincerity, accounting mam-
mon of more worth than obedience to God, and caring nothing for his canonical precepts.


II. NICE. A.D. 787 559


The Lord God is not found among such, unless, perchance, having been humbled by their
own fall, they return to a sober mind. It behoves them the rather to turn to God with
a contrite heart and to pray for forgiveness and pardon of so grave a sin, and no longer
to boast in an unholy gift. For the Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart.
With regard, therefore, to those who pride themselves that because of their benefactions
of gold they were ordained in the Church, and resting confidently in this evil custom (so
alien from God and inconsistent with the whole priesthood), with a proud look and open
mouth vilify with abusive words those who on account of the strictness of their life were
chosen by the Holy Ghost and have been ordained without any gift of money, we decree
in the first place that they take the lowest place in their order ; but if they do not amend
let them be subjected to a tine. But if it appear that any one has done this [i.e., given
money], at any time as a price for ordination, let him be dealt with according to the Apos-
tolic Canon which says : " If a bishop has obtained possession of his dignity by means
of money (the same rule applies also to a presbyter or deacon) let him be deposed and
also the one who ordained him, and let him also be altogether cut off from communion,
even as Simon Magus was by me Peter." To the same effect is the second canon of our
holy fathers of Chalcedon, which says : If any bishop gives ordination in return for
money, and puts up for sale that which cannot be sold, and ordains for money a bishop
or chorepiscopus, or presbyter, or deacon, or any other of those who are reckoned among
the clergy; or who for money shall appoint anyone to the office of oeconomus, advocate,
or paramonarius ; or, in a word, who hath done anything else contrary to the canon, for
the sake of filthy lucre — he who hath undertaken to do anything of this sort, having been
convicted, shall be in danger of losing his degree. And lie who has been ordained shall
derive no advantage from the ordination or promotion thus negotiated ; but let him re-
main a stranger to the dignity and responsibility which he attained by means of money.
And if any one shall appear to have acted as a go-between in so shameful and godless
a traffic, he also, if he be a cleric, shall be removed from his degree ; if he be a layman
or a monk, let him be excommunicated.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon V.


Hefele.

Zonaras and Balsamon in earlier times, and
It seems that such as glori/ in the fact that they \ later Christian Lupus and Van Espeu, re-
owe their position to tlmrliherality in gold to the\m?LYked that the second part of this canon
Church, and ivJw contemn those who were chosen treats of simony, but not the first. This has
because oj their virtue and were appointed tcith- ^ in view rather those who, on account of their
out any largess, shoidd receive the loioest place in \ large expenditure on churches and the poor,
their order. And should they continue in their have been raised, without simony, to the
u-ays, let them he punished. But those who made clerical estate as a reward and recognition of
such gifts so as to get ordinations, let such be their beneficence ; and being proud of this,
cast forth from communion, as Simon Magus was now depreciate other clergymen who were un-
oy Feter. able or unwilling to make such foundations

and the like.

CANON VI.

Concerning the holding of a local Synod at the time appointed.

Since there is a canon which says, twice a year in each province, the canonical
enquiries shall be made in the gatherings of the bishops ; but because of the inconven-
iences which those who thus came together had to undergo in travelling, the holy fathers
of the Sixth Council decreed that once each year, without regard to place or excuse
which might be urged, a council should be held and the things which are amiss cor-
rected. This canon we noAv renew. And if any prince be found hindering this being
carried out, let him be excommunicated. But if any of the metropolitans shall take no


560


II. NICE. A.D. 787


care that this be clone, he being free from constraint or fear or other reasonable excuse,
let him be subjected to the canonical penalties. AVhile the council is engaged in con-
sidering the canons or matters which have regard to the Gospel, it behoves the assem-
bled Bishops, with all attention and grave thought to guard the divine and life-giving
commandments of God, for in keeping of them there is great reward ; because our
lamp is the commandment, and our light is the law, and trial and discipline are the
way of life, and the commandment of the Lord shining afar giveth light to the eyes.
It is not permitted to a metropolitan to demand any of those things wdiich the bishops
bring with them, whether it be a horse or any other gift. If he be convicted of doing
anything of this sort, he shall restore fourfold.

NOTES.


Ajstcient Epitome of Canon VI. |

Whenever it is not possible for a siinod to
meet according to tJie decree form iddfed long ago,
twice in each year, at least let it he held once, as I
seemed good to the Sixth Synod. Should any i
magistrcde forbid such meeting, let him be cast j
out: and a bishop who shall take no j^f'i'ns to \
assemble it, shall be subject to punishment. |
And ivhen the synod is held, should it appear
that the 3Ietropolitan has talrn anything away
from any bishop, let him restore four-fold.

Hefele.
Anastasius remarks on this, that this ordi-


nance (whether the Avhole canon or only its
last passage must remain undecided) was not
accepted by the Latins. That this canon did
not forbid the so-called Synodicum, which the
metropolitans had lawfully to receive from
the bishops, and the bishops from the priests,
is remarked by Van Espen, 1. c. p. 464.

Compare with this (as Balsamon advises)
the eighth canon of the Council in Trullo.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canoirici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist.
XVIII., C. vij.


CANON VII.

That to churches consecrated without any deposit of the reliques of the Saints, the
defect should he made good.

Paitl the divine Apostle says : " The sins of some are open beforehand, and some
they follow after." These are their primary sins, and other sins follow these. Accord-
ingly upon the heels of the heresy of the traducers of the Christians, there followed
close other ungodliness. For as they took out of the churches the presence of the
venerable images, so likewise they cast aside other customs which we must now
revive and maintain in accordance with the w^ritten and unwritten law. We decree
therefore that relics shall be placed with the accustomed service in as many of the
sacred temples as have been consecrated without the relics of the Martyrs. And if
any bishop from this time forward is found consecrating a temple without holy relics,
he shall be deposed, as a transgressor of the ecclesiastical traditions.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VII.


Let reliques of the Holy Martyrs be pjlaced in
such churches as have Ijeen consecrated withoid
them, and this with the accustomed prayers.
But ivhoever shall consecrate a chnrch loiflio/it
these shall be deposed as a transgressor of the
traditions of the Church.

Balsamon.

But someone may be surprised that ora-
tories to-day are consecrated without any


deposition of reliques. And they may ask
! why the Divine Liturgy is not celebrated in
them by bishops and not by priests only.
Tlie answer is that the superaltars {avTifxevaia)
which are made by the bishops when a church
\ is consecrated, suffice oratories in lieu of con-
secration or enthronement when they are sent
to them, on the occasion of their dedication
or opening. They are called ai'Tifxivcria be-
cause they are in place of, and are antitypes
of those many like tables which furnish thor-
oughly the holy Lord's table.


11. NICE. A.D. 787


561


On the rite of consecrating churches with
reliques see Cardinal Bona. {JDe liebiis Lit.,
Lib. I., cap. xis.)

The Antimensia are consecrated at the
same time as the church ; a full account of the
ceremony is found in the Euchologion
(Goar's ed., p. 648). A piece of cloth is placed
on the altar and blessed, and then subse-
quently, as need requires, pieces are cut off
from it and sent to the various oratories, etc.
The main outline of the ceremony of conse-
cration is as follows.


J. M. Neale. {LH. Hist. East. Cli., p. 187.)

Relics being jjounded up with fragrant
gum, oil is poured over them by the bishop,
and, distilling out to the corporals, is sup-
posed to convey to them the mysterious virt-
ues of the relics themselves. The holy
Eucharist must then be celebrated on them
for seven days, after which they are sent
forth as they are wanted.


CANON yiii.

Tliat Hebi^ews ought not to be received unless they have been converted in sincerity of
heart.

Since certain, erring in the superstitions of the Hebrews, have thought to mock at
Christ our God, and feigning to be converted to the religion of Christ do deny hiui, and
in private and secretly keep the Sabbath and observe other Jewish customs, we decree
that such persons be not received to communion, nor to prayers, nor into the Church ;
but let them be openly Hebrews according to their religion, and let them not bring their
children to baptism, nor purchase or possess a slave. But if any of them, out of a
sincere heart and in faith, is converted and makes profession with his whole heart, set-
ting at naught their customs and observances, and so that others may be convinced and
converted, such an one is to be received and baptized, and his children likewise ; and let
them be taught to take care to hold aloof from the ordinances of the Hebrews. But if
they will not do this, let them in no wise be received.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon VIII.

Hebrews must not be received unless they are
manifestly concerted with sincerity of heart.

Hefele.


their children " to mean, " these seeming
Christians may not baptize their own chil-
dren," because they only seem to be Chris-
tians. But parents were never allowed to
'' baptize their own children, and the true sense


The Greek commentators Balsamon and Zo- of the words in question comes out clearly
naras understood the words " nor to baptize , from the second half of the canon.


CANON IX.

That none of the hooks containing the heresy of the traducers of the Christians are
to be hid.

All the childish devices and mad ravings which have been falsely written against
the venerable images, must be delivered up to the Episcopium of Constantinople, that
they may be locked aAvay with other heretical books. And if anyone is fouud hiding
such books, if lie be a bishop or presbyter or deacon, let him be deposed ; but if he be
a monk or layman, let him be anathema.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon IX.

If any one is foimd to have concealed a book
written against the venerable images, if he is on
the clergy list let him be deposed ;ifa layman or
monk let him be cut off.


Van Espen.

What here is styled Episcoj^ium was the

palace of the Patriarch. In this palace were

the archives, and this was called the " Carto-

phylacium," in which the charts and episcopal


562


11. NICE. A.D. 787


laws were laid up. To this there was a pre-
fect, tlie grand Cliartopliylax, one of the princi-
pal officials and of most exalted dignity of the
Church of Constantinople, whose office Codi-
nus exjilains as follows : " The Chartojihylax
has in his keeping all the charts which per-
tain to ecclesiastical law (that is to say the
letters in which privileges and other rights
of the Church are contained) and is the judge
of all ecclesiastical causes, and presides over
marriage controversies which are taken cog-


nizance of, and proceedings for dissolution of
the marriage bond ; moreover, he is judge in
other clerical strifes, as the right hand of the
Patriarch."

In this Cartophylaceum or Archives, there-
fore, under the faithful guardianship of the
Chartojihylax, the fathers willed that the
writings of the Iconoclasts should be laid up,
lest in their perusal simple Catholics might
be led astray.


CANON X.

That no cleric ought to leave his diocese and go into another without the knowledge
of the Bishoix

Since certain of the clergy, misinterpreting the canonical constitutions, leave their
own diocese and run into other dioceses, especially into this God-protected royal city,
and take up their abode with princes, celebrating liturgies in their oratories, it is not
permitted to receive such persons into any house or church Avithout the license of their
own Bishop and also that of the Bishop of Constantinople. And if any clerk shall do
this without such license, and shall so continue, let him be deposed. With regard to
those who have done this with the knowledge of the aforesaid Bishops, it is not laAvful
for them to undertake mundane and secular responsibilities, since this is forbidden by
the sacred canons. And if anyone is discovered holding the office of those who are
called Meizoteroi ; let him either lay it down, or be deposed from the priesthood. Let
him rather be the instructor of the children and others of the household, reading to
them the Divine Scriptures, for to this end he received the priesthood.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon X.


A clergriman who after leaving his own parish
has settled in another far off from his own bishop
and from the bishop of Constmitinop)le, shall be
received neither into house nor church. And if
he shall persevere in his course, he shall be de-
posed. But if they shall do this with a knowledge
of what we have said, they shall not receive a
secidar piosition ; or shoidd they have received
them, they shall cease from them. And if they
refuse they shall be deposed.


Hefele.


On the office of the ixeit,6TepoL, the Greek
commentators Zonaras and Balsamon give us
more exact information. We give the sub-
stance of it, viz.: they were majores domiis
stewards of the estates of high personages.

Balsamon.
On account of this canon it seems to me
that the most holy Patriarch at the time and
his Chartophylax allow alien clergymen to
celebrate the liturgj' in this royal city, even
without letters dimissory of the local bishop
of each one.


CANON XI.

That CEconomi ought to he in the Episcopal ])alaces and in the Monasteries.

Since we are under obligation to guard all the divine canons, we ought by all means
to maintain in its integrity that one wliich says oeconomi are to be in each church. If
the metropolitan appoints in his Church an oeconomus, he does well ; but if he does not,
it is permitted to the Bishop of Constantinople by his own {lSia<i) authority to choose
an oeconomus for the Church of the Metropolitan. A like authority belongs to the


II. NICE. A.D. 787


563


metropolitans, if the Bishops who are subject to them do not wish to appoint oeconomi
in their churches. The same rule is also to be observed with respect to monasteries.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome or Canon XI.


If the. Metropolitan does not elect on cecono-
mus of the metrojxjlis, the patriarch shall do so.
If the bishop shall not do so, the Metrojwlitan
shall ; for so it seemed good to the fathers assem-
bled at Ghalcedon. The same law shall hold in
monasteries.

Hefele.

The Synod of Chalcedon required the ap-
pointment of special oeconomi only for all
bishops' churches ; but our synod extended
this prescription also to monasteries.

Van Espen.

Bishops at their ordination among other
things promise that they will observe the
canons, and the bishops of the Synod say that


among these canons they are bound to keep
the one that orders them to appoint an Qilcono-
mus.

Among the officials of the Constantinopoli-
tan Church, Codinus names first The Grand
CEconomus, " who " (he says) " holds in his
own power all the faculties of the Church, and
all their returns ; and is the dispenser in this
matter as well to the Patriarch as to the
Church."

Balsamon and Aristenus refer to Canon
xxvj. of Chalcedon ; and point out how here
the power of Constantinople was added to.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's iJecretum, Pars. II., Causa
IX., Qusest. III., Canon iij.


CANON XII.

That a Bishop or Uegumenos ought not to alienate any part of the suburban estate
of the church.

If a bishop or hegumenos is found alienating any part of the farm lands of the
bishoprick or monastery into the hands of secular princes, or surrendering them to any
other person, such act is null according to the canon of the holy Apostles, which says :
"Let the bishop take care of all the Church's goods, and let him administer the same
according as in the sight of God." It is not lawful for him to appropriate any part him-
self, or to confer upon his relations the things which belong to God. If they are poor
let them be helped among the poor ; but let them not be used as a pretext for smug-
gling away the Church's property. And if it be urged that the land is only a loss and
yields no profit, the place is not on that account to be given to the secular rulers, who
are in the neighbourhood ; but let it be given to clergymen or husbandmen. And if
they have resorted to dishonest craft, so that the ruler has bought the land from the
husbandman or cleric, such transaction shall likewise be null, and the land shall be
restored to the bishoprick or monastery. And the bishop or hegumenos doing this
shall be turned out, the bishop from his bishoprick and the hegumenos from his monas-
tery, as those who wasted what they did not gather.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XII.
According to what seemed good to the Hob/
Apostles, any act of alienation of the goods of a
diocese or of a monastery made by the bishop, or
hy the superior of the monastery, shall be null.
And the Bishop or Superior who shall have done
this shall be expelled.

Van Espen.

As at the time of this Synod by the favour
of kings and princes the way was frequently


open to ecclesiastical dignities, clergymen
might easily be induced through ambition to
make over to princes some part of the
Church's possessions, if only by so doing they
might arrive at the coveted preferment
through their patronage, and then desiring to
make good this simouiacal promise, they
studied to transfer the church's goods to
their patrons ; with regard to these the pres-
ent decree of the synod was made.

But because human ambition is cunning,


564


11. NICE. A.D. 787


and solicitously seeks a way of attaining its Two such pretexts the synod exposes and

ends, ambitious clerics tried by various colour- rejects in the present canon.

ing to give a tone to and to jDalliate these

translations of church-goods to princes and This canon is found in the Corpus Juris

magistrates, so that they might attain to Canonici, Pars II., Causa XII., Qusest. II.,

that they aimed at by the favour of said , canon xix.

princes and magistrates.

CANON XIII.

TJiat they are worthy of sjjecial condemnation who turn the monasteries into public
houses.

During the calamity which was brought to pass in the Churches, because of our sins,
some of the sacred houses, for example, bishops' palaces and monasteries, were seized
by certain men and became public inns. If those who now hold them choose to give
them back, so that they may be restored to their original use, well and good ; but if
not, and these persons are on the sacerdotal list, we command that they be deposed ;
if they be monks or laymen, that they be excommunicated, as those who have been
condemned from the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and assigned their
place where the Avorm dieth not and the fire is not quenched, because they set them-
selves against the voice of the Lord, which says : " Make not my Father's house an
house of merchandise."

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIII.

Those tvlio make common diocesan or monastic
goods, unless they restore to the bishop or supe-
rior the things belonging to the diocese or monas-
tery, the ivhole proceeding shall be null. If they
are i^ersons in Holy Orders they shall be deposed,
but if laymen or monks they shall be cast out.

Van Espen.

No doubt by " the calamity " here is
intended a reference to the troubles occa-
sioned by the Iconoclasts, during whose time
of domination many nefarious things were
perpetrated against the orthodox, and most
bitter of all was the persecution of the monks
and priests by Leo the Isaurian and by his
son Constantine Copronymus, both of them
supporters of the Iconoclasts.


And so it came to pass that by this perse-
cution and through the nefarious vexations of
the Iconoclasts, many monks and clerics fled
from their monasteries and left vacant the
Episcopia or holy houses, and so it became
easy for people to come in and occupy the
empt}^ monasteries and religious houses, and
to turn them to common and profane uses,
especially when the anger of the Emperors
and of the Iconoclasts was known to be
fierce against the monks, and such bishops
and i^riests as were worshippers of images.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Pars. II., Causa xix., Quaest. III.,
canon v., in Anastasius's version but lacking
the opening words which are supplied by the
Roman Correctors.


CANON XIV.

That no one without ordination ought to read in the amho during the synaxis.

That there is a certain order established in the priesthood is very evident to all,
and to guard diligently the promotions of the priesthood is well i^leasing to God.
Since therefore we see certain youths who have received the clerical tonsure, but who
have not yet received ordination from the bishop, reading in the ambo during the
Synaxis, and in doing this violating the canons, we forbid this to be done (from hence-
forth,) and let this prohibition be observed also amongst the monks. It is permitted
to each hegumenos in his own monastery to ordain a reader, if he himself had received
the laying on of hands by a bishop to the dignity of hegumenos, and is known to be a
presbyter. Chorepiscopi may likewise, according to ancient custom and with the
bishop's authorization, appoint readers.^


' Bev. adds in the Latin " by imposition of bands."


11. NICE. A.D. 787


565


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIV.
Ho one shall read from the amhon unless he
has been ordained by the bishop. And this shall
be in force also among monks. The superior of a
monastery, if he has been ordained by the bishop,
may ordain a lector but only in his own monas-
tery. A chorepiscopus also can make a lector.

Balsamon.

I sav therefore from this present canon and
from canon xix. that they may properly be
made superiors, who have never received holy
orders ; since women may be placed in such
positions in our monasteries. And as these
women do not hear confessions, nor make
readers, so neither do superiors do this who
are neither monks nor priests, nor could they
do this even with the license of the bishop.

Hefele.

Van Espen (l.c. p. 469 sqq., and Jus Canon.,
t. i. pt. sxxi. tit. 31, c. 6), professes to show


(a) that at that time there was no special bene-
diction of abbots (different from their ordina-
tion as priests), and that therefore the words,
" if he (the superior of the monastery) him-
self is consecrated by the bishop to the office
of hegumenus," and " evidently is a priest,"
mean the same ; (b) that at the time of our
Synod every superior of a monastery, a prior
as well as an abbot, had the power of confex*-
ring upon the monks of his monastery the
order of lector ; but (c) that the way in which
Anastasius translated the canon (si dumtaxat
Abbati manus impositio facta noscatur ab exns-
copo secundum morem prcefciendorum abbatum),
and the reception of this translation into the
Corpus juris canonici, c.l., Dist. Ixix., gave
occasion to concede the right in question, of
ordaining lectors, only to the solemnly con-
secrated (and insulated) abbots.

This canon is found (as just noted) in the
Corpus Juris Canonici, Pars I., Dist. LXIX., c. j.


CANON XV.

That a clerk ought not to he set over two churches.

Feom henceforth no clergyman shall be appointed over two churches, for this
savours of merchandise and filthy lucre, and is altogether alien from ecclesiastical cus-
tom. We have heard by the very voice of the Lord that, " No man can serve two
masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the
one and despise the other." Each one, therefore, as says the Apostle, in the calling
wherein he was called, in the same he ought to abide, and in one only church to give
attendance. For in the affairs of the Church, what is gained through filthy lucre is
altogether separate from God. To meet the necessities of this life, there are various
occupations, by means of which, if one so desire, let him procure the things needful for
the body. For says the Apostle, " These hands have ministered unto my necessities,
and to them that were with me." Occupations of this sort may be obtained in the God-
protected city. But in the country places outside, because of the small number of peo-
ple, let a dispensation be granted.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XV.

Hereafter at Constantinople a cleric may not
serve two churclies. But in tlie outskirts this
may be permitted on account of the scarcity of
men.

Van Espen.

This means that in the country or where
men are so scarce that each parish cannot
have its own presbyter, one presbyter should
be allowed to serve two churches, not that so
he may suppl}' his own need, (as to-day is
allowed by the combination of benefices), hut
that so the necessities of the parishioners
may be provided for.


It should be noted that the synod deems
it " filthy lucre " and " separate from God "
if ecclesiastical ministries are performed
"for the necessaries of life," and is of opinion
that the clergy should seek their support
from some honest employment or work by
the examj^le of Paul, rather than to turn
ecclesiastical ministrations to the attaining
of temporal things, and to use these as an
art by which to gain bread.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Pars. II., Causa XXI., Qusest. I.,
canon j., where the gloss is "because there
the clergy are few."


oGG


11. NICE. A.D. 787


CANON XVI.

That it does not hecome one in holy orders to he clad in costly a2:>2>arel.

All buffoonery and decking of the body ill becomes the priestly rank. Therefore
those bishops and clerics who array themselves in gu}'^ and showy clothing ought to cor-
rect themselves, and if they do not amend they ought to be subjected to punishment. So
likewise they who anoint themselves with perfumes. When the root of bitterness sprang
up, there was poured into the Catholic Church the pollution of the heresy of the traducers
of the Christians. And such as were defiled by it, not only detested the pictured
images, but also set at naught all decorum, being exceedingly mad against those who
lived gi"avely and religiously; so that in them was fulfilled that which is written, "The
service of God is abominable to the sinner." If therefore, any are found deriding those
Avho are clad in poor and grave raiment, let them be corrected by punishment. For
from early times every man in holy orders wore modest and grave clothing ; and verily
whatever is worn, not so much because of necessity, as for the sake of outward show,
savours of dandyism, as says Basil the Great. Nor did anyone array himself in raiment
embroidered with silk, nor put many coloured ornaments on the border of his gar-
ments ; for they had heard from the lips of God that " They that wear soft clothing are
in kings' houses,"


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.


Bishops and clergymen arrayiny themselves
in splendid clothes and anointed with perfumes
must he corrected. Should they persist, they must
he jnmished.

Balsamon and Zonaras tell of the magnifi-
cence in dress assumed by some of the
superior clergy amouof the Iconoclasts, wear-
ing stuffs woven with threads of gold, and their
loins girt with golden girdles, and sentences
embroidered in gold on the edge of their
raiment. It is curious to note how often
heretics fall into extremes. We have seen


how Eustathius wore a conspicuous garb and
was not willing to appear in the ordinary
dress of a clergyman of his day. His was tlie
one extreme of ultra clerical or, I should say,
ascetic clothing. These Iconoclasts went to
the other extreme and dressed themselves
like men of the world, giving themselves the
dandy airs of the fops of the day, thus, as
always, making themselves ridiculous in the
eyes of the wise, and their oflSce contemi^tible
in the eyes of the common jDeoj^le.

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars. II.,
Causa XXL, Qutest. IV., canon j.


CANON XVII.

That he shall not he allowed to hegin the huilding of an oratory, uho has not the
means wherewith to finish it.

Certain monks having left their monasteries because they desired to rule, and, un-
willing to obey, are undertaking to build oratories, but have not the means to finish
them. Now whoever shall undertake to do anything of this sort, let him be forbidden
by the bishop of the place. But if he have the means wherewith to finish, let what he
has designed be carried on to completion. The same rule is to be observed with regard
to laymen and clerics.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XVII.

Wlioever wishes to huUd a monastery, if he
haa the whereimthal to finish it, let him hegin
the u-orJc, and let him briny it to a conclusion.
But if not, let him be ])rohibited by the bishoj) of
the place. The same law shall apply to laymen
and monks.

Van Espen refers to Gratian's Decretum,


Pars. III.^

et seqq.


De Consecrat., Dist. I., canon ix.


Balsamon also refers his readers to the
Fourth Book of the Basilica, title I., chapter
I., which is part of Justinian's cxxiij. Novel,
also to the first canon of the so-called First-
and-Second Council held at Constantinople in
the Church of the Holy Apostles.


II. NICE. A.D. 787 567


CANON XVIII.

That ivomen ought not to live in bishops'' houses, 7ior in monasteries of men.

" Be ye Avitliout offence to those who are without," says the divine Apostle. Now for
women to live in Bishops' houses or in monasteries is ground for grave offence. Who-
ever therefore is known to have a female slave or free woman in the episcopal palace or
in a monastery for the discharge of some service, let him be rebuked. And if he still
continue to retain her, let him be deposed. If it happens that women are on the subur-
ban estates, and the bishop or hegumenos desires to go thither, so long as the bishop
or hegumenos is present, let no woman at that time continue her woi'k, but let her
betake herself to some other place until the bishop [or hegumenos'] has departed, so
that there be no occasion of complaint.

NOTES.

Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII. ; sister, daughter and other persons free from

It is not fitting that ivomen should be kept in ' all suspicions, exceptions), admits no excep-

episcopal houses ^or in monasteries. If anyone \ tions in the case of a bishop, but says, " We


shall dare to do so, he shall be reproved ; but if
he persists, he shall be deposed. No ivoman is
allovjed to serve or even to appear where a bishop
or a sujjerior of a monastery is present, but let
her keep herself apart until he be gone.

Van Espen.


allow no bishop to have any woman or to live
with one."

For as bishops are set in a higher grade
above the rest of the clergy, and ought to be
like lights set on a candlestick to give light,
rightly they are ordered more than others to
take care to avoid all appearance of evil, and


Every woman the present canon expels to remove all from them that might cause
from the Episcopi/im or bishop's house, agree- suspicion,
ably to Novel CXXIII, chapter 29, of the!

Emperor Justinian, which, (although the ' With regard to monks and their houses see
Nicene canon on the subject makes a mother, Justinian's Novel CXXXIII., Cap. IV.

CANON XIX.

That the vows of those in holy orders and of monks, and of nuns are to he inade
without the exaction of gifts.

The abomination of filthy lucre has made such inroads among the rulers of the
churches, that certain of those who call themselves religious men and women, forgetting
the commandments of the Lord have been altogether led astray, and for the sake of
money have received those presenting themselves for the sacerdotal order and the
monastic life. And hence the first step of those so received being unlawful, the whole
proceeding is rendered null, as says Basil the Great. For it is not possible that God
should be served by means of mammon.- If therefore, anyone is found doing anything
of this kind, if he be a bishop or hegumenos, or one of the priesthood, either let him
cease to do so any longer or else let him be deposed, according to the second canon of
the Holy Council of Chalcedon. If the offender be an abbess, let her be sent away
from her monastery, and placed in another in a subordinate position. In like manner
is a hegumenos to be dealt with, who has not the ordination of a presbyter. With
regard to what has been given by parents as a dowry for their children, or which per-
sons themselves have contributed out of their own property, with the declaration that
such gifts were made to God, we have decreed, that whether the persons in whose behalf
the gifts were made, continue to live in the monastery or not, the gifts are to remain
with the monastery in accordance with their first determination ; unless indeed there
be ground for complaint against the superior.

' Not found in Bev. » gev. " To serve God and mammon."


568


II. NICE. A.D. 787


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XIX.


WJioever for money admits those coming to
Holy Orders or to the monastic life, if he he
bishop, or superior of a monastery or any other
in sacred orders, shall either cease or be deposed.
And the Supierior of a monastery of wotntu
shall be expelled \if she have done 5o] and shall
be given over to subjection. The same shall be
the case with a superior of monks, if he be not a
priest. But the j^ossessions brought by those
loho come in, let them remain, whether the per-
sons remain or not, provided the superior be not
to blame.

Balsamon.

But someone may ask how it is that canon


v., orders that he that performs an ordination
for money is eo ipso to be deposed, whereas
this canon provides that he who receives a
cleric or monk on account of a pecuniary gift
is to cease or else to be deposed. The
answer is, that whenever anyone performs
an ordinatiou for money, according to canon
v., he is to be deposed ; but when it was only
a reception of a person which took place,
whether into the list of the clergy or into
a monastery by reason of money, who did
this is only to be deposed, if after being
denounced he persists in this evih The
canons therefore are diverse in their scope.
The fifth treats of unlawful ordination, but
this one of improper receptions.


CANON XX.

That from henceforth, no double monastery shall he erected ; and concerning the
double monasteries already in existence.

We decree that from henceforth, no double monastery shall be erected ; because this
has become an oifeuce and cause of complaint to many. In the 3ase of those persons
who with the members of their family propose to leave the world and follow the monas-
tic life, let the men go into a monastery for men, and the women into a monastery for
women ; for this is well-pleasing to God. The double monasteries which are already in
existence, shall observe the rule of our holy Father Basil, and shall be ordered by his
precepts, monks and nuns shall not dwell together in the same monastery, for in thus
living together adultery finds its occasion. No monk shall have access to a nunnery ;
nor shall a nun be permitted to enter a monastery for the sake of conversing with any-
one therein. No monk shall sleep in a monastery for women, nor eat alone with a
nun.^ When food is brought by men to the canonesses, let the abbess accompanied
by some one of the aged nuns, receive it outside the gates of the women's monastery.
When a monk desires to see one of his kinswomen, who may be in the nunnery, let him
converse with her in the presence of the abbess, and that in a very few words, and then
let him speedily take his departure.

NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XX.

Monasteries sludl not be double, neither shall
monks and 7iuns live in the same building, nor
shall they talk together apart. Moreover if a
man takes anything to a canoness, let him wait
ivithout and hand it to her, and let him see his
relative in the presence of her superior.

Van Espen.
It is evident, as Zonaras remarks, that the
double monasteries here referred to are not
those in which men and women live together
in one house, which in this canon is not '
tolerated at all, but those which were situated
so close together that it was evident there


could easily be an entrance from one to the
other, these are allowed under certain cau-
tions b}^ this canon.

But not only the Greeks but the Latins
also often disapproved of such monasteries.
See decree in Gratian, Pars. II., Causa XVIII.,
Q. II., canon xxviij., and Pope Paschal's
letter (Epis. X) to Didacus, Abp. of Compos-
tella.

Despite all this St. Bridget of Sweden
again instituted double monasteries in the
XVth century, concerning which Thomas
Walsingham, a monk of St. Alban's Abbey,
in England, writes that in 1414, King Henry
founded three monasteries, of which the third


' Bev. Neither shall a nun eat alone.


II. NICE. A.D. 787


569


was a Brigittiue, professing the rule of St.
Augustine, with tlie additions called by them
the Rule of the Saviour. " These two con-
vents had one church in common, the nuns
lived in the upper part under the roof, the
brothers on the ground-floor, and each con-
vent had a separate inclosure ; and after pro-
fession no one went forth, except by special
licence of the Lord Pope."


With regard to the chaplains of nuns, pro-
vision is found in Justinian's Code. (Lib.
xliv., De Epis. ct clericis.)

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris
Caiwnici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars. II., Causa
XVIII., Q. II., canon xxj.


CANON XXI.

That monks are not to leave their monasteries and go into others.

A MONK or nun ought not to leave the monastery to which lie or she is attached,
and betake themselves to others. But if one do this, he ought to be received as a guest.
It is not however proper that he be made a member of the monastery, without the


consent of his hegumenos.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXI.


NOTES.


It is not alloived to a monk or a nun to leave
her own house and enter another ; but if he {or
she) enters Jet {him or her) be received as a
guest ; but let htm {or her) not be admitted at all
nor given hospitality contrary to the will of the
superior.

Aristenus.

The present canon does not allow a monk
or a nun who goes to another house to be
received into, nor even to be admitted as a
guest, lest by force of necessity he be led
astray to worldly things and so I'emain.
Moreover it does not permit a woman to be


admitted and received and reckoned in the
number of the sisters without the consent of
the superior.

It seems to me that in Aristenus an ovk
must have credit into the text and that the
first sentence should read as now but omit-
ting the " not." This makes him agree with
Zonaras who says "the man must be received
as a guest, lest he go to a profane tavern and
be forced to associate with those who have
never learned how to live decently." It is
clear that the " superior " referred to is that
of the house whence the monk or nun went
forth.


CANON XXII.

That when it happens that monks have to eat with women they ought to observe giving
of thanks, and abstemiousness, and discretion.

To surrender all things to God, and not to serve our own wills, is great gain. For
says the divine Apostle, " whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God." And
Christ our God has bidden us in his Gospels, to cut off the beginning of sins ; for not
only is adultery rebuked by him, but even the movement of the mind towards the act
of adultery when he says, " Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath com-
mitted adultery with her already in his heart." We who have been thus taught ought
therefore to purify our minds. Now although all things are lawful, all things are not
expedient, as we have been taught by the mouth of the Apostle. It is needful that all
men should eat in order that they may live. And for those to whom life consists of
marrying, and bringing forth children, and of the condition of the lay state, there is
nothing unbecoming in men and women eating together, only let them give thanks to
the giver of the food ; but if there be the entertainments of the theatre, that is, Satanic
songs accompanied with the meretricious inflections of harps, there come upon them,
through these things, the curse of the prophet, who thus speaks : " Woe to them who
drink wine with harp and psaltery, but they regard not the works of the Lord, and con-
sider not the works of his hands." Whenever persons of this sort are found among


570


II. NICE. A.D. 787


Christians, let them amend their ways ; but if they will not do so, let there overtake
them the penalties which have been enacted in the canons by our predecessors. With
regard to those Avhose life is free from care and apart from men, that is, those who have
resolved before the Lord God to carry the solitary yoke, they should sit down alone
and in silence. Moreover it is also altogether unlawful for those who have chosen the
priestly life to eat in private with women, unless it be with God-fearing and discreet
men and women, so that even their feast may be turned to spiritual edification. The
same rule is to be observed with relatives. Again, if it happen that a monk or priest
while on a journey does not have with him what is absolutely necessary for him, and,
because of his pressing needs, thinks well to turn aside into an inn or into someone's
house, this he is permitted to do, seeing that need compels.


NOTES.


Ancient Epitome of Canon XXII.
There is no objection to layiromen eating with
men : it is not right however for men xvho have
chosen the lonehj life, to eat privately with
women ; unless jycrchance together ivith them
that fear God and with religious men and
women. But when travelling, a monk or any-


one in sacred orders, not carrying necessary pro-
visions with him, may enter a public house.

Balsamon refers in connexion with this
canon to Apostolic Canons xlij. and xliij. ; Ix.
of the Synod of Carthage, and Ixij. of the
Synod in Trullo.


f


THE LETTEK OF THE SYXOD TO THE EMPEEOE AND EMPRESS.


(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia^ Tom. VII., col. 577.)


To our most religious and most serene
princes, Constantine and Irene his mother.
Tarasius, the unworthy bishop of your God-
protected royal city, new Rome, and all the
holy Council which met at the good pleas-
ure of God and upon the command of your
Christ-loving majesty in the renowned me-
tropolis of Nice, the second council to as-
semble in this city.

Christ our God (who is the head of the
Church) was glorified, most noble princes,
when your heart, which he holds in his
hands, gave forth that good word bidding
us to assemble in his name, in order that
we might strengthen our hold on the sure,
immovable, and God-given truth contained
in the Church's dogmas. As your heads
were crowned with gold and most brilliant
stones, so likewise were your minds adorned
with the precepts of the Gospel and the
teachings of the Fathers. And being the
disciples and companions, as it were, of
those whose sounds went forth into all the
earth, ye became the leaders in the w^ay of
piety of all Avho bore the name of Christ,
setting forth clearly the word of truth, and
giving a brilliant example of orthodoxy
and piety ; so that ye were to the faithful
as so many burning lamps. The Church
which was ready to fall, ye upheld with
your hands, strengthening it with sound
doctrine, and bringing into the unity of a
right judgment those who were at variance.
We may therefore well say with boldness
that it was through you that the good
pleasure of God brought about the triumph
of godliness, and filled our mouth with joy
and our tongue with gladness. And these
things our lips utter with a formal decree.
For what is more glorious than to maintain
the Church's interests ; and what else is
more calculated to provoke our gladness ?

Certain men rose up, having the form of
godliness, inasmuch as they were clothed
with the dignity of the priesthood, but
denying the power thereof ; and thus de-
serving for themselves the charge of being
but ]^riests of Babylon. Of such the word
of prophecy had before declared that " law-


lessness went forth from the priests^ of
Babylon." Nay more, they banded them-
selves together in a sanhedrim, like to that
which Caiaphas held, and became the prop-
agators of ungodly doctrines. And having
a mouth full of cursing and bitterness, they
thought to win the mastery by means of
abusive words. With a slanderous tongue
and a pen of a like character, and objecting
to the very terms used by God himself,
they devised marvellous tales, and then
proceeded to stigmatise as idolaters the
royal priesthood and the holy nation, even
those who had put on Christ, and by his
grace had been kept safe from the folly of
idols. And having a mind set upon evil,
they took in hand unlawful deeds, thinking
to suppress altogether the depicting of
the venerable images. Accordingly, as
many icons as were set in mosaic work they
dug out, and those which were in painted
waxwork, they scraped away ; thus turning
the comely beauty of the sacred temples
into complete disorder. Among doings of
this sort, it is to be specially noted that
the pictures set up on tablets in memory of
Christ our God and of his Saints, they gave
over to the flames. Finally, in a word,
having desecrated our churches, they re-
duced them to utter confusion. Then some
bishops became the leaders of this heresy
and where before was peace, they fomented
strife among the people ; and instead of
wheat sowed tares in the Church's fields.
They mingled wine with water, and gave
the foul draught to those about them.
Although but Arabian wolves, they hid
themselves under sheeps' clothing, and by
specious reasoning against the truth sought
to commend their lie. But all the while
" they hatched asps' eggs and wove a spi-
der's web," as says the prophet ; and " he
that would eat of their eggs, having crushed
one, found it to be addled, with a basilisk
within it," and giving forth a deadly
stench.

In such a state of affairs, with a lie busy
destroying the truth, ye, most gracious and

' " Presbyters " in LXX.


572


11. NICE. A.D.


787


most noble princes, did not idly allow so
grave a plague, and such soul-destroying
error long to continue in your day. But
moved by the divine Spirit which abideth
in you, ye set yourselves with all your
strengtli utterly to exterminate it, and thus
preserve the stability of the Church's gov-
ernment, and likewise concord among your
subjects ; so that your whole empire might
be established in peace agreeably Avith the
name [Irene] you bear. Ye rightly rea-
soned, that it was not to be patiently
endured, that while in other matters we
could be of one mind and live in concord,
yet in what ought to be the chief concern of
our life, the peace of the Churches, there
was amongst us strife and division. And
that too, when Christ being our head,
we ought to be members one of another,
and one body, by our mutual agreement
and faith. Accordingly, ye commanded
our holy and numerously-attended council
to assemble in the metropolis of Nice, in
order that after having rid the Church of
division, we might restore to imity the
separated members, and might be careful to
rend and utterly destroy the coarse cloak
of false doctrine, which they had woven of
thorn fibre, and unfold again the fair robe
of orthodoxy.

And now having carefully traced the
traditions of the Apostles and Fathers, we
are bold to speak. Having but one mind
hj the inbreathing of the most Holy Spirit,
and being all knit together in one, and
understanding the harmonious tradition of
the Catholic Church, we are in perfect har-
mony with the symphonies set forth by the
six, holy and ecumenical councils ; and
accordingly we have anathematised the
madness of Arius, the frenzy of Macedo-
nius, the senseless understanding of Appoli-
narius, the man-worship of Nestorius, the
irreverent mingling of the natures devised
by Eutyches and Dioscorus, and the many-
headed hydra which is their companion.
We have also anathematised the idle tales
of Origen, Didymus, and Evagrius ; and the
doctrine of one will held by Sergius, Ho-
norius, Cyrus, and Pyrrhus, or rather, we
have anathematised their own evil will.
Finally, taught by the Spirit, from whom we
have drawn pure water, we have with one
accord and one soul, altogether wiped out
with the sponge of the di\dne dogmas the
newly devised heresy, well-worthy to be


classed with those just mentioned, which
springing up after them, uttered such empty
nonsense about the sacred icons. And the
contrivers of this vain, but revolutionary
babbling we have cast forth far from the
Church's precincts.

And as the hands and feet are moved in
accordance with the directions of the mind,
so likewise, we, having received the grace
and strength of the Spirit, and having also
the assistance and co-oj^eration of your royal
authority, have with one voice declared as
piety and proclaimed as truth : that the
sacred icons of our Lord Jesus Christ are
to be had and retained, inasmuch as he was

! very man ; also those which set forth what
is historically narrated in the Gospels ; and
those which represent our undefiled Lady,
the holy Mother of God ; and likewise
those of the Holy Angels (for they have

I manifested themselves in human form to
those who were counted worthy of the
vision of them), or of any of the Saints.
[We have also decreed] that the brave
deeds of the Saints be pom'trayed on tablets
and on the walls, and upon the sacred
vessels and vestments, as hath been the
custom of the holy Catholic Church of God
from ancient times ; which custom was

I regarded as having the force of law in the
teaching Ijoth of those holy leaders who
lived in the first ages of the Church, and also
of their successors our reverend Fathers.

' [We have likewise decreed] that these
images are to be reverenced (TrpoaKvvetv),

I that is, salutations are to be offered to them.

I The reason for using the word is, that it
has a two-fold signification. For Kvvelv in

! the old Greek tongue signifies both " to
salute" and "to kiss." And the preposi-
tion 7rpo9 gives to it the additional idea of
strong desire towards the jbject ; as for
example, we have <^ep&) and Trpoacfiipoi,
Kvpoi and TrpoaKvpoi, and so also we have
Kvveu) and TrpocxKvveo}. Which last word
implies salutation and strong love ; for
that which one loves he also reverences
{irpoaKvvel) and what he reverences that
he greatly loves, as the everyday custom,
which we observe towards those we love,
bears witness, and in which both ideas are
practically illustrated when two friends
meet together. The word is not only made
use of by us, but we also find it set down in
the Divine Scriptures by the ancients. For
it is written in the histories of the Kings,


11. NICE. A.D. 787


573


" And David rose up and fell iipon liis face
and did reverence to [irpoaeKwrjae) Jonathan
three times and kissed him " (1 Kings xx.,
41). And what is it that the Lord in the
Gospel says concerning the Pharisees?
" They love the uppermost rooms at feasts
and greetings (acrTracr/Aoi/?) in the markets."
It is evident that by " greetings " here, he
means reverence (Trpoa-Kvurjcriv) for the
Pharisees being very high-minded and
thinking themselves to be righteous were
eager to be reverenced by all, but not
[merely] to be kissed. For to receive saluta-
tions of this latter sort savoured too much
of lowly humility, and this was not to the
Pharisees' liking. We have also the ex-
ample of Paul the divine Apostle, as Luke
in the Acts of the Apostles relates : " When
we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren
received us gladly, and the day following
Paul went in with us unto James, and all
the presbyters were present. And when
he had saluted {d(T7raad/jb€vo<i) them, he
declared particularly what things God had
wrought among the Gentiles by his minis-
try " (Acts xxi., 17, 18, 19). By the saluta-
tion here mentioned, the Apostle evidently
intended to render that reverence of honour
{riiJbrjTtKrjv irpocrKuvrjaiv) which we shew to
one another, and of which he speaks when
he says concerning Jacob, that "he rever-
enced {TTpoaeKvvrjaev) the top of his staff"
(Heb. xi., 21). With these examples agrees
what Gregory surnarned Theologus says :
"Honour Bethlehem, and reverence {irpoa-
Kvvt)(Tov) the manger."

Now who of those rightly and sincere-
ly understanding the Divine Scriptures,
has ever supposed that these examples
which we have cited speak of the wor-
ship in spirit (r^? ev Trvevfiari \aTpeta<;) ?
[Certainly no one has ever thought so]
except perhaps some persons utterly be-
reft of sense and ignorant of all knowl-
edge of the Scriptures and of the teach-
ing of the Fathers. Surely Jacob did not
adore {eXdrpevcrev) the top of his staff;
and surely Gregory Theologus does not
bid us to adore {XaTpevetv) the manger?
By no means. Again, when offering
salutations to the life-giving Cross, we
together sing : " We reverence [irpoaKW-
Mfieu), thy cross, O Lord, and we also
reverence {Trpo(TKVv(op.ev) the spear which
opened the life-giving side of thy good-
ness." This is clearly but a salutation, and


is so called, and its character is evinced by
our touching the things mentioned with
our lips. We grant that the word irpo-
(7Kvv7](n,<i is frequently found in the Divine
Scriptures and in the writings of our learned
and holy Fathers for the worship in spirit
(eTTt T7)<i ev TTvevfiarL Xarpela^), since, being
a word of many significations, it may be
used to express that kind of reverence which
is service. As there is also the veneration
of honour, love and fear. In this sense it
is, that we venerate your glorious and most
noble majesty. So also there is another
veneration which comes of fear alone, thus
Jacob venerated Esau. Then there is the
veneration of gratitude, as Abraham rever-
enced the sons of Heth, for the field which
he received from them for a burying place
for Sarah his wife. And finally, those
looking to obtain some gift, venerate those
who are above them, as Jacob venerated
Pharaoh. Therefore because this term has
these many significations, the Divine Script-
ures teaching us, " Thou shalt venerate
the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serve," says simply that veneration is to be
given to God, but does not add the word
"only;" for veneration being a word of
wide meaning is an ambiguous term ; but
it goes on to say " thou shalt serve (Xar-
p€vaei<i) him only," for to God alone do we
render latria.

The things which we have decreed, being
thus well supported, it is confessedly and
beyond all question acceptable and well-
pleasing before God, that the images of
our Lord Jesus Christ as man, and those
of the undefiled Mother of God, the ever-
virgin Mary, and of the honourable Angels
and of all Saints, should be venerated and
saluted. And if anyone does not so believe,
but undertakes to debate the matter further
and is evil affected with regard to the vene-
ration due the sacred images, such an one
our holy ecumenical council (fortified by
the inward working of the Spirit of God,
and by the traditions of the Fathers and of
the Church) anathematises. Now anathema
is nothing less than complete separation
from God. For if any are quarrelsome
and will not obediently accept what has
now been decreed, they but kick against
' the pricks, and injure their own souls in
their fighting against Christ. And in tak-
I ing pleasure at the insults which are offered
to the Church, they clearly shew themselves


574


11. NICE. A.D. 787


to be of those who madly make war upon
piety, and are therefore to be regarded as
in the same category with the heretics of
old times, and their companions and breth-
ren in ungodliness.

We have sent our brethren and fellow |
priests, God-beloved Bishops, together with
certain of the Hegumenoi and clergy, that
they ma}^ give a full report of our proceed-
ings to your godly-hearing ears. In proof
and confirmation of what we have decreed,
and also for the assurance of your most
religious majesty, we have submitted proofs
from the Fathers, a few of the many we
have gathered together in illustration of
the brightly shining truth.

And noAV may the Saviour of us all, who
reigns with you (crvfi^aaiXevcov v/xlv) and
who was pleased to vouchsafe his peace to


the Churches through you, preserve your
kingdom for many years, and also your
council, princes, and faithful army, and the
whole estate of the empire ; and may he
also give you victory over all your enemies.
For he it is, who says: "As I live, saith
the Lord, they that glorify me, I will
glorify." He it is also who hath girded
you with strength, and will smite all your
enemies, and make your people to rejoice.

And do thou, O city, the new Sion,
rejoice and be glad ; thou that art the won-
der of the whole world. For although
David hath not reigned in thee, neverthe-
less thy pious princes here preside over
thy affairs as David wo aid have done.
The Lord is in the midst of thee ; may his
name be blessed forever and ever. Amen.


i


EXCURSUS ON THE TWO LETTERS OF GREGORY II. TO THE EMPEROR

LEO.

(J. B. Bury, Appendix 14 to Vol. V. of his edition of Gibbon's Rome. 1898.)

It is incorrect to say that " the two epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the
Acts of the Nicene Council" [as Gibbon does]. In modern collections of the Acts of Ec-
clesiastical Councils, they have been printed at the end of the Acts of the Second Nicene
Council. But they first came to light at the end of the XVIth. century and were printed for
the first time in the Annales Ecclesiastici of Baronius, who had obtained them from Fronton
le Due. This scholar had copied the text from a Greek MS. at Rheims. Since then other
MSS. have been found, the earliest belonging to the Xlth., if not the Xth century.

In another case we should say that the external evidence for the genuineness of the
epistles was good. We know on the authority of Theophanes that Gregory wrote one or
more letters to Leo (eVio-ToXT/v hoyfxaTiKiqv, sub a. m. 6172, o't eTrto-ToAoJi', sub a. m. 6221) ; and
we should have no external reasons to suspect copies dating from about 300 years later.
But the omission of these letters in the Acts of the Nicene Council, though they are stated
to have been read at the council, introduces a shadow of suspicion. If they were preserved,
how comes it that they were not preserved in the Acts of the Council, like the letter of
Gregory to the Patriarch Germanus ? There is no trace anywhere of the Latin originals.

Turning to the contents, we find enough to convert suspicion into a practical certainty
that the documents are forgeries. This is the opinion of M. I'abbe Duchesne (the editor
of the Liber Pont ificalis), M. L. Guei-ard {Melanges d' Archeologie et d'Histoirc, p. 44 sqq., 1890) ;
Mr. Hodgkin {Itcdy and her Invaders, Vol. vi., p. 501 sqq.) A false date (the beginning of
Leo's reign is placed in the XlVth. instead of the XVth. indiction), and the false implica-
tion that the Imperial territory of the " Ducatus Romse " terminated at twenty-four stadia, or
three miles, from Rome, point to an author who was neither a contemporary of Leo nor a
resident in Rome. But the insolent tone of the letters is enough to condemn them. Greg-
ory II. would never have addressed to his sovereign the crude abuse with which these docu-
ments teem. Another objection (which I have never seen noticed) is that in the First Letter
the famous image of Christ which was pulled down by Leo, is stated to have been in the
" Chalkoprateia " (bronzesmith's quarter), whereas, according to the trustworthy sources, it
was above the Chalka gate of the Palace.

Rejecting the letters on these grounds — which are supported by a number of smaller
points — we get rid of the difficulty about a Lombard siege of Ravenna before a. d. 727 : a
siege which is not mentioned elsewhere and was doubtless created by the confused knowl-
edge of the fabricator.

EXCURSUS ON THE RECEPTION OF THE SEVENTH COUNCIL.

The reception of the Seventh Council in the East was practically universal. No histo-
rian pretends that the iconoclastic opinions had any hold over the masses of the people. It
was strictly speaking a court movement, backed by the army, and whenever the images were
laid low and their veneration condemned it was by the power of the State, enforcing its will
upon a yielding and (as we would call them to-day) Erastian clergy. (Cf . Haruack, History
of Dogma, Eng. tr. Vol. iv., p. 326.)

The struggle indeed was not quite put an end to by the conciliar decree After the
death of the Empress in a. d. 803, several iconoclastic rulers sat on the throne of the East,


576


II. NICE. A.D. 787


among tliem Michael tlie Stammerer, who (as Michaud wittily says) " fought the images and
married the nuns."^ He seut a letter, which is still extant, to Louis le Debonnaire of France,
setting forth the suj)erstitions of the orthodox, which is most curious and interesting read-
ing. [Vide Mausi.)

His successor was Theophilus, who reigned from 829 until 842, and was a fanatical icon-
oclast. The Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem wrote to him officially,
several years after his accession, begging him not to imitate the bad example of the icono-
clasts. At that time the only Patriarch who sided with the heretics was John the Gramma-
rian, the Patriarch of Constantinople, the very same who in 814 had repudiated the icono-
clast doctrine ! With the death of this Emperor, the power of the Iconoclasts likewise died ;
and at the accession of Michael III. with his mother Theodora and his sister Thecla came
the final triumph of the images. I shall quote here the words of Harnack : " Then came an
Empress, Theodora, who finally restored the worship. This took place at the Synod held at
Constantinoj^le a. d. 842. This Synod decreed that a Feast of Orthodoxy (17 KvptaKrj rrjs 6pSo-
8o^ta?) should be celebrated annually, at which the victory over the iconoclasts should be
regularly remembered. Thus the whole of orthodoxy was united in image-worship. In this
way the Eastern Church reached the position which suited its nature. We have here the
conclusion of a development, consistent in the main points. The divine and sacred, as that
had descended into the sensuous world by the incarnation, had created for itself in the
Church a system of material, supernatural things, which ofifered themselves for man's use."
{Hist Dogma. Vol. iv., p. 328.)

Much has been written, and truly written, of the superiority of the iconoclastic rulers ;
but when all has been said that can be, the fact still remains, that they were most of them
but sorry Christians, and the justice of the Protestant Archbishop of Dublin's summing up of
the matter will not be disputed by any impartial student. He says, " No one will deny that
with rarest exceptions, all the religious earnestness, all which constituted the quickening
power of a church, was ranged upon the other [i.e. the orthodox] side. Had the Iconoclasts
triumphed, when their work showed itself at last in its true colours, it would have proved to
be the triumph, not of faith in an invisible God, but of frivolous unbelief in an incarnate
Saviour." (Trench. Mediceral History, Chap, vii.)

We come now to consider what reception the Seventh of the General Councils met with
in the West. And first we find that it was accepted, so far at least as its dogmatic decrees
went, by the Pope, the whole Roman Church and, so far as we know, by all the West except
the realm of Charlemagne and, as would naturally be expected, the English Church.

It is true that this was a large and very important exception ; so large and so important
that it becomes necessary to examine in detail the causes which led to this rejection.

Some persons have supposed that the English council held at Calcuth in 787 rejected the
ecumenical character of II. Nice, because in two of its canons (the 1st and the 4th) it only
speaks of "the faith of the Six General Councils." But it is evident that the reason for this
was that it had not yet heard of the Nicene synod ; moreover such action would have been
clearly impossible, since the council was presided over by the Bishop of Ostia, the legate of
Pope Hadrian.

The first opposition to the council in the West was made apparently by Charlemagne
himself. Pope Hadrian sent him a translation of the acts into Latin and signified his accept-


1 It was durinp this period that St. Theodore, writing in 826 to
Arsenius, observes :

'• Rome has not received it as an Ecumenical Council, but only
as a provincial Synod, assembled to remedy a particular evil :
Legates of the other Patriarchs were not there ; those of Rome
had come on different business: Legates, indeed, there were
from the East, but they were brouslit by our deimties, not sent
by their Patriarchs, who knew nothing of the matter till after-


wards. Our countrymen acted thus for the purpose of more
easily brinirins back the heretics by persuadine: them that it was
an Ecumenical Council." "Theodore, however, it is fair to add,
afterwards changed his opinion." Such is Dr. Neale's candid ad-
mission. Hist of the East. Ch., Vol. IL, p. 135. llow often, alas I
has this passage been quoted by controversialists, ana the word
of warning to the reader been wholly omitted.


II. NICE. A.D. 787 577


ance of the council. But this translation was so badly done that not only was a large part
of the acts utterly unintelligible, but also, in at least one place, a bishop of the council was
made to say that the sacred images were to be adored with the same supreme worship as is
paid to the Holy Trinity.

It may not be wholly charitable to suggest the possibility of such a thing having any
influence in the matter. On the other hand it would be unfair to the reader not to state
that Charlemagne had, or thought that he had, serious grievances against the Empress
Irene, and that he might not have been sorry to have discovered some reason for which to
reject her council. It should, moreover, be remembered how much the Pope in his struggle
for independence of the Eastern Empire trusted to Charlemagne, and therefore how reluct-
ant he might readily have been to break with so important an ally ; and so might be induced
to tolerate the rejection by the Frankish Emperor of what had been received by him, the
Vicar of Christ and the successor of Peter, as the Seventh Ecumenical Synod of the Cath-
olic Church.

As a result of this feeling of Charlemagne's, there were written what we call the "Caro-
line Books," and these exercised so mighty an influence on this whole question, and so com-
pletely misled even the learned, that I shall give a careful examination of their authorship,
authority, and contents ; for there can be no doubt that it was the influence of these books
(which appeared in 790) that induced the unfortunate action of the Council of Frankfort
four years later (in 794) ; and that of the Convention of Paris in 825.


EXAMINATION OF THE CAROLINE BOOKS.

I. Authorship of the Caroline Books.

I find that many writers on tlie subject of what tliey call "image worship," speak
frequently of these "Caroline Books," and refer to them with great admiration. It is also
absolutely certain that many of these writers have never read, jiossibly never seen, the books
of which they write so eloquently. I have used the reprint of Melchior Goldast's edition
(Frankfort, 1608) in 'Migne's Patrologia Latina, Tom. xcviij., in this article.

The work begins thus. "In the name of our Lord and Saviour Jesvis Christ beginneth
the work of the most illustrious and glorious man Charles, by the will of God, king of the
Franks, Gauls, Germany, etc., against the Synod which in Greek parts firmly and proudly
decreed in favour of adox'ing {adorandis) images," then follows immediately^ what is called
" Charlemagne's Preface."

Now of course nobody supposes for a moment that Charlemagne wrote these books him-
self. But Sir William Palmer {Treatise on the Church, Vol. II., p. 204) says that the prelates
of the realm of France "composed a reply to this Synod," he further says that " This work
was jDublished by the authority and in the name of the Emperor ChSji'lemagne and with the
consent of his bishops, in 790 " (p. 205). I am entirely at a loss to know on what authority
these statements rest. The authorship of the work has, not without great show of reason,
been attributed to Alcuin. Besides the English tradition that he had written such a book,
there has been jDointed out the remarkable similarity of his commentary on St. John (4, 5,
et seqq.) to a passage in Liber IV., cap. vj., of these Caroline Books. (On this point see
Forster, General Preface to the Works of Alcuin n. 10.) But after all whether Alcuin was
the avithor or no, matters little, the statement that the " bishoj^s of France "were in any
sense responsible for it is entirely gratuitous, unless indeed some should think it may be
gathered from the statement of the Preface ;

" We have undertaken this work with the priests who are prelates of the Catholic flocks
in the kingdom which has been granted to us of God." ^ But this would not be the only
book written at the command of, and set forth by, a secular prince and yet claiming the
authority of the Church. I need only give as examples " The Institution of a Christian
Man " and the Second Prayer Book of Edward the Vlth.

II. Authority of the Caroline Books.

But be their authorship what it may, we come next to consider their authority ; and here
we are met with the greatest difficulty, for it is certain that despite the statements to the
contrary, these books were not those sent to Pope Hadrian by Charlemagne, those of which
the Pope deigned to write a refutation. This Hefele has clearly proved, by pointing out
that those sent to the Pope treated the matter in an entirely different order ; that there
were in those sent only 85 chapters, while these books have 120 (or 121 if the authenticity
of the last chapter is granted). Moreover the quotations made by Hadrian do not occur
verbatim in the Caroline books, but are in some cases enlarged, in others abbreviated. (Cf.
Hefele's treatment of the whole subject in the original German.) Petavius thinks that what
Hadrian received were extracts from the Caroline Books, made by the Council of Frank-
fort.


> It is cnrious that Michaud (Sept. Coneiles (Eciiminiques. p.
294) should say " the title priest given to those who composed the


book proves that no one of them was a bishop." The Latin is
" Sacerdotum Prselatorum '' !


11. NICE. A.D. 787 579


Hefele arrives at a directly opjDOsite conclusion, viz., that the Caroline Books are an
expansion of the Capitula sent to the Pope, and that this expansion was made at the bidding
of Charlemagne,

It should be noted here that Baronius, Bellarmine, Binius, and Surius all question the
authenticity of the Caroline Books altogether. [Vide Baron, ^??im/., a.d., 794.) But this
extreme position seems to be refuted by the fact that certain quotations made by Hinc-
mar are found in the books as we have them. {Cf. Sirmond in Mansi, Tom. XIIL, 905,
Labbe, Tom. VII., col. 1054.)

III. Contents of the Caroline Books.

If the authorship and authority of these books are diflficult subjects, the contents of the
books are still more extraordinary, for it seems to be certain, past all possibility of doubt,
that the authors of these books had never read the acts nor decrees of the Seventh Ecu-
menical Synod, of which they were writing ; and further that he or they were also com-
pletely ignorant of what took place at the Conciliabulum of 754.

One examjDle will be sufficient to prove this point. In Book IV., Chapter XIV.. and also
in chapter XX., (Migne's ed., col. 1213 and col. 1226), the charge is made that the Seventh
Council, especially Gregory, the bishoj) of Neocsesarea, imduly flattered the Empress. Now
as a matter of fact the remarks referred to were made at the Conciliabulum of 754, and not
at the Second Councd of Nice ; they were not made by Gregory of Neocsesarea at all, and
the reason they are attributed to him is because he read them in the proceedings of that
pseudo-council to the true council of 787.

Other examples could easily be given, but this is sufficient. Ab uno disce omnes. The
most famous however of all the ignorant blunders found in these books must not here be
omitted. It occurs in Book III., chapter xvij., and is no less serious than to attribute to
Constantius, the bishop of Cyprus, the monstrous statement that the saci'ed images Avere to
be given the supreme adoration due to the Holy Trinity. What a complete mistake this
was, we have already pointed out, and will have been evident to anyone who has read the
■extracts of the acts given in the foregoing pages. I have said "mistake ;" and I have said
so deliberately, because I am convinced that the Caroline books, the decree of Frankfort,
and the decision of the Convention of Paris, all sprung from ignorance and blundering ;
and largely through the force of this particular false statement on which I am writing. But
I must not omit the statement of Sir William Palmer, a champion of these books, that " the
acts of the synod of Nice having been sent to Rome in the year 787, Pope Hadrian himself,
according to Hincmar, transmitted them into France to Charlemagne, to be confirmed by
the bishops of his kingdom ; and the Emperor [i.e. Charlemagne] also received the acts
directly from Constantinople according to Roger Hovedon. These prelates, thus furnished
with an authentic copy and not a mere tran.slation, composed a reply to the synod "
(Treatise on the Church, Vol. II., p. 203).

If Sir William is right, then the author of the Caroline books is thrown into a dark
shade indeed, for either he was too ignorant or too cai*eless to read the original Greek, or
else, knowing the real state of the case, deliberately misrepresented the synod. Sir William
feels this difficulty, and, a few lines below the sentence I have quoted, attributes the misstate-
ments to a "mistranslation," viz. the false statement — upon which alone all the rest hung —
attributed to the bishop of Cyprus. But the two claims are contraria inter se. If they
were using an autlieutic copy of the original sent from Constantinople then they could not
have been misled by a " mistranslation ; " if they used a mistranslation and took no pains to
read the decrees, their opinion and their writings — as well as the decrees which followed


580 II. NICE. A.D. 787


from them — were evidently entirely -without theological value, and this is the estimation in
which they have been held by all uni^rejudiced scholars without exception, whether agree-
ing with their conclusions or no.

It will be well to set plainly before the reader the foundation upon which rests the
dogmatic teaching of the Caroline Books. This is, in short, the authority of the Roman
See. That there may be no possible doubt ui)on this j^oint, I proceed to quote somewhat at
length chapter vi., of Book I. ; the heading of which reads as follows : " That the Holy
Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church is placed above all other Churches, and is to be con-
sulted at every turn when any controversy arises with regard to the faith."

"Before entering upon a discussion of the witnesses which the Easterns have absurdly
brought forward in their Synod, we think well to set forth how greatly the holy Roman
Church has been exalted by the Lord above the other Churches, and how she is to be con-
sulted by the faithful : and this is especially the case since only such books as she receives
as canonical and only such Fathers as she has recognized by Gelasius and the other Pontiffs,
his successors, are to be accepted and followed ; nor are they to be interpreted by the
private will of anyone, bvit wisely and soberly. . . . For as the Apostolic Sees in gen-
eral are to be preferred to all the other dioceses of the world, much more is that see to be
preferred which is placed over all the other apostolic sees. For just as the Apostles were
exalted above the other disciples, and Peter was exalted above the other Apostles, so the
apostolic sees are exalted above the other sees, and the Roman See is eminent over the other
apostolic sees. And this exaltation arises from no synodical action of the other Churches,
but she holds the primacy {prlmatum) by the authority of the Lord himself, when he said,
' Thou art Peter, etc' . . ,

" This church, therefore, fortified with the spiritual arms of the holy faith, and satiated
with the health-giving fountains which flow from the well of light and from the source of
goodness, resists the horrible and atrocious monsters of heresies, and ministers the honey-
sweet cups of teaching to the Catholic Churches of the whole world. . . . Whence [i.e.
from St. Jerome consulting the Pope] we can understand how Saints and learned men who
were shining lights in different parts of the world, not only did not depart in faith from the
holy Roman Church, but also asked aid of her in time of necessity for the strengthening of
the faith. And this all Catholic Churches should regularly observe, so that they may seek
help from her, after Christ, for protecting the faith : which {quce) having neither spot nor
wrinkle, smites the portentous heads of heresies, and strengthens the minds of the faithful
in the faith. And although many have separated from this holy and venerable communion,
nevertheless never have the Churches of our part done so, but instructed by that apostolical
erudition, and by his assistance from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, have
always received the venei'able charismata . . . ; and are careful to follow the see of
blessed Peter in all things, as they desire thither to arrive where he sits as keeper of the
keys. To which blessedness may he who deigned to found his Church upon Peter bring us,
and make us to persevere in the unity of the holy Church ; and may we merit a place in
that kingdom of heaven through the intervention of him whose See we follow and to whom
have been given the keys."

Such is the doctrinal foundation of the Caroline books, viz.: the absolute authority of the
Roman See in matters pertaining to the faith of the Church. It is certainly very difficult to
understand how the author of these books could have known that the doctrinal decree of
the Synod of Nice had received the approbation of this supreme power which it was so
necessary to consult and defer to ; and that the Synod which he denounces and rejects had
been received by that chief of all the Apostolic Sees as the Seventh of the Ecumenical Coun-
cils of the Catholic Church,


II. NICE. A.D. 787 581

— t.


Whether the author [or authors] had ever seen the Pope's letter or no, one thing is cer-
tain, he never read with any care even the imperfect translation with which he had been
furnished, and of that translation Anastasius Bibliothetius says: "The translator both
misunderstood the genius of the Greek language as well as that of the Latin, and has merely
translated word for word ; and in such a fashion that it is scarcely ever possible to know
{ant vlx aut niinquam) what it means ; moreover nobody ever reads this translation and no
copies of it are made." ^

This being the case, when we come to examine the Caroline Books, we are not astonished
to find them full of false statements.

In the Preface we are told that the Conciliabulum was "held in Bithynia ; " of course as a
matter of fact it met in Constantinoi:)le.

In Bk. I., chapter j., we find certain words said to occur in the letters of the Empress and
her son. On this Hefele remarks : " One cannot find the words in either of the two letters
of these sovereigns, which are preserved in the acts of the Council of Nice, it is the synod
that uses them.'-"

In the Second Book, chapter xsvij., the council is charged with saying "Just as the
Lord's body and blood pass over from fruits of the earth to a notable mystery, so also the
images, made by the skill of the artificers, pass over to the veneration of those persons
whose images they bear." Now this was never said nor taught by the Nicene Synod, but
something like it was taught by the Constantinopolitan conciliabulum of 754 ; but the very
words cited occur neither in the one set of acts nor in the other! The underlying thought
however was, as we have said, clearly exposed by the iconoclastic synod of 754 and as clearly
refuted by the orthodox synod of 787.

In Book III., chapter V., we are told that " Tarasius said in his confession of faith that
the Holy Spirit was the companion {contribulum in the Caroline Books) of the Father and of
the Son." It was not Tarasius who said so at all, but Theodore of Jerusalem, and in using
the word 6/xo(^u/\o9 he was but copying Sophronius of Jerusalem.

Chapter XVII. begins thus : " How rashly and (so to speak) like a fool, Constantine,
bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, spoke when he said, with the approval of the rest of the
bishops, that he would receive and honourably embrace the images ; and babbled that the
service of adoration which is due to the consubstantial and life-giving Trinity, should be
given images, we need not here discuss, since to all who either read or hear this it will be
clear that he was swamped in no small error, to wit to confess that he exhibited to creatures
the service due to the Creator alone, and through his desire to favour the pictures over-
turned all the Holy Scriptures. For what sane man ever either said or thought of saying
such an absurdity, as that different pictures should be held in the same honour as the holy,
victorious Trinity, the creator of all things, etc." But as will be seen by a glance at the acts
this is exactly the opposite of what Constantine did say. Now if, as Sir William Palmer
asserts, the author had before him the genuine acts in the original, I do not see how his
honesty can be defended, or if his honesty is kept intact, it must be at the expense of his
learning or carefulness. Bower felt this so keenly that he thinks the Caroline Books attrib-
ute the words to Constantine the bishoj) alone and not to the council. But the subter-
fuge is vain, for, as we have just seen, the author affirms that Constantine's speech received
"the assent of the rest of the bishops {cceteris consent lent ibus)," and further not obscurely
suggests that Constantine had the courage to say what the others were content to think,
but did not dare to say.

In Book IV., the third chapter distinctly states that while lights and incense were used


> Mansi, Tom. xii., 981, » Hefele. Hist, of Councils, Bk xx., chap, ij., § 400.


582 11. NICE. A.D. 787


by them in their churches, yet that neither the one nor the other was placed before images.
If this can be relied upon it would seem to fix the Frankish custom of that date.

Chapters XIV. and XX. are distinguished by the most glaring blunders, for they attrib-
ute to the Council of Nice the teachings of the Conciliabulum, and in particular they lay
them to the door of Gregory of Neocaesarea because he it was who read them.

Finally, in chapter the twenty-eighth, the ecumenical character of II. Nice is denied, on
the ground that it has not preserved the faith of the Fathers, and that it was not universal
in its constitution. I beg the reader, who has fresh in his memory the Papal claims set
forth in a previous chapter, to consider whether it is possible that the author of that chapter
should have seen and known of the Papal acceptance of the Seventh Synod and yet have
wi-itten as follows : "Among all the inanities said and done by this synod, this does not
seem by any means to be the least, that they styled it ecumenical, for it neither held the
purity of the ecumenical faith, nor did it obtain authority through the ecumenical action of
the Churches. ... If this synod had kept clear of novelties and had rested satisfied
with the teachings of the ancient Fathers, it might have been styled ecumenical. But since
it was not contented with the teachings of the ancient Fathers it cannot be styled ecumeni-
cal," etc., etc.

Such are in brief the contents and spirit of the Caroline Books. Binius indeed says
that he found a twenty-ninth chapter in a French MS. of Hadrian's Ej^istle. It is lacking
in the ordinary codices. Petavius thinks it was added by the Council of Frankfort. It is
found in Migne (col. 1218) and the main point is that St. Gregory's advice is to be followed,
viz. : " We permit images of the Saints to be made by whoever is so disposed, as well in
churches as out of them, for the love of God and of his Saints ; but never compel anyone
who does not wish to do so to bow to them {adorare eas) ; nor do we permit anyone to
destroy them, even if he should so desire." I cannot but think that this would be a very
lame conclusion to all the denunciation of the preceding chapters.

IV. The Chief Cause of TrouhJe a Logomachy.

Now from all this one thing is abundantly clear, that the great point set forth with such
learning and perspicuity by the Seventh Synod, to wit, the distinction between Xarpeia and
' TrposKuVeo-ts was wdiolly lost upon these Frankish writers ; and that their translation of both
words by " adoro " gave rise to nine-tenths of the trouble that followed. The student of
ecclesiastical history will remember how a similar logomachy followed nearly every one of the
Ecumenical Synods, and will not therefore be astonished to find it likewise here. The
"homousion," the "theotocos," the ''two natures," "the two wills," each one gave rise to
heated discussion in different sections of the Church, even after it had been accepted and
apjDroved by a Synod which no one now for an instant disputes to have been ecumenical.

Moreover, that after this serious error and bungling on the part of the Caroline divines
and of the French and Allemanic Chui'ches, the Pope did not proceed to enforce the accept-
ance of the council will not cause astonishment to any who are familiar with what St.
Athanasius said with regard to the Semi-Arians, who even after I. Nice refused to use the
word " homousios ; " or with the extreme gentleness and moderation of St. Cyril of Alexan-
dria in his tx'eatment of John of Autioch.

Perhaps before leaving the subject I should give here the chief strictures which Hefele
makes upon these books (§ 400).

(1) The Caroline Books condemn passages which they quote (without saying so) from
Pope Hadrian's own letter to the Empress.


!


11. NICE. A.D. 787


583


(2) They blame St. Basil for teaching that the reverence done to the image passes on to
the prototype.

(3) They treat St. Gregory Nyssen with contempt, and refuse to listen to him (Lib. II.,
c. xvij.).

(4) They are full of most careless and inexcusable blunders.

(a) They attribute to the Emperors a phrase which belongs to the Synod (I. j.).

(b) They confound Leontius with John (I. xxj.).

(c) They confound Tarasius with Theodore of Jerusalem (III. v.).

(d) They impute to the Council the opinions of the Iconoclastic Conciliabulum

(IV., siv. and xx.).

(e) They attribute to Epiphanius the deacon the propositions of others when he

merely read (IV., xv.)

It had usually been supposed that these Four Books were the " qupedam capitula" which
Charlemagne had sent by Augelbert to Pope Hadi'ian " to be corrected bj' his judgment {id
ilUtis jiidicio corrigerentar). Considering the nature of the contents of the Caroline Books as
we now have them, such would seem a priori highly improbable, but this matter has been
practically settled, as we have already pointed out, by Bishop Hefele, who has shown from
Pope Hadrian's answer " correcting " those " capitula," that they must have been entirely
different in order though no doubt their contents Avere similar. The differing views of Peta-
vius and Walch will be found in full in Hefele (§ 401).

In concluding his masterly treatment of this whole matter, Hefele makes (§ 402) a
remark well worthy of repetition in this place :

" The great friendship which Charles shewed to Pope Hadrian down to the hour of his
death proves that their way of thinking with regard to the cultus of images was not so
opposite as many suppose, and — above all — as many have tried to make out."

I shall close this matter with the admirably learned and judicious words of Michaud.

" No doubt there had been abuses in connexion with the worship of images ; but the
Council of Nice never approved of these. No doubt, too, certain marks of veneration used
in the East were not practised in Gaul ; but the Council of Nice did not go into these par-
ticulars. It merely determined the principle, to wit, the lawfulness and moral necessity of
honouring the holy images ; and in doing this it did not in any degree innovate. Charle-
magne ought to have known this, for, already in the sixth century Fortunatus, in his Poem
on St. Martin, tells how in Gaul they lighted lamps before the images.^ The great point
that Charlemagne made Avas that what was called in the West ' adoration,* in the strict
sense (that is to say the worship of Latria) should be rendered to none other than God ; now
this is exactly the doctrine of the Council of Nice. Charlemagne himself admits that the
learned may venerate images, meaning thereby that the veneration is really addressed to the
prototypes, but that such veneration is a source of scandal to the ignorant who in the image
venerate ^ nothing but the material image itself (Lib. III., cap. xvj.)." ^

EXCUESUS ON THE COUNCIL OF FRANKFORT, A. D. 794.

It has been commonly represented that the Council of Frankfort, which was a large
Synod of the West, with legates of the Pope jDresent and composed of the bishops of Gaul,
Germany, and Aquitaine, devoted its attention to a consideration of the question of the ven-


'_ '■ Here on the wall is an image of the Saint and under its feet
a little window, and a lamp, in the glass bowl of which the Are
burns." Fortun. (Miizne.. Pat Lat., Tom. LXXXVIIl.) De Vita
S. Martin, Lab. iv., 690 (col. 426).


2 " And adore " in the Latin.

' Michaud. Disciissioii sur les Sept Conciles (Ecumeniqttes. p.
300.


584 II. NICE. A.D. 787


eration due to images and of the claims of the Second Council of Nice to being an Ecu-
menical Synod. I do not know upon what grounds such statements have rested, hut
certainly not upon anything revealed by anj^ remains of the council we possess, for among
these we find but one brief paragraph upon the subject, to wit, the Second Canon, which
reads as follows (Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. vii., col. 1057) :

" II. The question was brought forward concerning the recent synod which the Greeks
had held at Constantinojjle concerning the adoration of images, that all should be judged as
worthy of anathema who did not pay to the images of the Saints service and adoration as to
the Divine Trinity. Our most holy fathers rejected with scorn and in every way such adora-
tion and service, and unanimously condemned it."

Now in the first jilace I call the reader's attention to the fact that the Couciliabulum of
754 was held at Constantinople but that the Seventh Council was held at Nice. It would
seem as if the two had got mixed in the mind of the writer.^

In the second j^lace neither of these synods, nor any other synod, decreed that the " ser-
vice " {XaTpeta) and " adoration " (Trpoa-Kvvrjats:) due to the holy Trinity was under pain of anath-
ema to be given to " the images of the Saints."

On this second canon Hefele writes as follows :

(Hefele. Concil, § 398).

The second of these canons deserves our full attention ; in it, as we have seen, the Synod
of Frankfort expresses its feeling against the Second Ecumenical Council of Nice, and
against the veneration of images ; Eginhard also gives us the information that it took this
action, viz. : " for it was decided by all [i. e. at Frankfort] that the synod, which a few years
before was gathered together in Constantinople (sic) under Irene and her son Constantine,
and is called by them not only the Seventh but also Ecumenical, should neither be held nor
declared to be the Seventh nor ecumenical but wholly without authority."

Hefele rejects the views of Baronius, Bellarmine, Surius, and Binius. I have no inten-
tion of defending the position of any one of these writers but I translate Binius's note, merely
remarking that it is easier to reject his conclusion than to answer the arguments uj^on
which it rests.

(Severinus Binius, Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VII., col. 1070.)

Baronius was of opinion that the Second Council of Nice was condemned by this council ;
and before him Bellarmine had taught the same thing. But two things make me dissent
from their conclusion :

First. That as the history and acts of this council inform us that the legates of Pope
Hadrian (whom Ado in his chronology names Theophylact and Stephen) were present at this
council, it was not possible that the whole council was ignorant by what authority the true
Seventh Council was assembled at Nice, and what its decrees had been. For as this Synod
at Nice was assembled under the same Pontiff, the legates of that same Pontiff could not
have been ignorant of its authority and teaching. Therefore even if false rumours concern-
ing the Seventh Synod had been scattered about, as Genebrardus affirms (on what founda-
tion I know not), the Fathers of the Council of Frankfort could have been instructed by the
papal legates, and been given information and taught what were the writings of that Seventh
Council. Moreover since the celebration of that Nicene Council was an event most celebrat-
ed and most widely published throughout the whole Church, it is not credible that among

1 This has been explained by sajing that the last meeting was in the palace at Constantinople.


11. NICE. A.D. 787 585


the bishops of all France and Germany, assembled in this place, no single one was found
who had accurate information concerning the manner in which the Council of Nice was as-
sembled, or of how it had received the approval of the Supreme Pontiff. For as a matter of
fact, that error of adoring images as gods is rather an error of the Gentiles than of any here-
tics or of any who profess the faith of Christ. Therefore in no way is it credible that the
fathers of the Council of Frankfort should have thought this, or rashly on account of certain
rumours have believed this ; especially since at that time in no Church was there the suspi-
cion of any such error ; and the bishops of the council were too pious and Catholic to allow
the suspicion that out of base enmity to the Orientals they were led to attribute error to
the fathers of the most sacred Council of Nice, or that they would have attached an heretical
sense to their decision.

Another reason is this ; that the fathers of this council often made profession of acting
under the obedience of the Roman Pontiffs ; and in the book Sacrosyllabus at the end, when
they gave sentence against the heretics, they subjoin these words: "The privilege of our
lord and father the Supreme Pontiff, Hadrian I., Poi^e of the most blessed See, being in all
respects maintained." And this same principle the same fathers often professed in this
council, that they followed the tradition of their predecessors, and did not dejDart from their
footsteps ; and that Charlemagne, who was present at this council, in his letter to the Spanish
bishops, said that in the first place he had consulted the pontiff of the Apostolic See, what
he thought concerning the matter treated of in that council : and that a little further on he
adds these words: "I am united to the Apostolic See, and to the ancient Catholic traditions
which have come down from the beginnings of the new-born Church, with my whole mind,
and with complete alacrity of heart."

Now the fathers of this council could not make such a profession if they had condemned
the Sacrosaut Synod of Nice, which had been confirmed by the Apostolic See. For as I
have shown above they could not have been misled by false information upon this point.
If therefore knowingly and through heretical pravity they did these things, so too they did
them out of pertinacity and heresy ; and so concerning the authority of the Apostolic See
one way they had thought and another way spoken. But in my judgment such things are
not to be imputed to so great and to such an assembly of bishops, for it is not likely that
the fathers of this council, in the presence of the legates of the Supreme Pontiff and of a
Catholic Prince, would have condemned the Seventh Synod, confirmed as it was by the
authority of the Pontiff' and have referred the matter to Hadrian the Supreme Pontiff.

Moreover it would have surely come to pass that if the Nieene Council had been con-
demned by the authority of this synod, and so the error of the Iconoclasts had been approved
through erroneous information, before our days some follower of that error would have tried
to back up himself and his opinion by its authority : but no one did this, and this is all the
more noteworthy since, only shortly after the time of Charlemagne, Claudius of Turin sprang
up in that very Gaul, and wished to introduce that error into the Western Church, and he
could have confirmed his teaching in the highest manner if he could have shewn that that
plenary council of the West had confirmed his error. But as a matter of fact Claudius did
not quote it in his favour ; nor did Jonas of Orleans, who wrote against him at that time,
and overthrew his foundations, make any mention in this respect of the Council of Frank-
fort in his response.

Lastly I add that the Roman Church never gave its approbation and received any pro-
vincial synod, so far as one part of its action was concerned while in another part it was
persistently heretical. But this provincial council so far as it defined concerning the servi-
tude and filiation of Christ was received and approved by the Church, it is not then credi-
ble that in the same council the Nieene Synod would have been condemned.


58G 11. NICE. A.D. 787


I need only add that every proposed tlieory is so full of difficulties as to seem to involve
more absurdities and improbabilities than it explains. The reader is referred especially to
Vasquez {De adorat. imag., Lil). II., Dispt. VII., cap. vij.) and to Suarez (Tom. I, Disp. LIV.,
Sec. iij.), for learned and instructive discussions of the whole matter.


EXCURSUS ON THE CONVENTION SAID TO HAVE BEEN HELD IN PARIS.

A.D. 825.

It is curious that besides the Caroline Books and the second canon of Frankfort, another
matter of great difficulty springs up with regard to the subject of the authority of the
Seventh Synod. In 1596 there appeared what claims to be an ancient account of a conven-
tion of bishops in Paris in the year 824.' The point in which this interests us is that the
bishops at this meeting are supposed to have condemned the Seventh Council, and to have
approved the Caroline books. The whole story w^as rejected by Cardinal Bellarmine and he
promptly wrote a refutation. Sismondi accepted this view of the matter, and Labbe has
excluded the pretended proceedings from his " Concilia " altogether.

But while scholars are agreed that the assigned date is impossible and that it must be
825, they have usually accepted the facts as true, I need not mention others than such
widely differing authors as Fleury [Hist. Eccles., Lib. xlvij. iv.), Roisselet de Saucliex'es {Hist.
ChronoL, Tome III., No. 792, p. 385), and Hefele [Concilien. § 425).

It would be the height of presumption were I to expi'ess any opinion upon this most
disputed point, the reader will find the whole matter at length in Walch (Bd. XI., S. 135,
139). I only here note that if the account be genuine, then it is an established fact that as
late as 825, an assembly of bishops rejected an Ecumenical Council accej^ted by the pope,
and further charged the Supreme Pontiff with having " commanded men to adore supersti-
tiously images (quod superstitiose eas adorare jussit)," and asked the reigning Pontiff to correct
the errors of his predecessors, and all this without any reproof from the Holy See !

Hefele points out also that they not only entirely misrepresent the teaching of Hadrian
and the Seventh Council, but that they also cite a passage from St. Augustine, "which
teaches exactly the opposite of that which this synod would make out, for the passage says
that the word colere can be applied to men."


HISTORICAL NOTE ON THE SO-CALLED "EIGHTH GENERAL COUNCIL"

AND SUBSEQUENT COUNCILS.

Whatever may be the final verdict of history with regard to the Caroline books, to the
action of this Synod of Frankfort, and to the genuineness of the account of the Convention of
Paris, there can be no doubt with regard to the position held by the Seventh of the Ecu-
menical Sj'nods in all subsequent conciliar action.

In 809 ' was held at Constantinople what both the Easterns and Westerns then considered
to be the Eighth of the Ecumenical Synods. Its chief concern was to restore peace and it
thought to accomplish this by taking the sti'ongest position against Photius. At this Synod
the Second Council of Nice was accepted in the most explicit manner, not only its teaching
but also its rank and number.^


'This is reprinted in full in Mansi, and n-om nim in Migne's i ^ The definition of faith says: "also we confess that the
Pat. Lat, Tom. XCVIII . col. 1299, rt seqq. Cardinal Bellar- I Seventh Holy and Ecumenical synod, which met in Nice for the
mine's refutation is also found in Mipne's Charlemagne, and in second time, "taught in accordance with orthodoxy, etc." (Labbe
Labbe and Cossart, Tom. VII., of the concilia. | and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. Vin., col. 1147.)

* Hefele. Concilien, g 487, also Fleury.


11. NICE. A.D. 787 587


But not many years afterwards Photius again got the upper band and another synod was
held, also at Constantinople, in a.d. 879, w^hich restored Photius and which was afterwards
accepted by many Easterns as the Eighth of the Ecumenical Synods. But at this synod, as
well as in that of 869, the position of Second Nice was fully acknowledged. So that after
that date, roughly speaking one century after the meeting of the Seventh Synod, despite all
opposition it was univex'sally recognized and revered, even by those who were so rapidly
drifting further and further apart as were the East and West in the time of Photius and his
successors.

At the Council of Lyons in a.d. 1274 there was consent on all hands that all were
united in accepting the Seven Synods as a basis of union.

And finally when the acts and agreements of the Council of Florence (1438) appeared in
the first edition issued under papal authoi'ity, that synod was styled the "Eighth," and in
this there was no accident, for during the debate the Cardinal Julian Csesarini had asked
the Greeks for the proceedings of the Eighth Synod and Mark answered : " We cannot be
forced to count that synod as ecumenical, since we do not at all recognize it but in fact
reject it. ..." A few years afterwards was held a second synod which restored Photius
and annulled the acts of the preceding assembly, and this synod also bears the title of the
Eighth Ecumenical. But Cardinal Julian did not enter on any defence of the Ecumenical
character of this so-called "Eighth Synod." ^

For the purposes of this discussion, the matter is perfectly clear, and even if some later
writers speak still of the " Six Ecumenical Councils " in doing so they are rejecting the
Eighth as much as the Seventh ; in fact they are rejecting neither, but speaking as did St.
Gregory, who still mentioned the Four General Councils and compared them to the Four
Gospels, although the fifth had been already held. Those few Frankish writers who con-
tinued to speak of II. Nice as a pseudo council did so out of ignorance or else in contrariety
to the teaching of the Roman Church to whose obedience they professed subjection. It is
no place of mine to offer moral reflections upon their doings.

' For which Baronius condemns Mm in his Annales, a.d. 869.


APPENDIX CONTAINING CANONS AND RULINGS NOT HAV-
ING CONCILIAR ORIGIN BUT APPROVED BY NAME IN
CANON II. OF THE SYNOD IN TRULLO.


Elenchus.


Frefatory note.

Introduction to the Apostolical Canons.

The 85 Apostolical Canons.

Epitome of the Canons of the folloiving

I. Dionysius of Alexandria,

II. Peter of Alexandria.

III. Gregory Thaumcdurgus.

IV. A fhanasius of A lexandria.

V. Basil of Ccesarea.


VI. Gregory Nyssen.

VII. Gregory Theologus.

VIII. Amphilochius of Iconium.

IX. Timothy of Alexandria.

X. Theophilus of Alexandria.

XI. Cyril of Alexandria.

XII Gennadius of Constantinople.^

' For some reason Beveridge does not follow, as I have done,
the order of the enumeration in the TruUan Canon. Johnson
has followed Beveridge's order.


PREFATORY NOTE.

As this volume only professes to coDtaiu the conciliar decrees of the Ecumenical Coun-
cils, it would seem that canons and inilings ■which were of private or quasi-private origin
should have no place in it ; and yet a very considerable number of such determinations are
expressly approved by name in the Canons of the Synod in Trullo, which canons were
received, to some extent at least (as we have seen), by the Seventh Ecumenical Council.
Under these circumstances I have felt that the reader might justly expect to find some men-
tion made of these decrees, which while indeed non-conciliar in origin, yet had received such
high conciliar sanction. I have therefore placed a translation of the text of the " Apostoli-
cal Canons " with a brief introduction, and have reprinted Johnson's epitome of the other
decrees and canons, supplying a few omissions and adding a few notes, chiefly taken from
the Greek scholiasts, Zonaras and Balsamon. It is hoped that thus the present volume has
been made practically complete, and that from it any student can obtain a satisfactory
knowledge of all the doctrinal definitions and of all the disciplinary enactments of the
undivided Church.


THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS.


INTRODUCTION.


To affirm tbat the " Apostolical Canons "
were a collection of canons made by the
Apostles would be about as sensible as to af-
firm that the " Psalterium Davidieum " ' was
a collection of his own psalms made by David,
or that the " Proverbs of Solomon " was a
collection of proverbs made by Solomon.

Many of the Psalms had David for their
composer ; many of the Proverbs had Solo-
mon for their originator ; but neither the book
we call " The Psalter " nor the book we call
" The Proverbs '' had David or Solomon for
its compiler. The matter contained in the
one is largely, many think chiefly, of Davidic
origin, the matter contained in the other is no
doubt Solomonic ; and just so " The Apos-
tolical Canons " may well be to a great extent
of Apostolic origin, committed to writing,
some i^ossibly by the Apostles themselves,
others by their immediate successors, who
heard them at their mouth ; and these at
some period not far removed from the date
of the Nicene Council (a.d. 325), probably ear-
lier than the Council of Antioch, were gath-
ered together into a code which has since then
been somewhat enlarged and modified. This
is the view of the matter to which the general
drift of the learned seems to be moving, and
it is substantially the view so ably defended
by Bishop Beveridge in his Syiwdicon, and in
his remarkably learned and convincing an-
swer to his French opj)onent,'^ entitled Codex
Canonum Ecde.sice Prinniicce riiidicuhis ac iUus-
tratus. (This last volume, together with the
" Preface to the Notes on the Apostolical j
Canons " has been reprinted in Vol. XII. of
Bishoj) Beveridge's Works in the " Library of
Anglo-Catholic Theology.") 3

In tluis accepting in the main the old con-
clusions I am far from intending to imply
that more recent research has not shewn some
of the details of the bishop's view to be er-
roneous. In brief, the proposition which

1 The reader may remember that when it was proposed in a
first draft to the Council of Trent to say the " Psahns of David,"
the Fathers refused to pass it as proposed, because the Psa'.ter
contained Psalms not by David, and substituted the expression
"The Davidic Psalter " {Fsalteriwin Davidieum).

2 Matthieu de Larroque. Observatiunes . . . et in Annot.
Ber. in Can. Apnst. 1674. I

3 It is most unfortunate that the Rev. A. B. Grosart, LL D. in I
the article "Beveridge" in that usually accurate and learned [
work, the Dictionary of English Biography, should have written
'• regrettinc " this republication of the Vindicaiio, on the ground '
that Bp Beveridge in its pages '•demonstrates that he lacked
the instincts of the genuine scholar as distinguished from the
merely largely read man ! " There seem to hen great many soi- I
disant " genuine scholars " who lack all sense of humour ! I


seems to be most tenable is that in the main
the Apostolic Canons represent the very early
canon-law of the Church, that the canons
which make ujd the collection are of various
dates, but that most of them are earlier than
the year 300, and that while it is not possible
to say exactly when the collection, as we now
have it, was made, there is good reason for
assigning it a date not later than the middle
of the fourth century. \Yith regard to the
name " Apostolic Canons " there need be no
more hesitation in applying it to these can-
ons than in calling Ignatius an " Apostolic
Father," the adjective necessarily meaning
nothing more than that the canons set forth
the disciplinary principles which were given
to the early Church by the Ajjostles, just as
we speak of the " iVpostles' Creed."

AVhile this is true there can be no question
that in the East the Apostolic Canons were
very generally looked upon as a genuine
work prepared by the Holy Apostles. I pro-
ceed now to quote Bishop Hefele, but I have
already (Cf. Council in Trullo) expressed my
own opinion that there is not contained in the
Quinisext decree any absolute definition of
what is technically known as the " authentic-
ity " of the Canons of the Apostles.


of the Councils, Vol. I., p.


(Hefele. Hist.
451 et seqq.).

The Synod in Trullo being, as is well knowm,
regarded as ecumenical by the Greek Church,
the authenticity of the eighty-five canons was
decided in the East for all future time. It
was otherwise in the West. At the same
period that Dionysius Exiguus translated the
collection in question for BishojD Stephen,
Pope Gelasius promulgated his celebrated
decree de Ithris non recipiendis. Drey men-
tions it, but in a way w'hich requires correc-
tion. Following in this the usual opinion, he
says that the Synod at Rome in which Gela-
sius published this decree was held in 494 ;
but we shall see hereafter that this synod was
held in 496. Also Drey considers himself
obliged to adopt another erroneous opinion,
according to which Gelasius declared in the
same decree the Apostolic Canons to be apoc-
ryphal. This opinion is to be maintained
only so long as the usual text of this decree is
consulted, since the original text as it is given


592


APPENDIX


in the ancient manuscripts does not contain
the passage whicli mentions the Apostolic
Canons.^ This passage was certainly added
sulisequently, with many others, probably by
Poj^e Hormisdas (514-543) when he made a
new edition of the decree of Gelasius. As
Dionysius Exiguus published his collection in
all probability subsequently to the publica-
tion of the decree of Gelasius, properly so
called, in 496, we can understand why this
decree did not mention the Apostolical
Canons. Dionysius did not go to Rome
while Gelasius was living, and did not know
him personall}', as he himself says plainly in
the Prcefdtio of his collection of the papal
decrees. It is hence also plain how it was
that in another collection of canons subse-
quently made by Dionysius, of which the pref-
ace still remains to us, he does not insert the
Apostolic Canons, but has simply this re-
mark : Q}ios non admisif uniniversalitas, ego
quoque in hoc opere proetennisi. Dionysius
Exiguus in fact compiled this new collection
at a time when Pope Hormisdas had already
explicitly declared the Apostolic Canons to be
apocryphal.

Notwithstanding this, these canons, and
particularly the fifty mentioned by Dionysius,
did not entii'ely fall into discredit in the
West ; but rather they came to be received,
because the first collection of Dionysius was
considered of great authority. They also
passed into other collections, and particularly
into that of the pseudo-Isidore ; and in 1054,
Humbert, legate of Pope Leo IX., made the
following declaration : Clcmentis liber, id est it-
i)icranum Petri Apostoli et CdHones Apostolorum
niimeranfur inter apocrijpha, exceptis capitulis
QuisQUAGiNTA, ciure decreveTiint rcgidis ortliodox-
is adjangenda. Gratian also, in his decree,
borrowed from the fifty Apostolic Canons,
and they gradually obtained the force of
laws. But many writers, especially Hincmar
of Rheims, like Dionysius Exiguus, raised
doubts upon the apostolical origin of these
canons. From the sixteenth century the
opinion has been universal that these docu-
ments are not authentic ; with the exception,
however, of the French Jesuit Turrianus, who
endeavoured to defend their genuineness, as
well as the authenticity of the pseudo-Isido-
rian decrees. According to the Centuriators
of Magdeburg, it was especially Gabriel d'
Aubespine, Bishop of Orleans, the celebrated
Archbishop Peter de Marca, and the Anglican
Beveridge, who proved that they were not
really compiled by the Apostles, but were

' Cf Ballerini. 0pp. S. Leon. M., Vol. HI. p. 158 ; Mansi. Cone.,
Tom. YIU, no.


made partly in the second and chiefly in the
third century. Beveridge considered this
collection to be a repertory of ancient canons
given by synods in the second and third cen-
turies. In opposition to them, the Calvinist
Dallaeus (Daille) regarded it as the work of a
forger who lived in the fifth and sixth cen-
turies ; but Beveridge refuted him so con-
vincingly, that from that time his opinion,
with some few modifications, has been that of
all the learned.

Beveridge begins with the principle, that
the Church in the very earliest times must
have had a collection of canons ; and he de-
monstrates that from the commencement of
the fourth century, bishops, synods, and
other authorities often quote, as documents
in common use, a Kavuiv aTroo-roAtKos, or Ik-
KXqatiaTLKo?, or apxatos ; as was done, for in-
stance, at the Council of Nice, by Alexander,
Bishop of Alexandria, and by the Emperor
Constantine, etc.'^ According to Beveridge,
these quotations make allusion to the Apos-
tolic Canons, and prove that they were al-
ready in use before the fourth century.

In opposition to Beveridge Dr. von Drey
wrote with profound learning ; ^ and Bickell,
in his work just quoted, to a great degree
accepts his conclusions as being well-founded.

These conclusions in short are that the so-
called "Apostolic Canons " are a patchwork
taken from the "Apostolic Constitutions,"
which are said to have been of Eastern origin
and to date from the latter part of the third
centur}', and from the canons of various
synods, notably Nice, Antioch, and Chalce-
don.

But this last reference to Chalcedon is too
much for Bickell to stomach ; and for many
reasons he makes the date of the collection
earlier.

Hefele points out a rather significant docu-
ment which he says both " Drey and Bickell
have overlooked. In 1738 Scipio Maifei pub-
lished three ancient documents, the first of
which was a Latin translation of a letter
written on the subject of Meletius by the
Egyptian bishops Hesychius, Phileas, etc.
This letter was written during the persecu-
tion of Diocletian, that is, between 303 and
305 : it is addressed to Meletius himself, and
especially accuses him of having ordained
pi-iests in other dioceses. This conduct, they
tell him, is contrary to all ecclesiastical rule
[aliena a more divino et regida ecclesiastica), and

' Cf 'for catenai Bickell, Geschichte des Kirckenrechts, S. 82.
s Xetif (Tnter-in-ckungen iiber die Const, und Canones der Apo»-
iel. Tiibing., 1832.


THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS


593


Meletius himself knows very well that it is a
lex patnim et propatrum . . . in alienis
paraeciis non licere alicui cpiscoporiun ordina-
tiones cclebrare. Maflfei himself supposes that
the Egyptian bishops were here refei'ring to
the thirty-fifth canon (the thirty-sixth ac-
cording to the enumeration of Dionysius),
and this opinion can hardly be controverted."

After Bickell and Drey about ten years
passed and then Bunsen and tJltzen wrote on
the subject. Of these Bunsen renewed Bev-
eridge's arguments, and considers the "Apos-
tolic Canons " as a reflex of the customs of the
Primitive Church, if not in the Johannean
age, at latest in that which immediately suc-
ceeded ; and he is of opinion that the legend
attributing them to the Apostles is earlier in
date than the Council of Nice. tJltzen does
not express himself definitely on the point,
but in a note to p. xvj. of the Preface to his
book regrets that Bunsen should have re-
newed Beveridge's argument with regard to
the relative age of the Apostolic Canons and
those of Antioch because in his judgment
" all the more recent judges of this matter
had refuted it,"

I think I should here interrupt my narra-
tive to warn the reader that Beveridge has
been often misunderstood and misrepre-
sented. For example he expressly says that
according to his theory ^ " these canons were
set forth by various synods, so too they seem to
us to have been collected by difl^erent persons,
of whom some collected more, some fewer.
. And these canons, thus collected,
some called ecclesiastical and some called
them Apostolical ; not that they believed
them to have been "m-itten by the very Apos-
tles, for they had made the collection them-
selves, but because they were consonant to
the doctrine and traditions of the Apostles,
and they were persuaded that they had been
originally established at least by apostolic
men." This is Beveridge's position in his
own words.

I come now to the most recent writings
upon the subject. Harnack has developed a
theory which is partly his own with regard to
the Apostolical Constitutions, in his edition of
the "Didache," and has also considered the
question of the Apostolic Canons. The fullest

I Bev. Prmfatio ad Annotat. in Can. Apost., § xiii.


discussion however of the matter is in a work
entitled. Die Apostolischen KonsUtutionem,Eine
Litteran-hisforische Untersuchung, von Franz
Zarer Funic. Rottenhurg am Ncckar. 1891.

Funk gives the history of the controversy,
and refuses to allow that Hefele's citation of
the Letter of the Egyptian bishops throws
any light upon the point. In most matters
he agrees with Bickell, and declares (p. 188)
that " the Synod of Antioch is certainly to be
I regarded as the source of the Apostolic Can-
ons," and that thus by comparing the canons,
j it is manifest that the Apostolic " are certain-
I ly to be regarded as the dependent writing "
j (p. 185). And after considering their rela-
tion to the Apostolical Constitutions, Funk
states his conclusion as follows (p. 190) :
" The drawing up of the canons falls there-
fore not earlier than the interpolation of the
Didaskalia and the preparation of the two last
books of the Constitution, hence not before
the beginning of the fifth century. On tne
other hand there is no ground for fixing the
writing at a later period, not a single canon
bears the mark of a later time."

Such was the state of things until Mgr.
Rihmani, the Syrian Archbishojo of Aleppo,
gave notice that he had found in a codex at
Mossul a Syrian version of the Apocryphal
book known as the Tcstamentum Jesu Christi.
It is stated that in the discoverer's opinion
the Testanicntum is earlier in date than the
AjDOstolic Canons, than the Canons of Hippo-
lytus, and than the Ylllth Book of the Apos-
tolic Constitutions ; and further that it was
the direct source of the Apostolic Canons.
As I know nothing further of this matter, I
must simply note it for the guidance of the
reader in his further study of the subject.

Having now traced the history of the dis-
cussion, I need only add that Mr. Turner has
just issued a very critical text of the version
of Dionysius Exiguus, the full title of which
is as follows :

Ecclesise Occidentalis Monvmenta Jvris
Antiqvissima Canonvm et Conciliorvm Grtie-
corum, Interpretationes Latinse. Edidit Cvth-
bertvs Hamilton Turner, A.M. Fascicvli
Primi Pars Prior Canones Apostolorvm Nicae-
norvm Patrvm Svbscriptiones. And that I
have taken, except Avhere noted to the con-
trar)', Hammond's translation.


594


APPEXDIX


THE CANONS OF THE HOLY AND
ALTOGETHER AUGUST APOSTLES.i

Canon I.'~

Let a bishop be ordained by two or three
bishops.

Canon II.

Let a presbyter, deacon, and the rest of the
clergy, be ordained by one bishop.

Canon III. (III. and IV.)
If any bishop or presbyter offer any other
things at the altar, besides that which the
Lord ordained for the sacrifice, as honey, or
milk, or strong-made drink instead of wiue,^
or birds, or any living things, or vegetables,
besides that which is ordained, let him be de-
posed. Excepting only new ears of corn, and
grapes at the suitable season. Neither is it
allowed to bring anything else to the altar at
the time of the holy oblation, excepting oil
for the lamps, and incense.

Canon IV. (V.)

Let all other fruits be sent home as first-
fruits for the bishops and presbyters, but not
offered at the altar. But the bishops and |
presbyters should of course give a share of
these things to the deacons, and the rest of i
the clergy.

Canon V. (VI.)

Let not a bishop, presbyter, or deacon,
l^ut away his wife under pretence of religion ;
but if he put her away', let him be excommu-
nicated ; and if he persists, let him be deposed.

Canon VI. (VII.)

Let not a bishop, presbyter, or deacon, un-
dertake worldly business ; otherwise let him
be deposed.

Canon VII. (VIII.)

If any bishop, presbj'ter, or deacon, shall
celebrate the holy day of Easter before the
vernal equinox, with the Jews, let him be de-
posed.

Canon VIII. (IX.)

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, or any
one on the sacerdotal list, when the offering
is made, does not partake of it, let him declare

' The Latin caption is "The Ecclesiast'cal Tlules of the Holy
Apostles, set forth by Clement. Pontift of the Roman Chiich."

'' The numberiner which I have followed is Hammond's, but,
where it differs from that given bv Ilefele, I have placed Hefele's
numbering in parenthesis. With Ilefele agree Van Espen and
Bruns (in his alternative nuniberinp) and "Johnson's marginal
numbering. The numbering that Johnson liimself follows is
that of Cotelerius.

* The test here varies.


the cause ; and if it be a reasonable one, let
him be excused ; but if he does not declare
it, let him be excommunicated, as being a
cause of oft'ence to the peoj^le, and occasioning
a suspicion against the offerer, as if he had
not made the offering j^roperly.

Canon IX. (X.)

All the faithful who come in and hear the
Scrij^tures, but do not stay for the prayers
and the Holy Communion, are to be excom-
municated, as causing disorder in the Church.

Canon X. (XI.)

If any one shall pray, even in a private
house, with an excommunicated person, let
him also be excommunicated.

C.\NON XL (XII.)

If any clergyman shall join in prayer with
a deposed clergyman, as if he were a clergy-
man,^ let him also be dej)osed.

Canons XII. and XIIL (XIII.)

If any one of the clergy or laity who is ex-
communicated, or not to be received, shall go
away, and be received in another city without
commendatory letters, let both the receiver
and the received be excommunicated.

But if he be excommunicated already, let the
time of his excommunication be lengthened.

Canon XIV.

A bishop is not to be allowed to leave his
own parish, and pass over into another, al-
though he may be pressed by many to do so,
unless there be some proper cause constraining
him, as if he can confer some greater benefit
upon the persons of that place in the word of
godliness. And this must be done not of his
own accord, but by the judgment of many
bishops, and at their earnest exhortation.

Canon XV.

If any presbyter, or deacon, or any other of
the list of tlie clergy, shall leave his own par-
ish, and go into another, and having entirely
forsaken his own, shall make his abode in the
other parish without the permission of his own
bishop, we ordain that he shall no longer per-
form divine service ; more especially if his
own bishop having exhorted him to return he
has refused to do so, and persists in his dis-
orderly conduct. But let him communicate
there as a layman.

* Hammond seems to have omitted is K^rjpiKw, which I have
supplied.


THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS


595


Canon XVI.

If, however, the bishop, with whom any
such persons are staying-, shall disregard the
command that they are to cease from per-
forming divine offices, and shall receive them
as clergymen, let him be excommunicated, as
a teacher of disorder.

Canon XVII.

He who has been twice married after bap-
tism, or who has had a concubine, cannot be-
come a bishop, presbyter, or deacon, or any
other of the sacerdotal list.

Canon XVIII.

He who married a widow, or a divorced
woman, or an harlot, or a servant-maid, or an
actress, cannot be a bishop, presbyter, or dea-
con, or any other of the sacerdotal list.

Canon XIX.

He who has married two sisters, or a niece,
cannot become a clergyman.

Canon XX.

If a clergyman becomes surety for any one,
let him be deposed.

Canon XXI.

An eunuch, if he has been made so by the
violence of men or [if his viriUa have been
amputated ^ ] in times of persecution, or if he
has been born so, if in other respects he is
worthy, may be made a bishop.

Canon XXII.

He who has mutilated himself, cannot be-
come a clergyman, for he is a self-murderer,
and an enemy to the workmanship of God.

Canon XXIII.

If any man being a clergyman shall muti-
late himself, let him be deposed, for he is a
self-murderer.

Canon XXIV.

If a layman mvitilate himself, let him be
excommunicated for three years, as practising
against his own life.

Canon XXV. (XXV. and XXVL)

If a bishop, presbyter, or deacon be found
guilty of fornication, perjury, or theft, let him
be deposed, but let him not be excommuni-
cated ; for the Scripture says, " thou shalt
not punish a man twice for the same offence."

' Hammond has omitted these words.


In like manner the other clergy shall be sub-
ject to the same proceeding.^

Canon XXVL (XXVIL)

Of those who have been admitted to the
clergy unmarried, we ordain, that the readers
and singers only may, if they will, marry.

Canon XXVIL (XXVIII.)

If a bishop, presbyter, or deacon shall strike
any of the faithful who have sinned, or of the
unbelievers who have done wrong, with the
intention of frightening them, we command
that he be deposed. For our Lord has by no
means taught us to do so, but, on the con-
trary, when he was smitten he smote not
again, when he was reviled he reviled not
again, when he suffered he threatened not.

Canon XXVIII. (XXIX.)

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, having
been justly deposed upon open accusations,
shall dare to meddle with any of the divine
offices which had been intrusted to him, let
him be altogether cut off from the Church.

Canon XXIX. (XXX.)

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, shall
obtain possession of that dignity by money,
let both him and the j^erson who ordained
him be deposed, and also altogether cut off
from all communion, as Simon Magus was by
me Peter.

Canon XXX. (XXXI.)

If any bishop obtain possession of a church
by the aid of the temporal powers, let him be
deposed and excommunicated, and all who
communicate with him.

Canon XXXI. (XXXII.)

If any presbyter, despising his own bishopi
shall collect a separate congregation, and
erect another altar, not having any grounds
for condemning the bishoiD with regard to re-
ligion or justice, let him be deposed for his
ambition ; for he is a tyrant ; in like manner
also the rest of the clergy, and as many as
join him ; and let laymen be excommunicated.
Let this, however, be done after a first, sec-
ond, and third admonition from the bishop.

Canon XXXII. (XXXIII.)
If any presbyter or deacon has been excom-
municated by a bishop, he may not be received

' I have changed Hammond's renderinsr of this last phrase, " in
like manner with respect to the other clergy."


596


APPENDIX


into communion again by any other than by
him who excommunicated him, unless it hap-
pen that the bishop who excommunicated him
be dead.

Canon XXXIII. (XXXIV.)

No foreign bishop, presbyter, or doacon,
may be received without commendatory let-
ters; and when they are produced let the
persons be examined ; and if they be
preachers of godliness, let them be received.
Otherwise, although you supply them with
what they need, you must not receive them
into communion, for many things are done
surreptitiously.

Canon XXXIV. (XXXV.)

The bishops of every nation must acknowl-
edge him who is first among them and ac-
count him as their head, and do nothing of
consequence without his consent ; but each
may do those things only which concern his
own parish, and the country places which be-
long to it. But neither let him (who is the ,
first) do anything without the consent of all ; i
for so there will be uuauiuiity, and God will |
be glorified through the Lord in the Holy
Spii-it.i ' i

Canon XXXV. (XXXVI.)

Let not a bishop dare to ordain beyond his
own limits, in cities and places not subject to
him. But if he be convicted of doing so,
without the consent of those persons who
have authority over such cities and places, let
him be deposed, and those also whom he has
ordained.

Canon XXXVI. (XXXVIL)

If any person, having been ordained bishop,
does not undertake the ministry, and the
care of the people committed to him, let him
be excommunicated until he does undertake
it- In like manner a presbyter or deacon.
But if he has gone and has not been received, I
not of his own will but from the perverseness
of the people, let him continue bishop ; and
let the clergy of the city be excommunicated,
because they have not corrected the disobedi-
ent people.

Canon XXXVIL (XXXVIIL)

Let there be a meeting of the bishops twice
a year, and let them examine amongst them-
selves the decrees concei'ning religion and

' The text here differs ; 1 follow Beveridse. Hammond read?,
" Thronsrh the Lord .Jesus Christ, and the Father throuEih the Lord
bv the lloly Spirit, even the Father, the Sou, and the Holy
Spirit."


settle the ecclesiastical controversies which
may have occurred. One meeting to be held
in the fourth week of Pentecost [i.e., the fourth
week after Easter], and the other on the 12th
day of the month Hyperbereteeus [i.e., Oc-
tober].

Canon XXXVIIL (XXXIX.)

Let the bishop have the care of all the
goods of the Church, and let hiui administer
them as iinder the inspection of God. But
he must not alienate any of them or give the
things which belong to God to his own rela-
tions. If they be poor let him relieve them
as poor ; but let him not, under that pre-
tence, sell the goods of the Church,

Canon XXXIX. (XL.)

Let not the presbyters or deacons do any-
thing without the sanction of the bishop ; for
he it is who is intrusted with the people of
the Lord, and of whom will be required the
account of their souls.

Canon XL. (XL. continued.)

Let the private goods of the bishop, if he
have any such, and those of the Lord, be
clearly distinguished, that the bishop may
have the power of leaving his own goods, when
he dies, to whom he will, and how he will,
and that the bishop's own property may not
be lost under pretence of its being the
property of the Church : for it may be that
he has a wife, or children, or relations, or
servants ; and it is just before God and man,
that neither should the Church sufier any
loss through ignorance of the bishop's own
property, nor the bi.shop or his relations be
injured under pretext of the Church : nor
that those who belong to him should be in-
volved in contests, and cast reproaches upon
his death.

Canon XLI.

We ordain that the bishop have authority
over the goods of the Church : for if he is to |
be intrusted with the precious souls of men,
much more are temporal possessions to be
intrusted to him. He is therefore to admin-
ister them all of his own authority, and sup-
ply those who need, through the presbyters
and deacons, in the fear of God, and with all
reverence. He may also, if need be, take
what is required for his own necessary wants,
and for the brethren to whom he has to show
hospitality, so that he may not be in any
want. For the law of God has ordained, that
thev who wait at the altar should be nour-


THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS


597


islied of the altar. Neither does any soldier
bear arms against an enemy at his own cost.

Canon XLII.

If a bishop or presbyter, or deacon, is ad-
dicted to dice or drinking, let him either give
it over, or be deposed.

Canon XLIII.

If a subdeacon, reader, or singer, commits
the same things, let him either give over, or
be excommunicated. So also laymen.

Canon XLIV.

Let a bishop, j^resbyter, or deacon, v^rho
takes usury from those who borrow of him,
give up doing so, or be deposed.

Canon XLV.
Let a bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who has
only i^rayed with heretics, be excommunicat-
ed : but if he has permitted them to perform
any clerical office, let him be deposed.

Canon XL VI.
We ordain that a bishop, or presbyter,
who has admitted the baptism or sacrifice of
heretics, be deposed. For what concord hath
Christ with Belial, or what part hath a believ-
er with an infidel ?

Canon XLVII.
Let a bishop or presbyter who shall baptize
again one who has rightly received baptism,
or who shall not baptize one who has been
polluted by the ungodly, be deposed, as de-
spising the cross and death of the Lord, and
not making a distinction between the true
priests and the false.

Canon XLVIIL
If any layman put away his wife and marry
another, or one who has been divorced by
another man, let him be excommunicated.

Canon XLIX.
If any bishop or presbyter, contrary to the
ordinance of the Lord, does not baptize into
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but
into three Unoriginated Beings, or three Sons,
or three Comforters, let him be deposed.

Canon L.

If any bishop or presbyter does not per-
form the one initiation with three immer-
sions, but with giving one immersion only,
into the death of the Lord, let him be de-


posed. For the Lord said not, Baptize intc
my death, but, "Go, make disciples of all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost."

Canon LI.

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, or any
one of the sacerdotal list, abstains from mar-
riage, or flesh, or wine, not by way of religious
restraint, but as abhorring them, forgetting
that God made all things very good, and that
he made man male and female, and blasphem-
ing the work of creation, let him be corrected,
or else be deposed, and cast out of the Church.
In like manner a layman.

Canon LII.

If any bishop or presbyter,' does not receive
him who turns away from his sin, but rejects
him, let him be deposed ; for he grieveth
Christ who said, " There is joy in heaven over
one sinner that rej^enteth."

Canon LIII.
If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, does
not on festival days partake of flesh and wine,
from an abhorrence of them, and not out of
religious restraint, let him be deposed, as be-
ing seared in his own conscience, and being
the cause of oflfence to many.

Canon LIV.
If any of the clergy be found eating in a
tavern, let him be excommunicated, unless he
has been constrained by necessity, on a jour-
ney, to lodge in an inn.

Canon LV.
If any of the clergy insult the bishop, let
him be deposed : for " thou shalt not sj)eak
evil of the ruler of thy peojDle."

Canon LVL
If any of the clergy insult a presbyter, or
deacon, let him be excommunicated.

Canon LVIL
If any of the clergy mock the lame, or the
deaf, or the blind, or him who is infirm in his
legs, let him be excommunicated. In like
manner any of the laity.

Canon LVIII.
If any bishop or presbyter neglects the
clergy or the jjeople, and does not instruct
them in the way of godliness, let him be ex-

' Hammond adds " or deacon."


598


APPE^'DIX


communicated, and if lie persists in hisnegli- the one only, let bim be deposed. If a lay
geuce and idleness, let bim be deposed. i man, let bim be excommunicated.


Canon LIX.

If any bisbop, jDresbyter, or deacon, when
any of the clergy is in want, does not supply
bim witb what be needs, let bim be excom-
municated ; but if be persists, let bim be de-
posed, as one who bas killed bis brotber.

Canon LX.

If any one reads publicly in tbe cliurcb the
falsely inscribed ^ books of impious men, as if
tbey were boly Scripture, to tbe destruction
of tbe people and clergy, let bim be deposed.

Canon LXI.

If any accusation be brougbt against a be-
lievei" of fornication or adultery, or any for-
bidden action, and be be convicted, let bim
not be promoted to tbe clergy.

Canon LXII.

If any of tbe clergy, tbrougb fear of men,
wbetber Jew, beatben, or beretic, sball deny
tbe name of Cbrist, let bim be cast out. If
be deny tbe name of a clergyman, let bim be
deposed. If be repent, let bim be received as
a lavmau.

Canon LXIII.

If any bisbop, presbyter, or deacon, or any
one of tbe sacerdotal order, sball eat flesb
witb tbe blood of tbe life tbereof, or anytbiug
killed by beasts, or tbat dies of itself, let bim
be deposed. For tbe law bas forbidden tbis.
If be be a layman, let bim be excommuni-
cated.

Canon LXIV.

If any clergyman or layman sball enter
into a synagogue of Jews or beretics to pray,
let tbe former be deposed and let tbe latter
be excommunicated.'-^

Canon LXV.

If any clergyman sball strike anyone in a
contest, and kill bim witb one blow, let bim
be deposed for bis violence. If a layman do
so, let bim be excommunicated.

Canon LXVI.

If any of tbe clergy be found fasting on
tbe Lord's day, or on tbe Sabbatb,^ excepting

> Hammond translates " bearing false inscriptions," the Greets

is \lj€v8€Triypa<j)a.

''■ Hammond translates differently with the same meaning.
^ Hammond substitutes 'any Saturday," and omits the word
"only."


Canon LXVII.

If anyone sball force and keep a virgin not
espoused, let bim be excommunicated. And
be may not take any otber, but must retain
lier wbom be bas chosen, though she be a
poor person.

Canon LXVIII.

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, shall
receive from anyone a second ordination, let
both the ordained and the ordainer be de-
posed ; unless indeed it be proved that be
bad bis ordination from beretics ; for those
who have been baj^tized or ordained by such
persons cannot be either of the faithful or of
the clergy.

Canon LXIX.

If any bisbo^D, presbyter, or deacon, or
reader, or singer, does not fast the hoi}'
Quadragesimal fast of Easter, or the fourth
da}', or the day of Preparation, let him be
deposed, unless be be hindered by some
bodily infirmity. If be be a layman, let bim
be excommunicated.

Canon LXX.

If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, or any
one of tbe list of clergy, keeps fast or festival
with the Jews, or receives from them any of
the gifts of their feasts, as unleavened bread,
or any such things, let bim be deposed. If
he be a layman, let bim be excommunicated.

Canon LXXI.

If any Christian brings oil into a temple of
the heathen or into a synagogue of the Jews
at their feast, or lights lamps, let him be
excommunicated.

Canon LXXII.

If any clergyman or layman takes away wax
or oil from tbe boly Church, let bim be ex-
communicated, [and let him restore a fifth
part more than be took.] ■*

Canon LXXIII.

Let no one convert to bis own use any
vessel of gold or silver, or any veil which bas
been sanctified, for it is contrary to law ; and
if anyone be detected doing so, let him be
excommunicated.

< This last phrase is omitted by Hammond, but is found in the
Latin and in some of the Greek texts.


THE APOSTOLICAL CANONS


599


Canon LXXIV.

If any bisboj) has been accused of anything
by men worthy of credit, he must be sum-
moned by the bishops ; and if he appears,
and confesses, or is convicted, a suitable
punishment mvist be inflicted upon him.
But if when he is summoned he does not
attend, let him be summoned a second time,
two bishoiDS being sent to him, for that pur-
pose. [If even then he will not attend, let
him be summoned a third time, two bishops
being again sent to him.'] But if even then
he shall disi'egard the summons and not
come, let the synod pronounce such sentence
against him as appears right, that he may not
seem to profit by avoiding judgment.

Canon LXXV.

An heretic is not to be received as witness
against a bishop, neither only one believer ;
for, "in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word shall be established."

Canon LXXVI.

A bishop must not out of favour to a
brother or a sou, or any other relation, ordain
whom he Avill to the episcopal dignity ; for it
is not right to make heirs of the bishopric,
giving the things of God to human affections.
Neither is it fitting to subject the Church of
God to heirs. But if anyone shall do so let
the ordination be void, and the ordainer him-
self be punished with excommunication.

Canon LXXVII.

If any one be deprived of an eye, or lame
of a leg, but in other respects be worthy of a
bisho2:)ric, he may be ordained, for the defect


Canon LXXX.

It is not allowed that a man who has come
over from an heathen life, and been baptized
or who has been converted from an evil
course of living, should be immediately made
a bishop, for it is not right that he who has
not been tried himself should be a teacher of
others. Unless indeed this be done upon a
special manifestation of Divine grace in his
favour.

Canon LXXXI.


We have said that a bishop or presbyter
must not give himself to the management of
public affairs, but devote himself to ecclesias-
tical business. Let him then be persuaded
to do so, or let him be deposed, for no man
can serve two masters, according to the Lord's
declaration.

Canon LXXXII.

We do not allow any servants to be pro-
moted to the clergy without the consent of
their masters, [to the troubling of their
houses. ^] But if any servant should appear
worthy of receiving an order,^ as our Onesi-
mus apj)eared, and his masters agree and
liberate him, and send him out of their house,
he may be ordained.

Canon LXXXIIL

If a bishop, presbyter, or deacon, shall
serve in the army, and wish to retain both
the Roman magistracy and the priestly oflice,
let him be deposed ; for the things of Csesar
belong to Csesar, and those of God to God.

Canon LXXXIV.

Whosoever shall insult the King, or a ruler,


J. ,1 1 1 1 i. 1 xii 1 4. 4-1 ' contrarv to what is right, let him suffer pun-

of the body does not defile a man, but the i :" r tj? i i i ^ j. ^ ■ t

n I- i 1.-I 1 ishment. If he be a clergvman, let him be

pollution 01 the soul. v n -j- i • i. i

^ deposed ; if a layman, excommunicated.

Canon LXXXV.

Let the following books be counted vener-
able and sacred by all of you, both clergy
and Laity. Of the Old Testament, five books
of Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Num-
bers, Deuteronomy ; of Joshua the Son of
Nun, one ; of the Judges, one ; of Ruth, one ;
of the Kings, four ; of the Chronicles of the
book of the days, two ; of Ezra, two ; of Esther,
one; [some texts read "of Judith, one";]
of the Maccabees, three ; of Job, one ; of the
Psalter, one ; of Solomon, three, viz. : Prov-


Canon LXXVIII.

But if a man be deaf or blind, he may not
be made a bishop, not indeed as if he were
thus defiled, but that the affairs of the Church
may not be hindered.

Canon LXXIX.

If anyone has a devil, let him not be made
a clergyman, neither let him pray with the
faithful ; but if he be freed, let him be re-
ceived into communion, and if he is worthy he
may be ordained.

' « According to Hefele this is only in the Latin, but it is fomid

' Accordine to Hefele. thcpe word? are only in the Latin, but in the Greek of Beveridge.
they are in the Greek text of Beveridge. ^ 1 have changed Hammond's translation here.


600


APPENDIX


erbs, Ecclesiastes, aud the Song of Songs ;
of the Prophets, twelve ; of Isaiah, one ; of
Jeremiah, one ; of Ezekiel, one ; of Daniel,
one. But besides these 3^011 are recommended
to teach your young persons the Wisdom of
the very learned Sirach. Our own books,
that is, those of the New Testament, are :
the four Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and


John ; fourteen Epistles of Paul ; two Epis-
tles of Peter ; three of John ; one of James,
and one of Jude. Two Epistles of Clemens,
and the Constitiitions of me Clemens, ad-
dressed to you Bishops, in eight books, which
are not to be published to all on account of
the mystical things in them. And the Acts
of us the Apostles.^


THE LETTER OF THE BLESSED DIONYSIUS, THE ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXAN-
DRIA TO BASILIDES THE BISHOP, WHO MADE ENQUIRIES ON VARIOUS
SUBJECTS, TO WHICH DIONYSIUS MADE ANSWER IN THIS EPISTLE,
WHICH ANSWERS HAVE BEEN RECEIVED AS CANONS.'


Dionysius to my beloved son, and brother, I the question proposed, was whether Chris


and fellow minister in holy things, Basilides
faithful to God, salutation in the Lord.

NOTE.

Dionysius, Johnson says, wrote in about
A.D. 217.

Canon I.^

When the Paschal fast is to be broken de-
pends on the precise hour of our Saviour's
resurrection, and this was not certainly to be
known from the Four Evangelists ; therefore
they who have not fasted the Monday, Tues-
day, Wednesday, and Thursday before Easter,
do no great thing if they fast the Friday and
Saturday, and so till past three on Easter
morning. But they who have fasted the
whole six days, are not to be blamed if they
break their fast after midnight. Some do not
fast any of these days.

Canon II.

Menstruous women ought not to come to
the Holy Table, or touch the Holy of Holies,^
nor to churches, but pray elsewhere.

note.
Balsamon notes how the canon educes the
example of the woman who had had an issue
of blood for twelve years and who therefore
did not dare to touch the Lord, but only the
'■ hem of his garment." He also notes that

' The text of this canon iB quite different in the different
codices and versions. I have departed from Hammond's version.

' I have followed in the captions to all these non-conciliar can-
ons the Greek text of Bcveridee iu his Si/twdicou (Tom. II.).

^ I have here placed .Johnson's epitome of these canons ; the
Ancient Epitome is lacking.

• In the Greek " the body aud blood of Christ."


tian women should be excluded from the
church and need follow the example of the
Hebrews, who " when the meustrual flux was
upon them, sat in a solitary place by them-
selves and waited for seven days to pass, and
their flux should be over." The- answer
given is as above.

Canon III.

They that can contain and are aged ought
to judge for themselves. They have heard St.
Paul say ; that they should " for a time give
themselves to praj'er, aud then come together


again.


NOTE.


In this epitome Johnson has set forth the
meaning of the canon, as understood by the
Greek scholiasts, rather than translated and
epitomized the canon itself.

Canon IV.

They who have had involuntary nocturnal
pollutions be at their own discretion [whether
to communicate or not].

NOTE.

The Saint ends this canon with these
words : "I have given opiuion on the points
about which you have consulted me, not as a
doctor, but in all simplicity as it is suitable the
relation between us should be. And when you
have examined, my most learned son, what I
have written you will let me know what seems
to you better or whether you agree with my
opinions. Farewell, dear son, may your min-
1 istry be in the peace of the Lord."


CANONS OF PETER OF ALEXANDRIA


601


II.

THE CANONS OF THE BLESSED PETER, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA,
AND MARTYR/ WHICH ARE FOUND IN HIS SERMON ON PENITENCE.


Canon I.

The fourth Easter from the beginning of
the persecution was now come ; and orders,
that they who did not fall till after they had
endured severe torments, and have already
been "Mourners" three years, after forty
days' fast, are to be admitted to communion,
although they have not been before received
[to penance].'-

Canon II.

But if they endured impi'isonment only,
without torments, let a year be added to their
former penance.

Canon III.

If they fell voluntarily, without toi'ments
or imprisonments, but are come to repent-
ance, four years are added to their former
penance.

Canon IV.

The case of them who do not repent pro-
nounced desperate.

Canon V.

They that used evasion, and did not right
down subscribe the abnegation, or with their
own hands incense the idols, but sent a
heathen to do it for them, are enjoined six
months' penance, though they have been par-
doned by some of the Confessors.

Canon VL

Slaves forced by their masters to incense
idols, and doing it in their master's stead, are
enjoined a year's penance.

Canon VII.

The masters who forced them to it, are en-
joined three years' penance, as being hypo-
crites, and as forcing their slaves to sacrifice.

Canon VIII.

They who first fell, and afterwards recov-
ered themselves, by professing themselves

• According to Johnson, St. Peter of Alexandria was martyred
A.D 311 in the persecution in the time of Diocletian, carried on by
Maximian.

'In BeveridKe will be found Balsamon's and Zonaras'? notes.


Christians, and endured torments, are forth-
with admitted to communion.

Canon IX.

That they who provoked the magistrates to
persecute themselves and others are to be
blamed, yet not to be denied communion.

Canon X.

That clergymen, who run themselves into
persecution, and fell, though they did after-
ward recover themselves, and suffer torments,
yet are not to be admitted to perform the
sacred offices.

Canon XL

That they who prayed for them who fell
after long torments, be connived at, and we
pray together with them, since they lament
for what they have done, with anguish and
mortification.^

Canon XII.

That they who with money purchased their
ease and freedom, are to be commended.

Canon XIII.

Nor should we accuse those who ran away,
and left all, though others left behind might
fare the worse for it.*

Canon XIV.

That they who endured tortures, and after-
wards, when they were deprived of speech
and motion, had their hands forced into the
fii-e, to offer unholy sacrifice, be placed in the
Liturgy [i.e., in the diptychsj among the Con-
fessors.

Canon XV.

Wednesday is to be fasted, because then
the Jews conspired to betray Jesus ; Friday,
because he then suffered for us. We keep
the Lord's Day as a day of joy, because then
our Lord rose. Our tradition is, not to kneel
on that day.

' Johnson remarks, " The truth is. there is occasion for a critic,
for tiie Greek is certainly corrupted."

•> This canon contains the legend, refuted by St. Jerome, that St
John the Baptist was taken by St. Elizabeth away from the dan-
ger of Herod's edicts atrainst ihe Innocents and escaped by
flight, his father. Zacharias, the meanwhile being slain between
tlie temple and the altar.


G02


APPENDIX


III.

THE CANONICAL EPISTLE OF ST. GREGOPtY, ARCHBISHOP OF NEOC^S-
AREA, WHO IS CALLED THAUMATURGUS, CONCERNING THEM THAT,
DURING THE INCURSION OF THE BARBARIANS, ATE OF THINGS OF-
FERED TO IDOLS AND COMMITTED CERTAIN OTHER SINS.i


Canon I.

That they who have been taken captives by
the barbarians, and have eaten with them, be
not treated as j^ersous that have eaten thing's
offered to idols ; especially because it is uni-
versally reported, that they do not sacrifice to
idols ; nor shall those women Avho have been
ravished by them, ])e treated as guilty of for-
nication, unless they were before of lewd
lives.

Canon II.

That those Christians who plundered their
brethren during the invasion, be excommu-
nicated, lest wrath come on the people, and
especially on the presidents, ~' who enquire
not into these matters.

Canons III., IV., V.

The pretence of having found those goods,
or that they themselves lost things of equal
value, shall stand them in no stead, but that
they be excluded from prayer.'^

Canon VI.

Against those who detain them prisoners
who had escaped from the barbarians, the
holy man ' expects that such should be thun-
der-struck, and therefore desires that some
enquiry be made ujdou the spot by persons
sent for this purpose.


Canon VII.

That they who joined the barbarians in
their murder and ravages, or were guides or
informers to them, be not permitted to be
hearers, till holy men asseml)led together
do agree in common upon what shall seem
good, first to the Holy Ghost, then to them-
selves.

Canon VIII.

But if they discover themselves, and make
restitution, they shall be admitted to be
Prostrators.

Canon IX.

They that are convicted to have found
(though in their own houses) anything [of
their neighbours'] left by the barbarians
shall also be Prostrators ; but if they shall
confess themselves they shall communicate in
jDrayer.

Canon X.

This last privilege is restrained to such as
demand nothing as a reward for their discov-
ery, and salvage, or under any pretence what-
soever.

Canon XL

The station of Mourners is without the gate
of the oratory ; the station of the Hearers is
within the oratory, in the porch with the cate-
chumens ; the station of Prostrators is within
the door of the temple ; the station of Co-
standers is among the communicants ; the
last is the participation of Holy Mysteries.^


IV.


THE EPISTLE OF ST. ATHANASIUS. TO THE MONK AMMUS.^

[Uavra /xev KuXa, k. t. A.)


{This, as Epistle XLVIII. irilJ be found trans-
lated in Vol. IV. of the Nicene and Post-Ni-
cene Fathers {2d Series) p. ooG et seq.)

Involuntai'y nocturnal i:)olluti()ns are not
sinful, [I add to Johnson the exact woi'ds of


the Saint. "For what sin or uncleanuess can
any natural excrement have in itself? Think of
the absurdity of making a sin of the wax which
comes from the ears or of the spittle from the
mouth. Moreover we might add many things
and exjjlain how the excretions from the


' Johnson says this was about the year of srrace 240, after the
Goths had ravaged Asia, durinir the reigii of Galienus. The
letter, he thinlis. was an Encyclical sent to every bishop of his
province, by Eiiphrosynus, who was one ol these bishops and
whom he calls his •• old friend." In the betrinniu<r of the letter
he addresses each one of the bishops as " most holy pope."

'' I.e., The bishops, cf. St Justin Martyr, TertuUian. etc.


3 Literally " abdicate from Prayers." Johnson explains this to
mean that they became Prostrators.

■• I.e.. St. Gfesrory.

* Johnson has a note that this cauon is not "St. Gregory's but
an addition by some other hand."

" In English translation named Amun.


THE CANONS OF ATIIANASIUS


G03


belly are necessary to animal life. But if we
believe that man is the work of God's band,
as we are taught in holy Scripture, how can it
be supposed necessary that we perform any-
thing impure ? And if we are the children of
God, as the holy Acts of the Apostles teaches,
we have in us nothing unclean, etc., etc."] ;
nor is matrimony unclean, though virginity
["which is angelic and than which nothing
can be more excellent "] is to be preferred
before it.


THE EPISTLE OF THE SAME ATHA-
NASIUS TAKEN FROM THE XXXIX.
FESTAL EPISTLE.

[Found translated in Vol. IV. of Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers {2d series), pp. 551 and
552.)

\Johnsons epitome is so unsatisfactory that
I have been co>»pelled to relegate it to a foot-
note and to make one in its room of my oivn.*^

As the heretics are quoting ajDocryphal
writings, an evil which was rife even as early
as when St. Luke wrote his gospel, therefore
I have thought good to set forth clearly what
books have been received by us through tra-
dition as belonging to the Canon, and which
we believe to be divine. For there are in all
twenty-two books of the Old Testament.
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deu-
teronomy. After this comes Joshua, and
Judges, and Ruth. The four books of the
Kings, counted as two. Then Chronicles,
counted the two as one. Then First and Sec-


ond Esdras [i.e. Ezra and Nehemiah]. Af-
ter these Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Cantica. To these follow Job, and the
Twelve Proj^hets, counted as one book.
Then Isaiah, Jeremiah together with the Epis-
tle of Baruch, the Lamentations, Ezekiel, and
Daniel.

Of the New Testament these are the books
[then follows the complete list ending with
"the Apocalypse of John"]. These are the
fountains of salvation, that whoso thirsteth,
may be satisfied by the eloquence which is in
them. In them alone (eV roin-ots ^6vol%) is set
forth the doctrine of piety. Let no one add
to them, nor take aught therefrom.

I also add for further accuracy that there
are certain other books, not edited in the
Canon, but established by the Fathers, to be
read by those who have just come to us and
wish to be instructed in the doctrine of piety.
The Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Si-
rach, Esther, Judith, Tobit, the Doctrine
(At8a;)(r;) of the Apostlcs and the Pastor. And
let none of the Apocrypha of the heretics be
read among you.


THE EPISTLE OF ST ATHANASIUS TO
RUFFINIAN.


2u


jXiV Ttt VM, K. T


. A.


* Johnson says : " This contains the Canon of Scripture as
we now receive it in all respects, save that the Epistle of Baruch
is reckoned in the Cauou, but Esther is not. He tells us, there
are other books never reckoned in the Canon but authorized by
the fathers to be read by the Catechumens, viz. : Wisdom of Sol-
omon, of Sirach, Esther, Judith, and Tobias, and that which is
called I'he Doctrine of the Apastles. and J'astor. These (says
he) are read, the other reckoned of the Canons: Apocryphal
books are the invention of heretics." To this Johnson appends
a note, to wit: "It is the common opinion of learned men that
the reason why some of the ancients reckoned the book of Esther
not to belong to the Canon, was the Apocryphal chapters added
to it by another hand. That The Doctrine of the Apostles is a
book now lost, see Dr. Grabe's Essay on this subject."

Who these " learned men " may be, I do not know, but at the
time of the writing of St. Athauasius the position of the Hebrew
Esther was not well assured in the restricted Palestinian Jewish
Canon. On this point the reader should make tiimself familiar
with The Canon of the 0!d Testament by the Rt. Rev. Tobias
Mullen, Roman Catholic Bishop of Erie, U. S. A.


(Found translated as Epistle LV. in Vol. W.
of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers {Id
Series) 2^2^- 566 and 567.)

It has been determined by synods in
Greece, Spain, France, that they who have
fallen, or been leaders of impiety [ArianismJ,
be pardoned upon repentance, but that they
have not the place of the clergy ; but that
they who were only drawn away by force, or
that complied for fear the people should be
corruj)ted, have the place of the clergy too.
Let the i:)eople who have been deceived, or
forced, be pardoned, upon repentance and
pronouncing anathema against the miscreancy
of Eudoxius and Euzoius, ringleaders of the
Arians (who assert that Christ is a creature) ;
and upon professing the faith of the Fathers
at Nice, and that no synod can prejudice that.


604


APPENDIX


THE FIRST CANONICAL EPISTLE OF OUR HOLY FATHER BASIL, ARCH-
BISHOP OF C^SAREA IN CAPPADOCIA TO AMPHILOCHIUS, BISHOP OF
ICONIUM.'


{This Epistle, number' ct xxxviij., is found
translated in Volume VIII. of the Seeond Series
of the Niceue and Post-Niceue Fathers, /j.
223 et seqq.)

Canon I.

As to the question concerning the Puritans
the custom of every country is to be observed,
since they who have discussed this point are
of various sentiments. The [baptism] of the
Pepuzenes I make no account of, and I won-
der that Dionysius the canonist was of an-
other mind. The ancients speak of heresies,
which entirely break men off, and make them
aliens from the faith. Such are the Manich-
seans, Yaleutinians, Marcionites and Pepu-
zenes, who sin against the Holy Ghost, who
baptize into the Father, Son and Montanus,
or Priscilla. Schisms are caused by ecclesi-
astical disputes, and for causes that are not
incurable, and for differences concerning
penance. The Puritans are such schismatics.
The ancients, viz. Cyprian and Fermilian,
put these, and the Encratites, and Hydropa-
rastatae, and Apotactites, under the same con-
demnation ; because they have no longer the
communication of the Holy Ghost, Avho have
broken the succession. They who first made
the departure had the spiritual gift ; but by
being schismatics, they became laymen ; and
therefore the^^ ordered those that were bap-
tized by them, and came over to the Church,
to be 2>urged by the true baptism, as those
that are baptized by laymen. Because some
in Asia have otherwise determined, let [their
baptism] be allowed : but not that of the En-
cratites ; for they have altered their baptism,
to make themselves incapable of being re-
ceived by the Church. Yet custom and the
Fathers, that is bishops, who have the admin-
istration, must be followed ; for I am afraid
of putting an impediment to the saved ;
while I would raise fears in them concerning
their baptism. We are not to allow their bap-
tism, because they allow ours, but strictly
to observe the canons. But let none be re-
ceived without unction. When we received
Zois and Saturninus to the Episcopal chair,
we made, as it were, a canon to receive those
in communion with them.


I These canons of St. Basil's are annotated by Zonaras, Bal-
Bamon and Aristenus, and of them there is also the Ancient Epit-
ome which will be found in Beveridge {Si/iiod., Tom. II.. p. 47).
Johnson gives the date of these canons as later than the year 370.


Canon II.

Let her that procures abortion undergo ten
years' penance, whether the embryo were per-
fectly formed, or not.

' Canon III

A deacon guilty of fornication, is deposed,
not excommunicated ; for the ancient canon
forbids a single crime to be twice punished.
And further, a layman excommunicated may
be restored to the degree from which he falls,
but a clergyman deposed cannot. Yet it is
better to cure men of their sins by mortifica-
tion, and to execute the canon only in cases
where we cannot reach what is more perfect.

Canon IV.

They that marry a second time, used to be
under penance a year or two. They that
marry a third time, three or four years. But
we have a custom, that he who marries a third
time be under penance five years, not by
canon, but tradition. Half of this time they
are to be hearers, afterwards Co-standers ;
but to abstain from the communion of the
Good Thing, when they have shewed som^
fruit of repentance.

Canon V.

Heretics, upon theirdeath-bed, giving good
signs of their conversion, to be received.

Canon VI.

Let it not be counted a marriage, when one
belonging to the canon commits fornication,
but let them be forced to part.^

Canon VII.

They who have committed sodomy with
men or bi'utes, murderer.s, wizards, adulter-
ers, and idolaters, have been thought worthy
of the same punishment ; therefore observe
the same method with these which you do
with others. We ought not to make any
doubt of receiving those who have repented
thirty years for the uncleanness which they
committed through ignorance ; for their
ignorance pleads their pardon, and their
willingness in confessing it ; therefore com-

2 Johnson adds this note, " i.e. a clergyman, Monk, Deaconess,
etc." See Caii. Nic, xvj.


THE CANONS OF BASIL


605


mand them to be forthwith received, espe-
cially if they have tears to prevail on your
tenderness, and have [since their lapse] led
such a life as to deserve your compassion.

Canon VIII.

He that kills another with a sword, or hurls
an axe at his own wife and kills her, is guilty
of wilful murder ; not he who throws a stone
at a dog, and undesignedly kills a man, or
who corrects one with a rod, or scourge, in
order to reform him, or who kills a man in his
own defence, when he only designed to hurt
him. But the man, or woman, is a murder-
er that gives o. phiJtrum, if the man that takes
it die upon it ; so are they who take medi-
cines to 2:)rocure abortion ; and so are they
who kill on the highway, and rapparees.

Canon IX.

Our Lord is equal, to the man and woman
forbidding divorce, save in case of fornica-
tion ; but custom requires women to retain
their husbands, though they be guilty of for-
nication. The man deserted by his wife may
take another, and though he were deserted
for adiiltery, yet St. Basil will be positive, that
the other woman who afterward takes him is
guilty of adultery ; but the wife is not al-
lowed this liberty. And the man who deserts
an innocent wife is not allowed to marry.

Canon X.

TJiat they who swear that they will not be
ordained, be not forced to break their oath.
Severus, Bishop of Masada, who had ordained
Cyriacus priest to a country church, subject
to the Bishop of Mesthia, is referred to the
divine tribunal, upon his pretending that he
did it by surprise. Cyriacus had upon his
ordination, been forced, contrary to canon, to
swear that he would continue in that country
church ; but the Bishop of Mesthia, to whom
that church properly belonged, forced him
out. St. Basil advises Amphilochius to lay
the country church to Masada, and make it
subject to Severus, and to permit Cyriacus to
return to it and save his oath ; and by this
means he supposes that Louginus, the lord of
that country, would be prevailed upon to alter
his resolution of laying that church desolate,
as he declared he would upon Cyriacus's ex-
pulsion.

Canon XI.

He that is guilty of involuntary murder,
shall do eleven years' penance — that is, if the
murdered person, after he had here received


the wound, do again go abroad, and yet after-
ward die of the wound.

Canon XII.
The canon excludes fi-om the ministry those
who are guilty of digamy.

Canon XIII.

Our fathers did not think that killing in
war was murder ; yet I think it advisable for
such as have been guilty of it to forbear com-
munion three years.

Canon XIV.

An usurer, giving his unjust gain to the
poor, and renouncing his love of money, may
be admitted into the clergy.

Canons XV. and XVI.

Not properly canons, but explications of
Scripture, and therefore neither Balsamou,
nor Aristenus, regard them as canons.

THE SECOND CANONICAL EPISTLE
OF THE SAME.

{This is found translated in the same volume
last referred to, Epistle cxcix., p. 236 et seqq.)

' Canon XVII.

I made a canon, that they at Antioch, who
had sworn not to perform the sacred offices
should not do it publicly, but in private only :
As to Bianor, he is removed from thence to
Iconium, and therefore is more at liberty \.
but let him repent of his rash oath which he
made to an infidel for avoiding a small


danger.


Canon XVIII.


That the ancients received a professed
virgin that had married, as one guilty of
digamy, viz., upon one yeai-'s penance ; but
they ought to be dealt with more severely
than widows professing continency, and even
as adulterers : But they ought not to be
admitted to profess virginity till they are
above sixteen or seventeen years of age, after
trial, and at their own earnest request ;
whereas relations often offer them that are
under age, for their own secular ends, but
such ought not easily to be admitted.

Canon XIX.
That men, though they seem tacitly to
promise celibacy, by becoming monks, yet
do it not expressly ; yet I think fit that they


606


APPENDIX


be interrogated too, and that a profession
should be demanded of them, that if they
betake themselves to a carnal life, they may
be punished as fornicators.

Canon XX.

"Women professing virginity, though they
did marry while they were heretics, or cate-
chumens, yet are pardoned by baptism.
What is done by persons in the state of
catechumens, is never laid to their charge,

C.^NON XXI.

A married man committing lewdness with
a single woman, is severely punished as guilty
of fornication, but we have no canon to treat
such a man as an adulterer ; but the wife
must co-habit with such a one : But if the
wife be lewd, she is divorced, and he that
retains her is [thought] impious ; such is the
custom, but the reason of it does not appear.

Canon XXII.

That they who have stolen virgins, and will
not restore them, be treated as fornicators ;
that they be one year mourners, the second
hearers, the third received to repentance and
the fourth be co-standers, and then admitted
to communion of the Good Thing. If the
virgins be restored to those who had espoused
them, i^ is at their discretion to marry them,
or not ; if to their guardians, it is at their
discretion to give them in marriage to the
raptors, or not.

Canon XXIII.

That a man ought not to marry two sisters,
nor a woman two brothers : That he who
marries his brother's wife, be not admitted
till he dismiss her.

Canon XXIV.

A widow put into the catalogue of widows,
that is, a deaconess being sixty years old,
and marrying, is not to be admitted to com-
munion of the Good Thing, till she cease from
her uncleanness ; but to a widower that mar-
ries no penance is appointed, but that of
digamy. If the widow be less than sixty, it
is the bishop's fault who admitted her dea-
coness, not the woman's.

Canon XXV.

He that marries a woman that he has cor-
rupted, shall be under penance for corrupting
her, but may retain her for his wife.


Canon XXVL
Fornication is neither marriage, nor the
beginning of marriage. If it may be, it is
better that they who have committed fornica-
tion together be parted ; but if they be pas-
sionate lovers, let them not separate, for fear
of what is worse.

C.\N0N XXYII.

As for the priest that is engaged, through
ignorance, in an unlawful marriage, I have
decreed, that he retain the honour of the
chair ; but forbear all sacred operations, and
not give the blessing either in private, or
public, nor distribute the Body of Christ to
another, nor perform any liturgy ; but let
him bewail himself to the Lord, and to men,
that his sin of ignorance may be pardoned.

Canon XXVIII.

That it is ridiculous to vow not to eat
swine's flesh, and to abstain from it is not
necessary.

Canon XXIX.

That princes ought not to swear to -wi'ong
their subjects : that such rash oaths ought to
be repented of, and evil not to be justified
under pretence of religion.

Canon XXX.

That they who steal women, and their ac-
complices, be not admitted to prayers, or be
co-standers for three years. Where no vio-
lence is used, there no crime is committed,
excejit there be lewdness in the case. A widow
is at her own discretion. We must not mind
vain pretences.

Canon XXXI.

She, whose husliand is absent from home,
if she co-habits with another man, before she
is persuaded of his death, commits adultery.

Canon XXXII.

The clergyman M'ho is deposed for mortal
sin, shall not be excommunicated.

Canon XXXIII.

That a woman being delivered of a child in
a journey, and taking no care of it, shall be
reputed guilty of murder.

Canon XXXIV.

That the crime of women under penance
for adultery, upon their own confession, or


THE CANONS OF BASIL


607


otherwise convicted, be not published, lest it
occasion their death ; but that they i-emain
out of communion the appointed time.

Canon XXXV.
If a woman leave her husband, and if it do
upon inquiry appear, that she did it without
reason, she deserves to be punished ; but let
him continue in communion.

C.^NON XXXVI.
A soldier's wife marrying after the long ab-
sence of her husband, but before she is certi-
fied of his death, is more pardonable than an-
other woman, because it is more credible that
he may be dead.

Canon XXXVII.
That he, who having another man's wife or
spouse taken away from him, marries another,
is guiltv of adulterv with the first, not with
the second.

Canon XXXVIII.

If a woman run after him that has corrupt-
ed her, she shall be under penance three
years, though the parents be reconciled to
her.

Canon XXXIX.

She, who continues to live with an adulter-
er, is all that time an adulteress.

Canon XL.
She that [being a slave] gives herself up to
the will of a man, without the consent of her
master, commits fornication ; for pacts of
those who are under the power of others are
null.

Canon XLI.

A widow being at her own discretion, may
marry to whom she will.

Canon XLII.

Slaves marrying without the consent of
their masters, or children without consent of
their fathers, it is not matrimony but forni-
cation, till they ratify it by consenting.

Canon XLIII.

That he who gives a mortal wound to an-
other is a murderer, whether he were the first
aggressor, or did it in his own defence.

Canon XLIV.
The deaconess that has committed lewd-
nes-5 with a pagan is not to be i-eceived to
communion, but shall be admitted to the ob-
lation, in the seventh year — that is, if she live


in chastity. The pagan, who after [he has
pi'ofessed] the faith, betakes himself again to
saci'ilege, returns [like the dog] to his vomit :
we therefore do not permit the sacred body
of a deaconess to be carnally used.

Canon XLV.

He that assumes the name of a Christian,
but reproaches Christ, shall have no advan-
tage from his name.

Canon XLVI.

She that marries a man who was deserted
for a while by his wife, but is afterward dis-
missed upon the return of the man's former
wife, commits fornication, but ignorantly :
she shall not be prohibited marriage, but it is
better that she do not marry.

Canon XLVII.

Encratites, Saccophorians, and Apotactites,
are in the same case with the Novatians. We
re-baptize them all. There is a diversity in
the canons relating to the Novatians, no canon
concerning the other. If it be forbid with you,
as it is at Rome for prudential causes, yet let
reason prevail. They are a branch of tlie Mar-
cionists ; and though they baptize in the name
of the three divine Persons, yet they make God
the author of evil, and assert, that wine and
the creatures of God, are defiled. The bishops
ought to meet, and so to explain the canon,
that he who does [baptize such heretics] may
be out of danger, and that one may have a
positive answer to give to those that ask it.

Canon XLVIII.

A woman dismissed from her hvisband,
ought to remain unmarried, in my judgment.

Canon XLIX.
If a slave be forced by her master, she is
innocent.

Canon L.

We look on third marriages as disgraceful
to the Chui'ch, but do not absolutely condemn
them, as being better than a vague fornication.


THE THIRD EPISTLE OF THE SAME
TO THE SAME.

(Found in lib. cit., p. 255, et seqq. Ej^istle
ccxvij.)

Canon LI.

That one punishment be inflicted on lapsing
clergymen, viz. : deposition, whether they be


608


APPENDIX


in dignity, or in the ministry which is given
without imposition of liands.

Canon LII.
A woman delivered in the road, and neg-
lecting her child, is guilty of murder, unless
she was under necessity by reason of the soli-
tude of the place, and the want of necessaries.

Canon LIII.

A widow slave desiring to he married a sec-
ond time, has, j^erhaps, been guilty of no great
crime in pretending that she was ravished ;
not her pretence, but voluntary choice is to
be condemned ; but it is clear, that the jDun-
ishment of digamy is due to her.

Canon LIV.

That it is in the liishop's power to increase
or lessen penance for involuntary murder.

Canon LV.

They that are not ecclesiastics setting upon
highwaymen, are repelled from the commun-
ion of the Good Thing ; clergymen are de-
posed.

Canon LVI.

He that wilfully commits murder, and after-
wards repents, shall for twenty years remain
without communicating of the Holy Sacra-
ment. Four years he must mourn without
the door of the oratory, and beg of the com-
municants that go in, that prayer be offered
for him ; then for five years he shall be ad-
mitted among the hearers, for seven years
among the prostrators ; for four years he shall
be a co-stander with the communicants, but
shall not partake of the oblation ; when these
years are completed, he sliall partake of the
Holy Sacrament.

Canon LYII.

Tlie involuntary murderer for two years
shall be a mourner, for three years a hearer,
four years a prostrator, one year a co-stauder,
and then communicate.

Canon LVIII.

The adulterer shall be four years a mourner,
five a hearer, four a prostrator, two a co-
stander.

Canon LIX.

The fornicator shall be a mourner two years,
two a hearer, two a prostrator, one a co-
stander.


Canon LX.
Professed virgins and monks, if they fall
from their jDrofession, shall undergo the pen-
ance of adulterers.

Canon LXI.
The thief, if he discover himself, shall do
one year's penance ; if he be discovered [by
others] two ; half the time he shall be a pros-
trator, the other half a co-stander.

Canon LXIL

He that abuses himself with mankind, shall
do the penance of an adulterer.

Canon LXIII.
And so shall he who abuses himself with
beasts, if they voluntarily confess it.

Canon LXIV.
The perjured person shall be a mourner two
years, a hearer three, a prostrator four, a co-
stander one.

Canon LXV.

He that confesses conjuration, or pharmacy,
sliall do jDenance as long as a murderer.

Canon LXVI.

He that digs the dead out of their graves,
shall be a mourner two years, a hearer three
3^ears, a prostrator four years, a co-stander
one year.

Canon LXVII.

Incest with a sister is punished as murder.

Canon LXVIII.
All incestuous conjunction, as adultery.

Canon LXIX.
A reader or minister lying with a woman he
has only espoused, shall cease from his func-
tion one year ; but if he have not espoused her,
he shall [wholly] cease from his ministry.

Canon LXX.

The priest or deacon that is polluted in
lips, shall be made to cease from his function,
but shall communicate with the priests or
deacons. He that does more shall be de-
posed.

Canon LXXI.

He that is convicted to have been conscious
to any of these crimes, but not discovered it,
shall be treated as the principal.


THE CANONS OF BASIL


609


Canon LXXII.

He that gives himself to divination, shall
be treated as a murderer.

Canon LXXIII.
He that denied Christ, is to be communi-
cated at the hour of death, if he confess it,
and be a mourner till that time.

Canon LXXIV.

[The bishop] that has the power of binding
and loosing, may lessen the time of penance,
to an earnest penitent.

Canon LXXV.

He that commits incest with a half-sister,
shall be a mourner three years, a hearer three
years, a co-stander two yeai's.

Canon LXXVI.

And so shall he be who takes in marriage
his sou's wife.

Canon LXXVII.

He that divorces his wife, and marries an-
other, is an adulterer ; and according to the
canons of the Fathers, he shall be a mourner
one year, a hearer two years, a prostrator
three years, a co-stander one year, if they re-
pent with tears.

Canon LXXVIII.

So shall he who successively marries two
sisters.

Canon LXXIX.

So shall he who madly loves his mother-in-
law, or sister.

Canon LXXX.

The Fathers say nothing of polygamy as
being beastl^^ and a thing unagreeable to
human nature. To us it appears a greater
sin than fornication : Let therefore such [as
are guilty of it] be liable to the canons, viz. :
after the}' have been mourners one year — let
them be prostrators three years — and then be
received.

Canon LXXXI.

They who in the invasion of the barbarians
have after long torments, eaten of magical
things offered to idols, and have sworn
heathen oaths, let them not be received for
three years ; for two years let them be hear-
ers, for three years prostrators, so let them
be received ; but they who did it without
force, let them be ejected three years, be
hearers two years, prostrators three years, co-
standers three years, so let them be admitted
to communion.


Canon LXXXII.

They who by force have been driven to per-
jury, let them be admitted after six years;
but if without force, let them be mourners
two years, hearers two years, the fifth year
prostrators, two years co-standers.

Canon LXXXIII.
They that follow heathenish customs, or
bring men into their houses for the contriv-
ing pharmacies, or repelling them, shall be
one year mourners, one year hearers, three
years prostrators, one year co-standers.

Canon LXXXIV.

"We do not judge altogether by the length
of time, but by the circumstances of the
penance. If any will not be drawn from
their carnal jileasures, and choose to serve
them rather than the Lord, we have no com-
munication with them.

Canon LXXXV.
Let us take care that we do not perish
with them ; let us warn them by night
and day, that we may deliver them out of the
snare or however save ourselves from their
condemnation,

FROM AN EPISTLE OF THE SAME
TO THE BLESSED AMPHILOCHIUS
ON THE DIFFERENCE OF MEATS.

[Found translated in lib. cit., p. 287, part of
Epistle ccxxxvj.)

Canon LXXXVI.

Against the Encratites, who would not eat
flesh.

OF THE SAME TO DIODORUS BISHOP
OF TARSUS, CONCERNING A MAN
WHO HAD TAKEN T\YO SISTERS
TO AN IFE.

[Found trandated in lib. cit., p. 212 et seqq.
Epistle clx.)

Canon LXXXVIL

Contains the preface of his letter to Dio-
dorus Bishop of Tarsus, in which he tells him
of a letter shewed him in justification of a
man's marrying two sisters bearing his name ;
but he hopes it was forged.

Canon LXXXVIIL

Contains the rest of the letter, in which he
argues and inveighs against this practice.


010


APPENDIX


OF THE SAME TO GREGORY A PRES-
BYTER, THAT HE SHOULD SEPA-
RATE FROM A WOMAN WHO DWELT
WITH HIM.

Canon LXXXIX.

A letter to Gregory, an unmarried priest,
charging him to dismiss a woman whom he
kept, tliough he was 70 j-ears of age, and
declared himself free from all amorous affec-
tions ; and St. Basil would seem to believe


OF THE SAME TO HIS SUFFRAGANS
THAT THEY SHOULD NOT ORDAIN
FOR MONEY.

{Found translated in lib. c\i.,pp. 156 and 157.
Epistle liii.)

Canon XCI.

One letter to the bishop subject to him,
wherein he prohibits to take money for orders,
and to bring merchandize into the church,
which is entrusted with the Body, and Blood
of Christ ; they had their pay after the ordi-
him in this particular ; but cites the III. nation was performed ; this he calls an arti-
canon of Nice against this practice, bids him fice, and declares, that he who is guilty of it
avoid scandal, place the woman in a monas- shall depart from the altar in his country,
tery, and be attended by men : he threatens and go buy and sell the gift of God where he
him that if he does not comply, he shall die can.
suspended fi"om his office, and give account

to God : that he shall l^e an anathema to all ' FROM CHAPTER XVIL OF THE BOOK
the people, and they who receive him [to com- , grp_ BASIL WROTE TO BLESSED


muuion] be excommunicated.


OF THE SAME TO THE CHOREPIS-
COPI, THAT NO ORDINATIONS
SHOULD BE MADE CONTRARY TO
THE CANONS.

{Found translated in Vol. VIII. Nicene and
Post-Nicene Fathers, i^. 157. Epistle liv.)

Canon XC.

A letter to his Village-bishop : ' he com-
plains of the want of discipline of the multi-
ph'ing of the clergy, and that without due
examination and enquiry into their morals ;
that they had drop2:)ed the old custom, which
was for the priests and deacons to recommend
to the Village Bishop, who taking the testimo-
nial, and giving notice of it to the [City]
Bishop, did afterwards admit the minister
into the sacerdotal list ; that the number of
the inferior clergy wasixnreasonably increased,
especially in time of war, when men got into
orders to avoid the press : he orders a list of
the clergy in every village to be sent to him,
and who admitted him, if any have been ad-
mitted into the inferior orders by priests,
that they be looked on as laymen. Let not
who will, put his name into the list. Re-ex-
amine those who are there, expel the unworthy,
admit none without my consent for the
future ; if you do he shall be counted a lay-
man.


Johnson by mistake has the singular instead of the plural.


AMPHILOCHIUS
GHOST.


ON THE HOLY


{Found translated in lib. cit., p. 40 et seqq.)

Canon XCII.
He speaks of the written doctrine, and the
unAvritten tradition of the Apostles, and says,
that both have the same efficacy as to relig-
ion. The unwritten traditions which he men-
tions, are the signing those who hope in
Christ with the Cross ; praying toward the
East, to denote, that we are in quest of Eden,
that garden in the East from whence our first
parents were ejected (as he afterwards ex-
plains it), the words of invocation at the con-
secration of the Bread of Eucharist, and the
cup of eulogy ; the beiiediction of the baptis-
mal water, the chrism and of the baptized
person ; the trine immersion, and the renun-
ciations made at bajitism ; all which the
Fathers concealed from those w^ho were not
initiated. He says the dogmata were always
kept secret, the Kerugmata published ; he
adds the tradition of standing at prayer on
the first day of the week, and the whole Pen-
tecost (that is, from Easter to Whitsunday),
not only to denote our rising with Christ, but
as a prefiguration of our expecting an eternal
perfect day, for the enjoyment of which we
erect ourselves ; and lastly, the profession of
our faith in Father, Son and Holy Ghost at
baptism.

Canon XCIII.

He asserts the Doxology [in these words]
"with the Holy Spirit," to be an unwritten,
Apostolic tradition. For this is a dogma full
of authority, venerable for its antiquity.


THE CANOXS OF GREGORY NYSSEN


611


FROM THE LETTER OF BASIL THE
GREAT TO THE NICOPOLITANS.

There is also in Tilius and Bishop Beve-
ridge here ^ inserted an epistle of St. Basil
the Great to the Nicopolitans, comforting
them under the loss of their church or ora-


tory, and telling them, that they ought not to
be concerned that they worship God in the
open air, for that the eleven Apostles wor-
shipped God in an upper room, where they
were cooped up, while they that crucified

[ Jesus performed their worship in a most

I famous Temple.


VI.


THE CANONICAL EPISTLE OF ST. GREGORY, BISHOP OF NYSSA, TO ST.

LETOIUS, BISHOP OF MELITENE.2


Canon I.

At Easter not only they who are transformed
by the grace of the laver, i.e. baptism, but
they who are penitents and converts, are to
be brought to God, i.e. to the Communion :
for Easter is that Catholic feast in which
there is a resurrection from the fall of sin.

Canon IL

They who lapse without any force, so as to
deny Christ, or do by choice turn Jews,
idolaters, or Manichees, or infidels of any
sort, not to be admitted to communion till
the hour of death ; and if they chance to
recover beyond expectation, to return to their
penance. But they who were forced by tor-
ments, to do the penance of fornication.

Canon III.

If they who run to conjurers or diviners,
do it through unbelief, they shall be treated
as they who wilfully lapse, but if through
want of sense, and through a vain ho^De of
being relieved under their necessities, they
shall be treated as those who lapse through
the violence of torment.

Canon IV.

That fornicators be three years wholly
ejected from prayer, three years hearers,
three years prostrators, and then admitted to
communion ; but the time of hearing and
prostrating may be lessened to them who of
their own accord confess, and are earnest
penitents. That this time be doubled in case
of adultery, and unlawful lusts, but discretion
to be used.


Canon V.
Vokmtary murderers shall be nine years
ejected out of the church, nine years hearers,
nine years prostrators ; but every one of
these nine years may be reduced to seven or
six, or even five, if the penitents be very
diligent. Involuntary murderers to be treated
as fornicators, but still with discretion, and
allowing the communion on a death-bed, but
on condition, that they return to penance if
they survive.

Canon VI.

That the Fathers have been too gentle
toward the idolatry of covetous jDersons, in
condemning to penance only robbery, digging
of graves, and sacrilege, whereas usury and
oppression, though under colour of contract,
are forbidden by Scripture. That highway-
men returning to the Church, be treated as
murderers. They that pilfer, and then confess
their sin to the priest, are only obliged to
amendment, and to be liberal to the poor ;
and if they have nothing, to labour and give
their earnings.

Canon VII.

They who dig into graves, and rake into
the ashes and bones of the dead, in order to
find some valuable thing buried together with
the corpse, (not they who only take some
stones belonging to a sepulchre, in order to
use them in building) to do the penance of
fornicators.

Canon VIIL

He observes that by the law of Moses,
sacrilege was punished as murder, and that
the guilty person was stoned to death, and
thinks the Fathers too gentle, in imposing
a shorter penance on sacrilege than adultery.


1 I.e., at the end, after the Epistle of Gennadius.

2 These Canons, in Beveridge's iSyiwdicon, are annotated only by Balsamon.


612


APPENDIX


VII.

FEOM THE METRE POEMS OF ST. GREGORY THEOLOGUS, SPECIFYING
WHICH BOOKS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT SHOULD BE READ.^


Let not other books seduce your mind : for
many malignant writings have been dissemi-
nated. The historical books are twelve in
number by the Hebrew count, [then follow
the names of the books of the Old Testament
but Esther is omitted, one Esdras, and all the
Deutero-Canonical books]. Thus there are
twenty - two books of the Old Testament
which correspond to the Hebrew letters. The


number of the books of the New Mystery are
Matthew, who wrote the Miracles of Christ for
the Hebrews ; Mark for Italy ; Luke, for
Greece ; John, the enterer of heaven,^ was
a preacher to all, then the Acts, the xiv.
Epistles of Paul, the vij. Catholic Epistles,
and so you have all the books. If there is
any beside these, do not rej)ute it genuine.


VIII

FROM THE IAMBICS OF ST. AMPHILOCHIUS THE BISHOP TO SELEUCUS,

ON THE SAME SUBJECT. ^


We should know that not every book which
is called Scripture is to be received as a safe
guide. For some are tolerably sound and
othei's are more than doubtful. Therefore
the books which the inspiration of God hath
given I will enumerate. [Then follows a list
of the proto-canonical books of the Old Tes-
tament, Esther alone being omitted. All the
deutero-canonical books are omitted. He
then continues] to these some add Esther. I
must now show what are the books of the
New Testament. [Then follow all the books
of the New Testament except the Revelation.


He continues,] But some add to these the
Revelation of John, but by far the majority
say that it is spurious. This is the most
true canon of the divinely given Scri^Dtures.


NOTE.


We have thus four [five if we accej^t the
Laodicean list as geuume,] different canons
of Holy Scrijiture, all having the approval of
the Council in Trullo and of the Seventh
Ecumenical. From this there seems but one
conclusion possible, viz. : that the ajiproval
given was not specific but general.


IX.

THE CANONICAL ANSWERS OF TIMOTHY, THE MOST HOLY BISHOP OF
ALEXANDRIA, WHO WAS ONE OF THE CL FATHERS GATHERED TO-
GETHER AT CONSTANTINOPLE, TO THE QUESTIONS PROPOSED TO HIM
CONCERNING BISHOPS AND CLERICS.^


Question I.

If a lad of seven years old, or a man, being
a catechumen, being present at the oblation,
does eat of it through ignorance, what shall
be done in this case ?

Ansiver. Let him be illuminated, i.e. bap-
tizetl, for he is called by God.

Question II.

If baptism be desired for a catechumen that

is possessed, what shall be done ?

Ansiver. Let him be baptized at the hour
of death, not otherwise.


Question III.

Ought a communicant to communicate, if
he be possessed ?

Ansiver. If he do not expose or blaspheme
the Mysteries, let him communicate not al-
ways, but at certain times.

Question IV.

If a catechumen be sick, and in a frenzy,
so that he cannot make profession of his faith,
can he be baptized, at the entreaty of his
friends ?

Answer. He may, if he be not possessed.


' Not being satisfied with Johnson. I have supplied a transla-
tion from Beveridge. It also is found in Aristeiius's Epitome.
Balsamon has written a brief scholion adding nothing of impor-
tance to the text.

■^This seems to imply a knowledge of the Revelation, although
it l8 not mentioned


' That is the Canon of Holy Scripture. I have substituted my
own Epitome, in the room of Johnson's, translating the origin^
as it is found in Beveridge's Si/nodicon, Tom. II . p. 179. It is
also in Aristeuus's Epitome, Balsamon has no scholion on this
passage.

•• Beveridge's Synodicon gives notes by Balsamon only.


THE ANSWERS OF TIMOTHY


613


Question V.

Can a man or woman communicate after
performing the conjugal act over night?
Answer. No. 1 Cor. vii. 5.

Question VI.

The day appointed for the baptism of a
woman ; on that day it happened that the cus-
tom of women was upon her ; ought she then
to be baptized ?

Answer. No, not till she be clean.

Question VII.

Can a menstruous woman communicate ?
Ansiver. Not until she be clean.

Question VIII.

Ought a woman in child-bed to keej) the
Paschal fast ?

Ansiver. No. ,

Question IX.

Ought a clergyman to perform the oblation,
or pray, while an Arian or heretic is present?

Ansiver. As to the divine oblation, the dea-
con, after the kiss, makes a proclamation,
" Let all that are not Communicants walk
off ; " therefore such persons ought not to be
present, except they promise to repent, and
renounce their heresy.

Question X.

Is a sick man obliged to keep the Paschal
fast?

Answer. No.

Question XI.

If a clergyman be called to celebrate a mar-
riage, and have heard that it is incestuous ;
ought he to comply, and perform the obla-
tion?

Answer. No ; he must not be partaker of
other men's sins.


Question XII.

If a layman ask a clergyman whether he
may communicate after a nocturnal pollution?

Answer. If it proceed from the desire of a
woman, he ought not : but if it be a tempta-
tion from Satan, he ought ; for the tempter
will j)ly him when he is to communicate.

Question XIII.

When are man and wife to forbear the con-
jugal act ?

Answer. On Saturday, and the Lord's day ;
for on those days the spiritual sacrifice is
offered.

Question XIV.

Shall there be an oblation for him, who be-
ing distracted, murders himself ?

Answer. Not except the case be very clear
that he was distracted.

Question XV.

If one's wife be possessed to such a degree,
as that she be bound with irons, and the man
cannot contain, may he marry another?

Answer. I can only say it would be adultery
so to do.

Question XVI.

If a man in washing or bathing, swallow a
drop of water, may he communicate after it ?

Answer. If Satan find an occasion of hin-
dering us from the communion, he will the
oftener do it.

Question XVII.

Are they, who hear the Word, and do it
not, damned?

Ansiver. If we neither do it, or repent that
we have not done it.

Question XVIIL

At what age are sins imputed to us by God ?

Answer. According to every one's capacity
and understanding ; to one at ten, to another
when older.


THE PROSPHONESUS OF THEOPHILUS, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA,
W^HEN THE HOLY EPIPHANIES HAPPENED TO FALL ON A SUNDAY.^

Canon I. and shew our dislike of heresy, and yet not

Because the fast of Epiphany chances to fall wholly neglect the fast which should be ob-
on a Lord's day, let us take a few dates, and served on this day ; eating no more till our
so break our fast, and honour the Lord's day, i evening assembly at three afternoon.


I Johnson gives the date as about a.d. 385. These are annotated only by Balsamon.


614


APPENDIX


THE COMMONITORY OF THE SAME
WHICH AMMON EECEIVED ON AC-
COUNT OF LYCUS.

Canon II.

Let [the priests] who have communicated
with the Ariaus, be retained or rejected, as the
custom of every church is ; but so, that other
orthodox [priests] be ordained, though the
others continue. As the orthodox bishops
did in Thebais, so let it be in other cities.
They who were ordained by Bishop Apollo,
and afterwards communicated with the Arians,
if they did it of their own accord, let them be
censured ; but if they only did it in obedience
to the bishop, let them be continued ; but if
all the peojDle abdicate them, others must be
ordained. And if Bistus the priest be found
to have committed uncleauness with a woman
dismissed from her husband, let him not be
permitted to be a priest. But this is no preju-
dice to the bishop who ordained him, if he
did it ignorantly ; since the Holy Synod com-
mands unworthy men to be ejected, though
they be not convicted until after ordination.

Canon III.

Let Bishop Apollo's sentence against his
priest Sur prevail, though he has the liberty
of being further heard.

Canon IV.

If Panuph the deacon married his brother's
daughter before baptism, let him continue
among the clergy, if she be dead, and he had
not to do with her after his baptism ; but if
he married her, and cohabited with her while
he was a communicant, let him be ejected
from the clergy, without prejudice to the
bishop who ordained him, if he did it igno-
rantl}'.

Canon V.

If it do evidently appear, that Jacob, while
he was reader, did commit fornication, and
was ejected by the priests (Trpea-fSvripwi'), and
yet afterwards ordained, let him be ejected,
and not otherwise.

Canon VI.
That all in holy orders unanimously choose
those who ai*e to be ordained, and then the
bishop examine [them] ; or that the ])ishop
ordain them in the midst of the church, all
that are in holy orders consenting, and the
bishop with a loud voice asking the people,
who are then to be present, whether they can
give their testimony [to the parties to be or-
dained] ; and that ordination be not per-


formed in j^rivate ; if there be in the remote
country, who while they were communicants
[with the Arians] communicated in their opin-
ions, let them not be ordained until they be
examined by orthodox clergymen, in the pres-
ence of the bishop, who is to charge the peo-
ple, that there be no running i;p and down in
the middle of the church, or service.

Canon VII.

Let the clergymen distribute all that is of-
fered by way of sacrifice, after so much as was
necessar}^ has been consumed in the M^-steries.
Let not the catechumens taste of them, but
clergymen and communicants only.^

Canon VIII.
One, Hierax, had delated a clergyman as
guilty of fornication. Bishop Apollo defended
him. Theophilus orders the matter to be ex-
amined.

Canon IX.

That an CEconomus be created, by the con-
sent of all that are in Holy Orders, with the
concurrence of Bishop Apollo, that so the
I goods of the Church be expended as they
ought.

Canon X.

That the widows, jDOor, and travellers be
not distui'bed ; and that no one make a prop-
erty of the goods of the Church.


OF THE SAME TO AGATHO THE
BISHOP.

Whereas Maximus has for ten years lived
in unlawful marriage, but pretends that it was
through ignorance, and that they are now
parted hj mutual consent, let them stand
among the catechumens, if it appear that
they be in earnest.


OF THE SAME TO MENAS THE
BISHOP.

Theophilus was informed, that the priest in
Geminus, a village, had repelled Kyradium (a
woman) from the communion : Theophilus
apj)roves of it, because she had done wrong,
and was unwilling to make satisfaction ; but
orders her to be admitted to communion
upon repentance.

' Johnson gives this note. "To eat the main of what was left,
was not at a'.l inconsistent with reserving so much as was neces-
sary for foreseen and unforeseen emergencies."


CYRIL ALEXANDRIA AND GENNADIUS


G15


THE NARRATIVE OF THE SAME CON-
CERNING THOSE CALLED CATHARL

Because the great synod held at Nice has
decreed, That [the clergymen] who come over


to the Church from the Novatians be or-
dained ; do you ordain those that come over,
if their life be upright, and there be no objec-


tion.


XL

THE CANONICAL EPISTLE OF OUR HOLY FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS,
CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, ON THE HYIMNS.i


CYRIL TO DOMNUS.

This letter contains a complaint of one,
Peter, deposed from his See, yet retaining
the character of a bishojD, who thought his
cause good, but complains that he had not
time and opportunity given him for his de-
fence ; and that whatever he had, was taken
away from him. He desires Domnus, who
was a Metropolitan, that he would call a
synod, and let him have a hearing ; and that
such bishops as Peter suspected of prejudice
against him should not be permitted to be
his judges. He thinks it very hard, that not
only what belonged to the Church, but ever}'
thing else was taken from him ; and com-
plains that all bishops were called to account
for every thing they received, whether from
the Church, or by any other means. Peter
had indeed signed an instrument of resigna-
tion ; but Cyril says, that he was terrified into
it ; and that he would have no such resigna-
tion be of force excej^t he that made it de-
served dej)Osition.


OF THE SAME TO THE BISHOPS OF
LIBYA AND PENTAPOLIS.

There is another Epistle of the same father,
complaining to the bishoj^s of Libya and Pen-
tapolis. That some who had been refused
ordination by their own bishop, or cast out of
the monasteries for their irregularity, were
ordained by a surprise upon some other
bishop, and that just as they came from their
bride-bed, and then went and performed the
oblation, or any other office, in the monaster-
ies from which they had been ejected, which
gave great offence. He charges the bishops
to take care of this for the future and, if any
were to be ordained, to enquire into their
lives, and whether they are married, and
when, and how ; and orders, that catechu-
mens, who had been separated for lapsing, be
baptized at the hour of death.


XIL2

THE ENCYCLICAL LETTER OF GENNADIUS, PATRIARCH OF CONSTANTI-
NOPLE AND OF THE HOLY SYNOD MET WITH HIM TO ALL THE HOLY
METROPOLITANS AND TO THE POPE OF THE CITY OF ROME J


To the most beloved of God, fellow-minis-
ter, Gennadius and the most holy synod as-
sembled in the royal city which is New Rome,
sendeth greeting.

As our Lord without money and without
price ordained his Apostles, so should we or-


dain the clergy, for the Lord has placed us in
their grade and in their stead (as t6v excn'wv
/3a^r]6v T€ Koi tottov). Nor should we use any
ingenious sophisms to avoid this plain duty,

' explicitly laid upon us, not only by the words
of the Gospel but also by a canon of the great

, Ecumenical Synod of Chalcedon.


■ Johnson pives the date of this as about the year 412 a.d.. | ^ in this I have not followed Johnson, but translated from

'- The Greeks speak of the canons of The Thirteen Holy ' Beveridge, Synod., Tom. U., p. 181.

Fathers, counting in the number St. Cyprian's canon, but as this

was really Synodal I have placed it in that category.


FINIS.


f


INDEXES


As this volume is composed (1) of tbe " Decrees and Canons " of the Councils, along with
extracts from the proceedings of some of the principal ones, and (2) of Scholia that are given to
explain and illustrate those other main parts in the collection, an attempt is made to combine in the
same set of indexes the references to tiiese two parts, and at the same time to easily distinguish
them to the eye by the character of the types that are used. This is thougiit to be simpler and
more generally useful than either to have separate indexes for the text and Scholia^ or to index
all the references without distinction. The references that belong to the Decrees, Canons, and
Extracts, are placed in heavy face type, while those that belong to the Scholia are in the usual
lighter face type of the volume. Where the same figures in different type are found together, it
means that a reference is made to some fact in the text on that page, and also to some comment
in the Scholia upon the same page.


INDEX OF AUTHORS


Abraham Echellensis, 43.

Addis and Arnold, 27 n.

Ado, Bishop of Vienne, 526.

Adrian I., liisliop of Rome, 45.

African Code, 3'J2, 401,402, 437 seq

Agatho, Tope, 264.

Aguirre, Cardinal, 373 a.

Alcuin, 276.

Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria,
5'J2.

Alexander Natalis, 119.

Allies, T. W., 179.

Ambrose, St., 37, 72, 333, 334.

Amerbachian manuscript, 125.

Ammon, correspondent of Theo-
philus of Alexandria, 614.

Amort, 80 n.

Aiialectn Grcfca, 263.

Anastasius, Pope, 526.

Anderson, Joseph, 284.

Anianus, Saint, 283.

Annale.^ de FldlosojyJiie Chretienne,
2 n.

Annnles Fra7ikorum, 526.

Apostolical Canons, 8, 33, 52, 69,
100, 101, 108, 109, 110, 111,
113, 115, 117, 118, 119, 120,
121, 146, 150, 151, 272, 279,
363, 364, 365, 369, 370, 378,
391, 392, 445, 448, 453, 454,
456, 468, 516, 570.

Apostolical Constitutions, 31, 41, 51,
52, 137, 144, 146, 177.

Aristenus, 23, 40, 67, 71, 79, 84,
111, 115, 117, 127, 131, 1.33,
147, 151, 274, 288, 377, 382,
386, 417, 421, 430, 563, 612.

Asseman, 43, 356 n. , 516.

Athanasins, Bishop of Alexandria,
3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 33, 37, 40, 43,
55, 72, 175, 176, 208, 209, 269,
272, 333, 335, 434.

Atlienagoras, 6.

Aubespine, Gabriel de 1', 29, 32,
126, 154,

Augiisti, 21.

Augustine of Hippo, 32, 37, 42, 131,
136, 153, 155, 272, 277, 286,
334, 380, 398, 422.

Augustinus, Antonius, 372.

Ballerini, editors, 90, 94, 105, 171,
266, 289, 293, 304, 317, 414,
421, 456, 464.

Balsamon, 8, 12, 17, 20, 23, 24, 30,
45, 75, 85, 94, 100, 108, 117,
125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130,
131, 133, 141, 147, 149, 151,
171, 177, 179, 181, 231, 232,
235, 271, 272, 277, 278, 370,
371, 374, 375, 382, 386, 393,
394, 396, 399, 402, 408, 417,
421, 430, 439, 512, 513, 559,
562, 563 566, 570, 590.

Barn:il)as's Episfle. 209.

Baronius, xii., 43, 52, 124 n., 127,
162 n,, 166, 245, 263. 351, 373,
516, 575, 579, 584, 587.


Basil's Canons, 403, 404.

Basil of Cffisarea, 7, 9, 29, 37, 38,

74, 21, 80, 81, 173, 175, 176,

184, 270, 286.
Basuage, Jacques, 314.
Battifol, M. Pierre, 134.
Biiumer, 135.

Baur, historical critic, 264.
Bede, Ven., 271, 285.
Bellarmine, R. F. R., Jesuit, xii,

52, 245, 579, 584, 586.
Bernard, St., 284.
Beveridge, Bishop of St. Asaph, xi,

8, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 42, 59, 63,

70, 79, 101, 125, 171, 181, 231,

235, 269, 278, 385, 393, 408,

438, 441, 473, 513, 556, 591,

592, 593, 612.
Biblioieca deW Accademia storica

giuridica, 136 n.
Bickell, Geschichte des Kirchen-

rechis, 592.
Bingham, Rev. Joseph, 9, 21, 25,

28, 71. 137, 269, 286.
Binius, Patristic Edhor, 89, 127,

373 n , 517, 579. 582
Binterim, Archa?ologist, 21, 132.
Blastares, Matthew, 124.
Blondel, David, 89, 434.
Blunt, J. J., 112.
Bona, Cardinal, 141, 155, 378, 380,

392, 561.
Bonaventura, Franciscan Scholar,

36.
Book of Eastern Law, 34.
Bossuet, 36, 192 seq., 244 seq., 352,
Bower, Archibald, 434.
Bright, Dr. William, 9, 12, 28, 173,

181, 184, 218, 254, 271, 272,

276, 279, 281, 282, 284, 287,

293, 295
Browne, Bishop Harold, 365.
Bruce, Dr. A. B , 174 n., 212.
Brun, Pierre Le, 136.
Bruus, Ilerm. Theod,, 45.
Bryce, Professor James, 277.
Bull, Bishop George. 4, 5.
Bulletin de Correspondance Helle-

nique, 147.
Burchard, John, 31.
Butler, Daniel, 8.
Butler, Bishop Joseph, 29.

Capitularia Reguni Francorum,
166 n.

Caranza, 25.

Cardwell, Dr. Edward, 375.

Cassioihirus, historian, 37.

Catholic Dictionary, 301.

Cave, Dr. William. 21,90.

Ceilliers, Remi, 89, 105, 110, 127,
158, 434.

Charles the Great, 276 ; his Capitu-
lar, 385.

Chronidr of St. Bertiniis, 526.

Chrvsostom, 30, 37, 136, 137, 272,
273, 27.5, 285, 286, 379, 393.

Church Quarterly Revieiu, 135.


Clemens Alex., 6, 9, 72.

Clemens Rom., 9, 13, 96, 209.

Code of the Universal CMtrch, 2ZI.

Codex Africanus, 269, 272, 280.

Codex Canonum, 60, 231.

Codex Theodofiianus, 146, 268, 269,
272, 273, 277.

Codex of Luna, 171.

Conrade a Lichtenau, 526.

Cornelius* of Rome, 9.

Corpus Juris Canonici, 9, 11, 12,
13, 21 n., 24, 29, 33, 35, 36, 39,
42, 63, 64, 67, 72, 80, 83, 84,
85, 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99,
100, 101, 110, 111, 114, 117,
118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 126,
131, 140, 144, 147, 148, 149,
152, 157, 158, 179, 269, 270,
271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 279,
280, 282, 283, 284, 286, 2s7,
364, 370, 372, 374, 378, 3>s2,
404, 415, 416, 421, 422, 425,
494, 557, 558, 560, 563, 564,,
565, oi'iG, 569.

Cotelerius, Patristic Editor, 72.

Council of Trent, 375.

Cresconius, canonist, 116.

Curzon, Hubert, 141.

Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, 25^
30, 380.

Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, 197,
212, 214, 216, 217, 233, 335.

Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, 32, 37»
208, 272, 408.

D'Aguirre, Cardinal, 43.

Dale, 145.

Daille (Dalla^us), 592.

Damian, Peter, 167.

Denziger, 201.

Diciionnaire tinirersel et complet des

Conciles taut generaux que par-

ticuliers, xx.
Didache, 13, 14.
Didacus, Archbishop of Compo-

stella, 568.
Dionysius Exiguus, 13, 20, 25, 126,

127, 158, 171, 179, 184,214,271,

278, 279, 417, 441.
Dionysius the Areopagite, 335.
DoUinger, Ignaz von, 176, 316.
Dorner, Isaac August, 264.
Dressel, Patristic Editor. 5.
Ducange, Charles du Fresne, 10,

21, 22, 146, 148, 394,
Duchesne, Andrew, 137, 143 n., 145,

289, 575.
Dupin. Louis Ellies, 16, 420.
Durandus of Pourgain, 141.

Egbert of York, 38.

Eginhard of Seligenstadt, 24,

Epiphanius, 7, 37, 41, 72, 146, 168,
175, 176, 366, 367.

Euchnlogiov. 154

Eusebius's Ecclesiastic History. 6, 8,
9, 10, 17, 18, 29, 86, 141, 144,
148, 175, 176, 184. 208, 272.


620


INDEX OF AUTHORS


Evagrius, Scbolasticus, 2(!3, 316,

Fahrifius, Johannes Albert, 43.
Ferrandus, Canonist, 127.
Ferraris, Kev. E S. , 372.
Ffoulkes, Bibiiotheca Prompta, 15,

40, ,si», ;tO, 15!), 218.
Field, Dean. .524.
Fleidner. Pastor, 41 n.
Fleiirv. Claude. 20 n., 106, 177,

268, 269, 281, 286, 288, 356,

86.S, 372. 379, 556. 586.
Flodoard of fipernav, 421.
Forbes, Bishop .V. P., 4.
Fortunatus, Life of St. Mat-tin^ oSZ.
Foster, General Preface to the

Worlis of Ale wilt, 578.
Freeman, Norman Conquest, 271.
Fucbs, Bihliotheca, 11, 17, 110, 129,

159, 171. 4:',0, 440, 458.
Fuliri'ntius Ferrandus, 69
Fulton, Dr. John 150, 365.
Funk, Franz Xavier, 37 n.

Gallandus, Auscust. 204, 237, 264.

Gamier. ,Tean,""314, 316, 321

Gaudentius. Bishop at Sardica, 418.

Gazette Arclieolnglqiw, 143.

Gehisius, Pope, 13, 40, 44, 51, 53.

Genebrardus, 584.

Giblion, Edward, 207 n.

Gieseler, Johann Carl Ludwig, 264.

Giraldus Cambrensis, 284.

Goar, Etidiologion. 268.

Godefridus llerniantius, 119, 124.

Goldast, jNIelcliior. 578.

Gothofred, 147, 273.

Gratian, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 21, 24,
30. 33, 35, 36, 39, 40, 42, 63,
64, 67, 79, 80, 83, 84, 85, 86,
92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 101, 110,
111, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118,
119, 120, 121, 126, 131, 140,
144, 147, 148, 152, 157, 158,
179, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273,
274, 275, 278, 279, 280, 282,

283, 284. 286, 287, 358. 362
364, 370. 372, 374, 378, 382,
404, 421, 422, 425, 494, 557,
558, 560, 566, 568, 569.

Greek Pontificals. 177.

Green, Dr. T. L , 80 n.

Gregory I., 38, 146, 186, 269, 276,

284, 378, 436.

Greaorv of Nazianzum, 13, 37, 206,

'334.
Gregory of Nyssa, 37, 38, 272, 335.
Gregory, Tliauni., 25, 335.
Gregory of Tours, 38, 176.
Gro.sart, Kev. Dr., 591 n.
Guerard, M. L., 575.
Guettee, II. W., 2 n.
Gury, Jean Pierre, 37.

Haddan, A. W.. 21.

Iladdan & Stubbs, 38.

Ilahn, Johann Michael, 264.

Halloix. 314.

Hammond, W. A., 10. 16. 21. 25.

65. 137. 138, 150, 271. 278, 279.
Hardouin, Jean, 38. 44, 45, 200,

219 n., 264, 304, 321.


Ilarmenopulus, 74.
Ilarnack, Adolf, 13, 14, 144, 162 n.,
317, 55.5, 575.

Hatch, Dr. Edwin. 184.

Hefele, Carl Joseph von, xii, 5, 8,
9, 11, 12, 16, 17, 21, 23, 28, 40,
42, 43, 44, 51, 64, 65, 68, 80,
82, 89, 93, 100, 106, 110, 114,
124, 130, 132, 141. 147, 150,155,
159, 163, 166, 172, 177, 178,
196, 208, 211, 213, 214, 217,
219, 232, 242, 263, 266 n., 267,
269, 272, 279, 290, 293, 295,
304, 305, 316, 317, 353, 356,
373 n., 402, 405, 417, 419, 421,
434, 438, 516, 539, 557, 561,
562, 563, 578, 579, 583, 586.

Herbst, 158, 1(;0, 171, 421.

Hergenrother, Cardinal, 272.

Hermaim Contractus, 6, 526.

Hernu'noi>uhis. 23, 241, 242, 421.

Hermes, Pastor. 92.

Hervetus, 269, 278, 417.

Herzog, Joliann Jakob, 112

Hilary of Poitiers, 37, 105, 175, 835,
434.

Ilincmar, Arcldiishop of Rheims,
45, .526, 579.

Hippolvtus, 6, 9, 145.

Hodgkin, 282, 283. 575.

Ilolstenius, Lucas, 182.

Hort, Dr E. I. A., 162 n.

Hosius, Bishop of Cordova. 272.

Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, 200.
Ignatius of Antioch, 4, 5, 6, 13,

39 n., 96, 208.
Irenffius, Bishop of Lvons. 6, 9, 209.
Isidore Mercator, 121, 126, 127,

157, 158, 164, 171, 184, 269,

271, 278, 416, 417
Isidore of Pelusium, 286.
Isidore of Seville, 279, 286, 436.
Ivo of Chartres, 31.

Jahn, Johann, 6.

Jerome (Ilieronymus), 32, 33, 37.
72. 275, 366, 367, 413.

Joannes Damascenus. 4, 7, 209.

John, Archbishop of Constantino-
pie, 335.

John of Antioch, 101, 184.

Johnson, Kev. John, 11, 68, 136,
271, 276, 278, 403, 450, 459,
462, 463, 467, 472, 480, 481,
4,S2, 493, 516, 600, 601, 615.

Josephus .l']gypt., 1S4.

Journal Asiatique, 2 n.

Journal of Hellenic Studies, 147.

Joyce, J.'W., 284.

Julius of Kome, 9.

Justellus, Christopher. 11. 16, 40,
45, 63, 79, 125, 231, 235, 269,
278, 425.

Justin Martyr, 6, 8, 13, 30, 92, 136,
146, 380.

Justinian I.. Koman Emperor. 131,
178, 268, 274, 279, 290, 382,
387, 422, 566, 567, 569.

Kel)le, Kev. John, 285.

Kellner, 114.

Kiiigdon, 156.

Kilchin, 277, 283.


Kobcr, 272.
Krebbs, 62.

Labbe, Pliilippe, 3 n., 17 n , 19, 121,
163 n., 164, 512, 525, 579, 586.

Labbe & Cossart, vii . 45, 63, 107,
166, 197, 218, 220 seq., 231,
234, 235, 236, 237, 247, 251,
259, 260, 265, 266, 267, 302,
305, 321, 340, 349, 359, 441,
512, 513, 529 539, 583, 584,
586.

Lambeck, Peter, 316.

Lambert of Hersfeld, 8, 24, 28, 150.

L'Anii du Clerge, 367.

Launoy, 15, 526.

Laurents, 96.

Lee, F. G., 285.

Legg. J. Wickham, 396.

Leo Allatius, 155, 167, 389.

Leo the Great, 19, 22, 37, 277, 286,
288, 289, 293, 334, 335, 404,
421.

Le Quien, 166, 169, 234, 278.

Leunclavius, xxxiii.

LibeUus Synodicus, 62.

Liber Pontijicidis, 145.

Liberatus, 208, 285, 321.

Liddell & Scott, 31 n., 70, 210, 219,
386. 505.

Liddon, Dr. Henry Parry, 156.

Lightfoot, Bishop of Durham, 4,
41 n . 90, 96, 144, 207 n.

Lipsius, Dr., 163.

Littledale, Dr. K. F.,80n.

Lombard, Peter, 27.

Loofs, 317.

Louis le Debonnaire. 576.

Lupus, Servatus, 52, 557, 559.

Mabillon, Jean. 166.
Macaulay, Lord, 207 n.
Macrostirh (Semiarian), 5.
Mansi, 12. 37, 38, 45, 73, 105, 173,

181. 200, 263, 266, 268, 269,

270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 276,

277, 278, 281, 2S6, 304, 340,

413, 464, 579, 586.
Marca, Peter de, 18, 124, 321, 415,

417, 439, 592.
Marcian, Koman Emperor, 277.
Marius Mercator, 206, 217, 229.
Marquardt, Freher. 145.
Marriott, W. B., 37, 141.
Martignv, 147.

Martin liracarensis, 110, 120, 121.
Mason. Kev A. J.. 28, 216.
Mattliew of Paris, 526
Matthieu de Larroque, 591.
Maximus the Abbot, 241.
Melito, Bishop of Sardes, 208.
Mendham, 529 n. , 538 n.
Methodius, Cvrillus, 6.
Meyrick. Rev. F., 524 n.
Michael the Stammerer, 576.
Michaud, Joseph 578.
Migne, Pat. hat. , 220, 227, 266, 340,

349, 370 n., 441, 536. 578, 582,

586.
Migne, Pat. GrcBC.,ZS, 197, 206, 209,

251. 321.
Milinun, Dean, 180, 219.
Miiuicius, Felix, 72.


INDEX OF AUTHORS


621


MoUer, German writer, 317.
Munaldiui of Venice, 379.
Montfiiucon, Bernard de, 43, 45,

17G.
Morinus, Henricus, 21, 25, 39, 42,

147, 272.
Muratori, Ludovico Antonio, 31, 38,

IGG.

Natalis, Alex., 4, 52, 435.

Neale, J. M., 10, 136 n., 165, 176,

180, 281, 390, 523, 524, 561,

576 n.
Neander, Joachim, 130, 132, 133,

158.
Nestorius, 206, 210, 211, 212, 213,

214, 215, 216, 217.
Newman, J. H. , 5, 173, 175, 176,

269, 286, 288.
Noris, Cardinal, 316, 317.

Origen, 6, 208.
Orsi, Cardinal, 162.

Pagi, Antoine. 89, 90, 105, 124.
Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis,

21. 268, 272, 273, 286.
Palmer, Sir William, 524, 578, 579.
Parapliilus the ^lartyr, 4.
Paschal, Pope, 568.
Pearson, Bishop of Chester, 4, 169,

208, 209.
Percivai, H. R., 136, 170.
Pereira, Antonio, 363.
Pertz, Monumenta Germanica^ 276,

277.
Petavius, Dionvsius, 200, 206, 212,

213, 214, 230, 578, 582, 583.
Phillips, 52.
Philostorgius, 28.

Photius, Patriarch of Constantino-
ple, 45, lUl, 169, 186, 232,

241.
Pierre le Brun. 31 n.
Plumptre, Dean, 32, 97.
Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, 9.
Foiitijicale Romanum, 154.
Porson, Richard. 6.
Prisca [See Ver.sio Prisca].
Probst, German writer, 136, 145.
Prosper of Aquitaine, 31 n.
Pseudo-Isidore. 40, 112.
Pugin, Augustus. 141.
Pulcheria, Empress. 277.
Puiler, F. AV., 113. 162 n., 518.
Pusev, Dr. E. B , 162 n., 168, 169,

232, 233, 317, 417.

Quesnel, Pasquier, 285.

Rabjinus Maurus, 21.
Raymund, 415, 416.
Raine, Rev. Canon, 281.
Reeves, Bishop of Down, 286.
Regino, Abbot of Prum, 31, 526.
Renaudot, Eusebe, 43.
Revillout, E^ugcne, 2.
Revue de qvesiions historiques, 2 n.
Richer, Edmond, 414, 417.


Robertson, Canon J. C. , 218.

Rock, 141.

Roger Iloverden, 526, 579.

Roisselet de Sauelieres, 586.

Rossi, J. B. de. 147.

Routh, Dr. Martin Joseph. 6, 21, 24,

28, 70, 79, 205 n., 208, 225,

271, 276, 280.
Roziere, Eugene de, 352.
Rufiuus. of Aquileia, 15, 44, 52.
Ruinart, Thierry, 28.
Rupertus, Be divinis qfficiis, 406.
Rusticus, 264.

Sacramentary^ Gallican, 166.
Sacramentary, Gelasian, 166.
Sahiiasius (Saumaisei, 15.
Sahuou, Dr. George, 162 n.
Schaff, Dr. Philip, 553 u.
Schoell, Historia Literarum Gra-

carum, xxx.
Schroclvh, Johann Matthias, 105.
Scipio Maffei, 37.
Scudamore, Rev. "\V. E., 31.
SerUentiw Seier>\ 263.
Severus, Monophysite, Patriarch of

Antioch, 263.
Severus, Sulpicius, 435.
Sidonius Apollinaris, 38, 270.
Sirmond, 579.

Sismondi, Charles Sismondi de, 586.
Skene, William Forbes, 284.
Smith & Cheetham, Diet. Chr. Ant.,

8, 21. 32, 34, 41, 72, 89, 97,

159, 218.
Smitli & Wace, Did. Chr. Eiog.,

3 n., 4, 89 n.,90, 163, 218.
Socrates, Ecd. Hist.!, 8, 18, 20, 28,

32, 33, 51. 52, 53, 89, 97, ^00,

105, 114, 164, 175, 177, 185,

208, 270, 272, 273, 363, 413,

435.
Sophocles, 6.
Sozomen, Ecd. Hist., 8, 20. 33, 51,

89, 105, 114, 164, 185, 270, 273,

413.
Spelman. Sir H , 284.
Spittler, Saiiiiiif Ziehen Werken, 159,

414, 417.
Stanley, Dean. 270.
Stillingtieet, Bishop Edward, 15.
Suarez, Francis, 586.
Suicer, John Gaspar, 67, 71, 269.
Suidas, lexicographer, 6.
Surius, Patri.-^tic Editor, 579.
Swainson, The Nicene and Apostles'

Creeds, 162.
Swete, H. B., 4, 165, 173.

Tacitus. 36.

Tatian. Christian Apologist, 6, 209.

Tertullian. 28, 30, 41. 42, 144, 146,
273.

Thearistus, African Translator, 40.

Theilo, African Translator, 40,

Theodore, Archbishop of Canter-
bury, 38.

Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia,
208, 211,


Theodoret, Bishop of Cvrus, 8, 37,

53, 173, 175, 182, 215, 241, 273,

432.
Theodosian Code, 143.
Theodosius, Roman Emperor, 19.
Theopliilus of Antioch, 6.
Theophylact, Commentator, 169.
Thomas Aquinas, 36.
Thomas of Walsingham, 568.
Thomassen, 12, 21, 22. 23. 27 n.,

34, 42, 52, 84, 86, 366,
Tilius, John, Bishop of S. Brieuc,

231, 473.
Tillemont, 20 n. , 89, 105, 110, 162 n.,

163, 169, 171, 173, 177, 226,

240, 264, 276, 277, 281, 288,

417.
Trench, Archbishop, 576.
Tubingen Review, 158.
Turrianus, Archteologist, 43, 45, 46.

UUman, Karl. 180.
Ussher, Archbishop. 5, 59.

Valesius, French Editor, 52, 177.

Van Espen, 11, 12, 20, 36, 66, 67,
69, 71, 74, 79, 80. 82, 85, 100,
108, 111, 119, 126, 129, 131,
132, 133, 140, 147, 149, 150,
151, 154, 158, 171, 181. 184,
269, 274, 275, 363, 369J 370,
372, 373, 377, 379, 386, 387,
394, 395, 417, 420, 421, 430,
432, 439, 457, 556, 557, 559,
561, 563, 566, 567, 568.

Vasquez, Gabriel, xii. 4 n , 586.

Veccur, Patriarch of Constantino-
ple, 167.

Venables. Rev. Edmund, 18, 179.

Veron. Rides of the Catholic Faith,
xii.

Vcrsio pri.'ica. or Pvifm, 13, 17, 20,
40. 45, 115, 152, 171, 271. 276,
278, 280, 416. 425.

Victor Vitensis, 273, 279, 283.

Virffilius, Pope. 2 n., 186.

Vincenzi, Prof., 301, 314, 317.

Voss, Patristic Editor, 5.

Walch, Prof. C. W. F.. 105, 264,

314, 316. 414. 583, 586.
Waterland, Dr. Daniel, 6.
Wesseley, Archaeologist, 62.
Westcott, Bishop of Durham, 9, 159.
Wetzer and Welte, 80 n.
Willierforce, Rev. R. I., 175.
Wilkins, Concilia, 270.
Willmann, Gustavus, 459,

Zacharias, pope, 84.

Zahn, Theodore, 5, 146.

Zonaras, John, 10, 11 , 17, 20, 23,'24,
28, 30, 35, 45, 64, 80, 82, 99,
100, 108, 115, 125, 127, 128,
129, 133, 140, 149, 156, 171,
178, 181, 184, 231, 235, 272,
274, 278, 363, 371, 373, 375,
386, 392, 393, 394, 399. 400,
417, 421, 423, 432, 457, 516,
559, 566, 568, 590.


INDEX OF NAMES


Abraham Ecliellensis, 43, 45, 49.
Al)rain, Bp. of IJatui'S, liJ2.
Abundaiitius, Roman legate, 329;

consul, 458.
Acacius, Bp. of Bcrea, 1()2, oG3.
Acajsius, Novalian Bp. at Constan-
tinople, 20.
Acepliali. 200.

Adamantius. friend of Origen, 320.
Adelpinis. Messalian writer, 240,

241. '
Adeodatus of Simidica, bishop, 504.
Adrian I. (Hadrian), Pope, 45, 184,

357, 521, .525, 533, 536, 538,

576, 578, 571).
^lian at Gangra, 91.
^schines, 128.
^therens, liis signature at Antio-

chean ssnod, 124.
Aetius, Bp. of Thessalonica, at Sar-

dican Council, 430, 431.
Aetius, deacon of Constantinople,

249, 253, 267, 292, 293 ;

opened the third session at

Chalcedon, 259.
Agapetus I., Pope, 401.
Agapius, claimant of the see of

Bostra, 513, 514.
Agatho I., Pope of Kome, 325 seq.
Agothon, 0.
Alcuin, 578.

Alexander of Hales, 526.
Alexander, Bp of Alexandria, 53,

54, 208.
Alexander, Bp. of Antioch, 363.
Alexander, Bp. of Apamea, 225,

237.
Alexander, Bp. of Hierapolis, 225,

237.
Alexander III., Pope of Rome, 72.
Alexander, solitary, presbyter, 308.
Alexis Angelus. xi.
Alexis Aristenus, xxxiii.
Alexis Comnenns, xxxii, 27.
Alexius Aristenus, 184.
Alexius Comnenu.'<, 27S.
AUetz, French Canonist, xx.
Alypius, Bp. of the Tagastine

Church, 424, 441, 442, 480,

486, 503, 504.
Ambivius, African bishop, 480.
Amlirose, Milan, 10, 56, 159, 180,

248, 303.
Ambrosius, bishop, 188.
Ampelius, African bisliop, 480.
Amphiiochius, Bp. of Iconium, 162,

240, 351, 605.
Aiiastasiu.s, Bp. of Antioch, 179.
Aiuistasius, Bj). of Con.stantinople,

244, 253, .547, 560.
Anastasius, Bp. of Jerusalem. 356.
Anastasius, Bp. of Nicaea, 278.
Anastasius, Bp. of Rome, 470, 471,

475.
Anastasius, librarian at Nice II.,

536, 581.
Anastasius, Presbyter of Nestorius,

208.


Anastasius, the Elder, 335.
Anatolius, Bp. of Constantinople,

244, 253.
Anatolius, Bp. of Constantinople,

187, 247, 262, 266, 282, 289,

290.
Anatolius, his signature to Antio-

chean Synod, 121.
Anemius, liishoj) in Svnod in Rome,

188.
Anglebert, 583.
Anthemius, consul, 490.
Antliimus, 34 n.
Anthimus, Bp. of Tyana, 277.
Antiochus, Bp. of Samosata, 162.
Antoninus, Bp. of Ephesus, was

convicted of simony, 268.
Antony, African bishop, 509.
Apergius of Perga, 343.
Apiarius of Sicca, 44.
ApoUinaris, Patr. of Alexandria,

2'.t9, 302.
Apollo, bishop, 614.
Apringius, Bp. of Chalcedon, 225.
Aptus, African bishop, 480.
Arabianus, Bp. of Ancyra, 513.
Arcadius, Emperor, 458, 483, 513,

514
Arcadius, legate at Ephesus, and

Bp., 154, 219, 220, 221, 223,

224, 239.
Arcbidamus, papal legate at Sar-

dica, 415.
Aristenus, Alexis, xi, xxxiii, 17, 23,

276.
Aristenus, 226.
Arius, 549.
Ascholius, bishop in svnod in Rome,

188.
Ascholius, Bp. of Thessalonica,

180, 181.
Ascidas, bishop, 304 [see Theo-
dore, Asc. ].
Asclepas, Bp. of Gaza, deposed,

414.
Asellus, preslivter, legate at Car-
thage, 44*1, 443^ 506, 506,

507.
Asiaticus, African bishop and dele-
gate, 503.
Asseman, 43.
Athanasius, 5, 18, 33, 40, 43, 55,

92, 105. 114, 164, 173, 175, 248,
253, 303, 361, 540, 545; can-
on supposed to be against, 110.

Atticus, consul, 458, 470.

Atticus of Constantinople, 44, 112,

508, 510.
Attila, the Ilun. 283.
Aul)esi)ine, 85, 276
Augustanus, Elias Ehingerus, 235.
August!, 21.
Ausrustine of Hippo, 25, 28, 37, 92,

93, 120, 303, 309, 321, 322,
4.".8, 443, 447, 480, 503, 504;
his a]ipointment to his see,
120.

Anrelian, Bp. of Aries, 303.


Aurelius, Bp. ot Carthage, 439.
441, 442, 446, 458, 465, 470,
471, 483, 484, 485, 486, 506,
509.

Aurelius, Bp. of Irenopolis, 225.

Aurelius, African bishop, 459.

Aurelius. Bp. of Rome, 440.

Aurelius, Emperor. 516.

Bacchus, 28.

Bagadius, claimant of the see of

Bostra, 513, 514.
Ballerini, 436.
Balsamon, xxxii, xxxiii, 17, 20,

23, 24, 34, 39, 40, 45, 68, 73,

81, 85, 86, 93, 94, 114, 131,

1.52, 171, 184, 276, 283, 357,

368, 432, 514.
Baronius, 52, 89, 93, 128, 351,

436.
Barsumas, Syrian, 270.
Basil, Bp. of Amasea, 78. •
Basil, Bp. of Ancyra, 234.
Basil, Bp. of Cfesarea, 25, 71, 127,

131, 132, 303, 361, 380, 545,

567, 583.
Basil. Bp of Gortyna, in Crete,

;).56. 3.57.
Basil at Gangra, 91.
Basil I., Emperor, xxxi.
Basilides, Spanish bishop, Q'i.
Basilides, bishop, friend of Diony-

sius of Alexandria, 600.
Basilius, bishop in Synod in Rome,

188.
Basilius Tricaccabus of Pisidia,

533.
Bassianus, 59, 273 ; deprived of his

see at Ephesus, 266, 271.
Bassus and Antiochus, consuls,

221.
Bassus at Gangra, 91.
Bassus, consul, 495.
Batifol, 159.
Belisarius, consul, 304.
Bellarmine, 35, .52, 351, 436, 526.
Benedict VIII., Pope, 167.
Benedict XIV., Pope, 37.
Benevolus, 28.
Benignus, bishop, 304.
Beronician, clerk of the consistoty,

253, 260.
Berti, 436.
Beveridge. xvii seq., xxxiii, 17, 18,

20, 2l'. 43, 69, 70, 81.
Bickell, 367, 592, 593.
Bingham, .Joseph, 32, 71, 132, 154.
Binius, Prof. Severin, Canonist, ^

xix, 93. t

Binterini, 21. ''

Birbeck, W. J., ix.
Bistus, priest, 614.
Bithynicus at Gangra, 91.
Blastares, Matthew, xxxiii, 124.
l^olotolT, Prof., ix.
Bona, Cardiual, 32, 135.
Bona Ventura, Monk and Scholar,

36..


INDEX OF XAMES


'J23


Boniface, Pope, 44, 45, 442, 454,

506, 508, 510.
Boniface VIII., Pope, xxxv.
Boniface, presbvter and legate

from Rome," 261, 290, 293,

509.
Bosphorus, Bp. of Colonia, 162.
Bridget of Sweden, St., 5G8.
Britton, bishoi), 188.
Browne, Bp. Harold, 365.
Bruns, Herm. Tbeod. , xxi, 45,497,

508.
Bunsen, German scholar, 593.
Bury, rxix, 523.

Cabasilas, 34.

Cabassutius, John, xx.

Cfficilian, Bp. of Carthage, 443,
444.

Cassarius, Consul, 458, 470.

Caldonius, African bishop. 518.

Calvin. Jolm, 37.

Candidian, represented the Em-
perors at the Council of Eph-
esus, 196, 226, 227, 228.

Candidus of Abbirita, bishop, 504.

Capreolus, Bp. of Carthage, 218.

Caranza, Barth. , xxi.

CaroHue, Queen, 285.

Carosus, 59, 111.

Cave. XX, 21.

Cecilian, hishop, 44.

Cecropius, Bp. of Sebastopol, 261,
277, 349.

Ceillier, Remi, xx, 105, 124, 436.

Celestine, African bishop, 509.

Celestinel., Pope, 45, 218, 219,
220, 509.

Celestius, 225 seq., 229, 230.

Centuriators of Magdeliurg, 592.

Cethegus, consul, 304.

Ceticius, African bi.shop, 509.

Charisius, presbvter of Philadel-
phia, 231, 231. 232.

Charlenuigne, 45, 50, 166, 576, 577,
578 seq., 585.

Charles VI., Emperor, 277.

Charles IX , of France, 36.

Chrysostom, John, Bp. of Constanti-
nople, 30. 33, 52, 114, 132. 281,
303, 379, 545.

Chumnus, Abp. of Thessalonica,
xxxiii.

Clarus, African bishop and delegate,
503.

Claudius of Turin, 585.

Clement of Alexandria, 5, 9, 159.

Clement of Rome, 9, 96.

Clement V., Pope, xxxv.

Clement VIII., Pope, 35, 372 n.

Coluralian. 56.

Constans III., Emperor, 264.

Con,<tans. Emperor, 272. 413.'

Constantine, Bp. of Con.stantia in
Cyprus, 539, 581.

Constantine, Bp. of Leontina. 530.

Constantine. Bp. in Pontus, 267.

Constantine, B]) of Rdiuc, 357.

Constantine, consul, 304, 305.

Constantine I., Emperor, xxix, 8,
2S. 105, 536.

Constantine IV. (Pogonatus), 328,
340, 343, 540.


Constantine V., Copronvmus. 547,

564, 571.
Constantine VI., Emperor, 521,

529, 530, xxxii.
Constantine IX., Emperor, xx.xi.
Constantme, secretary at Constanti-
nople, 293, 304."
Constantius, Bp of Cyprus, 579.
Constantius, Emperor, 8, 105, 144,

272.
Cornelius, centurion, 28.
Cornelius of Rome, 9, 20, 36, 144.
Cosmas, deacon, notary and cham

berlain {cubudesms)^ 538.
Crabbe, Peter, Belgian Canonist,

xix.
Crescentian, African bishop, 458.
Cresconius, Bp. of Villa Regis, 464,

480, 503.
Cureton, 415, 433.
Cyprian. Bp. of Carthage, 14, 29,

63. 92, 144. 146, 361, 516, 517,

604.
Cyriacus, bishop, envoy to Rome,

189.
Cyriacus. Bp. of Caesarea in Cap-

padocia, 356.
Cyril, Alex., 2 n.. 19. 44, 56,

192 seq., 299. 303, 361. 510.
Cyril, Bp. of Cuele, 242, 242.
Cyril of Jerusalem, 92, 128, 162,

173. 189.
Cyril of Scythopolis, 18.
Cvril, bishop at the Conciliabulum,

225.
Cyrus, one of Ibas's priests, 281.
Cyrus, Bp. of Alexandria, 327,

336, 343, 353, 582, 615

Dadoes, INIessalian writer, 240.

Dallajus, 159.

Damasus I . 22, 33. 161, 169, 173,
180, 182, 184, 186.

Damasus II., Pope, 21.

Damian. bisbop, 302.

Daniel the prophet, 84.

Daniel, bishop at the Conciliabulum,
225.

Daniel the Stylite, 162 n.

Daniel, notarv at Carthage council,
441, 443.

Datiau, African liishop, 484.

David the King, 84.

Decius, Emperor, 516.

Delarc, M. I'abbe, xxi.

De Marca, 18.

Demetrius Chomateniis, 34.

Denziger, xxi.

DeRossi, 134.

Desideratus, Bp. of Verdun, 38.

Dexianus, bishop at the Conciliabu-
lum, 225.

Dianius, same as Dins, 90.

Didyuuis the l)lind, 316.

Diocletian, 62 n., 104, 592.

Diodorus, Bp. of Tarsus, 162,
609.

Diogenes, bishop at the Conciliabu-
lum. 225.

Diogenes, a lapsed, 62.

Dionvsius of Alexandria, 128, 175,
361, 600.

Dionvsius, Bp. of Diosjiolis, 162.


Dionysius Exiguus, 9, 13, 20, 45, 79,
85, 99, 101, 113, 117, 1.52, 154,
158, 159, 276. 401, 438, 475,
591.

Dioscorus, Bp. of Alexandria, 247,
248, 259, 260, 261, 276, 285,
344.

Dioscorus, papal legate, 19.

Dius, called President at Gangra,
90.

Domuinus, Patr. of Autioch, 299.

Domninus, Bp. of Tbeopolis, 302.

Domnus, Metropolitan, 415.

Domuus. Patr. of Antioch, 281.

Donatiau, the Primate, Senex, 503.

Donatus, African bishop and dele-
gate, 503, 509.

Donus (Domuus), Bp. of Rome,
329.

Dorotheus, presbvter of Antiocb, 8,
59, 111.

Drev, Dr. Von, xx.xiv n., 591, 592,
'593.

Ducange, 21.

Dulcicius, bishop and African leg-
ate, 4S7.

Dulcitius, notary from Pope Leo,
258.

Du Pin, XX, 89, 436, 450.

Eanbald, Archbishop, 276.

Ebrard, 174.

Ecciesius, Bp. of Ravenna, 143.

Eck, 37 n.

Edgar, King, 70, 270.

Egbert, Abp. of York, 38.

Ehingeris. Elias, 235.

Elfric. 270.

Elias, Bp. of Jerusalem, 162 n.

Elias Ehmger, 45.

Epictetus, the Blessed, 253.

Epigonius, African Bishop. 467,

468, 470.
Epiphanius, reader and bishop at

Pavia, 279.
Epiphanius, Bp. of Salamis, 52,101,

128, 163, 164, 168, 240, 345.
Epipbaniite, the deacon, 583.
Equitius, African bishop, has been

condemued, and is to be ex-

puHed, 474, 475, 4£9.
Estius, William, 97.
Eucliologion, 389.
Eudoxia, Empress, 285.
Eudoxius, Eusebian delegate, 414.
Eugenius at Gangra, 91.
Eugenius, deacon of Marcellus, and

messenger, 176.
Eulalius at Gangra, 91.
Eulogius, priest of Ibas, 281.
Eulogius, Bp. of Alexandria, 179,

335.
Eulogius, Bp. of Edessa, 162.
Eunomius, Bp. of Xicomedia, 278.
Euphemia, martyr, 261, 262, 263,

265.
Eupbrajmius of Tbeopolis, 335.
Euphrates of Cologne, 413.
Euprepius. Bp. of Biza (Bizya),

242, 242.
Eusebius, of Caesarea, 3, 28, 34,

52, 89, 90, 132, 545.
Eusebius of Cappndocia. 89, 90.


G24


IXDEX OF NAMES


Eusebius, bishop, envoy to Rome,

18i).
Eusebius of Constautinoyile, 89.
Eusebius, Bp. of Doryheuni, 179,

187, 259, 2S8.
Eusebius at Ganj^ra, 91.
Eusebius of Nieoiiieciia, 32.
Eusebius, signed at Autiocb, 121.
Eustacliius, liis signature to tlie

Antioclieun Synod, 121.
Eustatiiius, Bp, of Bervtus, 277,

290. 291, 310, 5(;(;.
Eustathius, Bp. in Painphylia, 236.
Eustatbius, Bp. of Autiocb, 82, 58,

414.
Eustatbius, Bp. of Parnassus, 225.
Eustatbius, Bp. of Sebaste, 89, 97.
Eustatbius, condemned at Gangra,

89, 91.
Eustocliius, Patr. of Jerusalem,

299, 302.
Eutactus, monk, 89.
Eutliymius, abbot in Palestine, 263.
Euthyrius, Bp. of Tyana, 225.
Eutycbius, Patr. of Constantinople,

299, 302, 321.
Eutycliius, consul, 470.
Evagrius, bisbop in Cyprus, 234.
Evagrius, deacon, SK!, 344, 360.
Evangeius, African bisbop, 480.
p:varestus, 28, 293.
Evodius iEuodius>, African bishop,

480, 488, 495.
Ezechiel, the prophet, 84.

Fabian, Bp. of Rome, 145.
Faliius, Bp of .\utiocb, 9.
Eabricius, Joliauues Albert, xx, 45.
Faustinus, Bp of Poteutia, 441,

442, 443, 445, 503, 506, 506,

507.
Felicianus, African bisliop, 486.
Felix III., Pope, 187. xiii.
Fermilian, one of the ancients, 604.
Ferrandus, 475.
Ffoulkes, Edmund Salusbury, 43

n., 89, 95.
Firmilian of Cffisarea, 128.
Flal)ius Stilico, consul, 470.
Flavian, Bp. of Antioch, 189, 233,

512.
Flavian, Bp. of Constantinople,

247, 248, 253, 254,281,288,

303, 310, 345.
Flavian, Bp of Pbilippi, 218, 220.
Flavian, Montanist, bisbop, 186.
Flavins Euclierius, consul, 172.
Flavins Evagrius, consul, 172.
Fleury, Claude, xxi, 20, 73, 81, 436.
Florentius, African bisbop and

legate, 495.
Florentius, Bp. of Sardis, 249.
Florus, inclined to heresy, 239.
Fortunatian, African bishop and

legate, 495, 503, 509.
Fortunatian, P>p. of Naples, 503.
Fortunatus, African bishop, 480,

491, 5C9.
Francis de Sales, 98
Fritilas, Bp. of Heraclea, 225, 242.
Fronton le Due, 575.
Fulgentius of Ruspe, 401.
Fulgentius Ferrandus, 69.


Fuchs, George Daniel, xxi, 100,

130.
Fullo, Peter, 400.
Fulton, Rev. Dr. John, viii, xxi,

365.
Funk, 367, 593.

Gabriel, an angel, 150.

Gabriel of Pentapolis, 389.

Gabriel d'Anbespine, Bp. of Or-
leans. 592.

Gaiseric, the Vandal, 282.

Galerius, the Emperor, 62 n.

Galloniiin of Utica, bishop, 504.

Gamurrini, transcript of Pcregri-
natio Salciie, 136.

Garnier, 207.

Gaudentius, Bp. at Sardica, 420,
431.

Gelasius, Bp. of Caesarea in Pales-
tine, 162.

Gelasius of Cyzicus, 29, 40, 44, 51,
.52.

Geneljrardus, 584.

Genetblius, Bp. of Cnrthage, 446.

Gennadius, Bp. of Constantinople,
361, 615.

George, Patr. of Antioch, 356.

George, Bp. of Constantinople, 326,
328, 342, 343.

George of Laodicea, 9.

George, bishop, 302.

George, Papal Legate, 38.

George, presbyter and legate from
Jerusalem, 326, 329, 350.

Gess, 174.

Geta. African bishop, 486.

Gii)bon, Edw., 523, 575.

filubokoffski, Prof., ix.

Goar, EiicJio/ogion, 285.

Goschlerand, M. I'abbe, xxi.

Gothfried (Gotliofredus), Jacob, 16.

Grabe, John E. , 603 n.

Gratiau ( Emp. of the West), 10, 21,
79, 161 n., 181, 333.

G rat ray, Pere, 351.

Grains", Bp. of Carthage, 421, 422,
430.

Gregory at Gangra. 91.

Gregorv the (Jrcat, xv, 38, 179, 186,
"187, 268, 271, 431, 525.

Gregorv of Naz., 14, 34, 131, 162,
177, 180, 206, 273, 277, 286,565.

Gregorv of Nvss., 25, 37, 162, 248,
303, 361," 512, 583.

Gregory Thanm., xxxiii, 25, 303,
"361, 579, 602.

Gregory Theologus, 361.

Gregory II., Pope, 575. '

Gregory III., Pope, 93.

Gregory IX., Poi)e, xxxv.

Gregory XIII., Pope, xxxv.

Gregory or Gregorian, Roman ju-
rist, xxix.

Gueranger, Dom Prosper, Iit»titu-
tions Liturgiquen, 135, 159.

Iladdon, A. W., 21, 34.
Hadrian, the Emperor, xxix.
Hadrian, Pope. [See Adrian.]
Ilaunnond, W". A., xxi, 21, 94,

276.
Hardouin, xx, 44, 263.


Harmenopulus, Constantine, xxxiii,

23, 74.
Harnack, 14 n., 593.
Hefele, xxi, 17, 21, 40, 64, 73, 75,

81,85, 105, 106, 200, 281.
Helen, mother of the Emperor Con-
stantine, 536.
Helladius, Bp. of Caesarea Capp.,

162.
Helladius, Bp. of Ptolemais, 225.
Helladius, Bp. of Tarsus, 225.
Henry II. of Germany, 167.
Henry III. of France, 36.
Henrv V. of England, 568.
Henry VIII. of England, 367-368.
Heraclius (Augustus), 328, 340.
Herbst, 65.
Hermant, xx.

Hermes, Messalian ■writer, 240.
Hermogenes, Roman jurist, xxix.
Hervetus, 73, 276, 283.
Hesychius, his signature to the An-

tiocbean synod, 121.
Hesychius. Bp. of Castabala in Cili-

cia, 225, 592.
Hicrax, clergyman, 614.
Hilarus, deacon and legate of Leo,

258.
Hilary of Aries, 282.
Hilary of Horrea-Cascilia, bishop,

504.
Hilary of Poitiers, 105, 303.
Hilary Roman Archdeacon, 56, 248.
Himerius, Bp. of Niconiedia, 225.
Hincmar, Abp. of Rheims, 45.
Hippolytus, 9.

Honoratus, African bishop, 4E0.
Honoratus, African bishop, 459,

464, 465, 456, 480.
Honorius, Alex., deacon, 273.
Honorius, Bp. of Rome. 327, 328,

342, 343.
Honorius, Emperor, 458, 470, 483,

488, 495, 496, 503, 509, 513.
Hoogstriiten, 37 n.
Hormisdas, Pope, 401, 592.
Hosius, Bp. of Cordova, xiii, 51,

89, 90, 415.
Hoskins. Rev. Leighton. ix.
Hunneric, Vandal King, 273.
Hydrnntinns, Nicolas, xi.
Hypatius at Gangra. 91.

Ibas, Bp. of Edessa, 268, 286, 299.
Ignatius, Bp. of Antioch, 39, 96.
Innocent I., Pope, 16, 24, 43, 159,

363, 493.
Innocent II., Pope, 367.
Innocent III., Pope, 179.
Innocent, Presbyter of Alexandria,

508, 510.
Irenanis, a digamist, was ordained

Bishop of Tyre, 363.
Irenoens, Bp. of Lyons, 4, 132.
Iren<eus, Count, friend of Nesto-

rius, 226.
Irene, Empress, 521, 529, 530,

.548, 571, 577.
Ischyrion. 276.
Isidore Mercator. xxxiv. 39, 80,

85. 98, 101, 111, 113, 118, 154,

276
Isidore of Pelusium, 268.


INDEX OF NAMES


625


Isidore of Seville, xxxiv.
Isidorus, Bp. of Cyrus, 1G2.

James of Nisibis, 43.

James, the Lord's brother and
bishop of Jerusalem, 380.

Januarius, a bishop at Sardican
council, 429, 42'J.

Januarius, African bishop, 480,
5C9, 518.

Janus and the Council, 351.

Jeremiah the prophet, 84.

Jerome, St., 52, 'J2, 173, 580.

Jesus Christ, 84.

Jocundus, African bishop and dele-
gate. 503, 504.

Jocundus of Sufetula, 504.

John Baptist, 84.

John, Bp. of Antioch, 101, 159,
192. 200, 225, 238, 242, 250,
291, 582.

John, Bp. of Constantinople
(Chrysostom), 303.

John, Bp. of Damascus, 225, 546.

John, Bp. of Justinianopolis, 356,
383.

John, Bp. in Pontus, 267.

John, Bp. of Tortus, 32G, 329.

John, Bp. of Scvthopolis, 335.

John, Bp. of Sebaste, 295.

John, Bp. of Thessalonica, 326,
329.

John, bishop, papal legate, 329.

Jolin, bishop and legate at Nicaea
II., 535.

John II., Pope, 105, 401.

John VIII., Pope, 357.

John XXII., Pope, xxxv.

John, Copt. Patriarch, 43.

John Damascene, 165, 168, 209.

John, deacon and Roman legate,
326, 329, 350.

John the Evangelist, 30, 203.

John, logothete at Nicsea II., 537.

John, monk, presbyter and repre-
sentative of the Eastern high
priests, 539.

John, solitary and presbyter, 308.

John Talaia,'286.

John, the Grammarian, Bp of Con-
stantinople, 576.

John Tilius, 45.

Johnson, Rev. John, xxi, 450.

Jonas of Orleans, 585.

Josephus ^gypt., 30.

Jovian, 272

Jubaianus, African bishop opposed
to Cyprian, 517.

Julian, Bp of Eclanum, 230.

Julian, African bishop, 468.

Julian, Emperor, 112, 275.

Julian Cajsarini, Cardinal, 587.

Julian, inclined to heresy, 239.

Julius I , Pope, 105, 106, 415.

Julius, Bishop and Legate of Leo,
258.

Justellus, canonist, xix, 16, 283.

Justin Martyr, 14.

Justin II., Pope, 323.

Justina, Empress, 28.

Justinian I., xxix, 34, 43, 86, 177,
187, 300, 335, 360, 367, 390,
435.


Justinian II., Emperor, 356, 401,

540.
Justinus, consul, 304.
Juvenal, Bp. of Jerusalem, 18, 19,

192, 219, 223, 266.

Keble, Rev. John, 135 n.
Krebs, German archaeologist, 62.
Kyradium, a woman repelled from
comnmnion, 614.

Labbe, canonist, xix, xx.

Laetus, notary at Carthage, 487.

Lambert, William, xxi, 94.

Larsow, Prof., 413.

Launoy, French writer, 15.

Laurence of Icosium, bishop, 504.

Leo. the Isaurian, an Iconoclast,
564.

Leo of Mocta, bishop, 504.

Leo, presbyter, imperial messenger.
538.

Leo L, Pope, 2, 18, 19, 22, 43, 56,
179, 186, 187, 253, 266, 299,
303, 363.

Leo II., Pope, 352.

Leo III., Pope, 22, 166, 167, 232.

Leo IV., Pope, 105, 124.

Leo IX., Pope, 179.

Leo III., Emperor, xxxi.

Leo VI., Emperor, xxxi, xxxii.

Leontius, Bp. of Magnesia, 59.

Leontius, Bp. at Chalcedon, 116.

Leontius, presb. at Antioch, 8 n.

Leontius of Byzantium, 263.

Leontius Castratus, Bp. of Anti-
och, 414.

Liberalis, African bishop, 518.

Librius, Pope, 414.

Licinius, 24, 28.

Liddon, Bdmpt. Led., 135.

Liglitfuot, Bp. of Durham, 523.

Littledale, Dr., 80 n , 351.

Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth,
135 n.

Lotiiar. Colleague, Emperor, 277.

Louis, St., 36, 277.

Louis the Pious, 277.

Lucentius, papal legate at Chalce-
don, 179, 245, 247, 248, 260,
261, 289. 290, 292.

Lucian, African bishop and dele-
gate, 486.

Ludlow, I. M., 72.

Luft, 158.

Lupus, Samuel, xx, 52.

Luther, Martin, 37, 92 n.

Lyndwood, xxix.

Maasen, Dr. , 16.

Macarius, Bp. of Antioch, 342,

344, 353.
Macarius, Bp. of Laodicea Magna,

225.
Macarius, African ]\Iartyr, 496.
Macedonius, signed at Antiochean

synod, 121.
Maffei, Scipio, 37, 413, 592, 593.
M'Garvey, Rev. Wm., ix.
Mamachi, Dominican writer, 413.
Mansi, Archbishop, xx, 45, 436.
Manuel, Patr. of Constantinople, 34.
Maras, priest of Ibas, 281.


Marcellian, inclined to heresy, 239.
Marcellus, Bp. of Ancyra, 62, 163.
Marcellus, subdeacon of Carthage,

508, 510.
Marcian, Emperor, 262, 270, 277,

282, 359, 360.
Marcus, Pope, 43.
Marcus Aurelius, 28.
Maria Theresa, 277.
Marianus, Uzipparensis, bishop.

503.
Marinus, 28.
Maris the Persian, 2 n., 200, 299,

303, 309.
Mark, Patr. of Alexandria, xxxiii.
Mark, St., 29.

Martial, Spanish bishop, 63.
Martin, African bishop, 509.
Martin Bracarensis, 93, 117, 118,

121, 156, 157, 159.
Martin, Pope, 93, 118.
Martinian, a solitary, presbyter, 308.
Martinianus, ceconomus, 286.
Martyrius, Bp. of Antioch, 185.
Martyrius, Euscbian delegate, 414.
Maternus, African bisliop, 480.
Maurentius, African bishop, 493.
Mauricius, his signature to the

Antiochean synod, 121.
Maxentius, the Emperor, 62 n.
Maximian, Bp. of Aqu», 504.
Maximian, Emperor, 51, 62 n.
Maximian the younger. Emperor,

xxix.
Maximianus, successor of Nestorius

at Constantinople, 195.
Maximilian, 20, 28.
Maximin, 62.

Maximin, Bp. of Anazarbus, 225.
Maximin II., Emperor, 63.
Maximinian, Bp. of Vagal, dis-
missed from his see, 485.
Maximus, Bp. of Antioch, 19, 248,

266.
Maximus the Cynic, Bp. of Con-
stantinople, 177, 179, 180, 186.
Maximus, Bp. of Jerusalem, 18.
]\Iaximus, priest and solitary, 308.
Maximus, 614, 638.
Meletian schism, 162, 177, 181, 182.
Meletius, Bp. of Antioch, 162, 177,

181-2.
Meletius, Bp. of Neocaesarea. 225.
Memuon, Bp of Ephesus, 226, 227,

228.
Mendham, John, x.xi.
Mennas, Abp. of Constantinople,

219, 301.
Merlin, James, French canonist,

xix.
Michael, an angel, 150.
Michael, Patr of Constantinople,

34, 389,
Michael III., Emperor of the East,

179.
Michaud, xiv n., 523.
Miletius of Lycopolis, 15, 34.
Milman. Dean, 548.
Mitter-Miiller, 93.
Modestinus, Herennius, Roman

jurist, xxix.
INlongus. Peter, 285.
Montfaucon, 45.


626


INDEX OF NAMES


Morinus, Henricus, 21, 25, 42, 131-
Muirbead, Mr., on tbe liomaa law,

xxix
Mullen, Bp. of Erie. U. S. A., 603 n.
Mnsanis, bishop. 431.
.MysiBUs, Bp. of Aradu.x, 225.

Narcissus, bis signature at Antio-

ohean Synod, 121.
Narcissus of Jerusalem, 17.
Natalis, Alexander, b'2. 436.
Neander, 130, 132. 2(14, 436.
Nectarius, Patr. of Constantinople,

27, 126, 186, 1£9, 286, 512,

513.
Nicepborus of Jerusalem, xxxiii.
Nicetas, signed at Autiochean

synod, 121.
Nicetius, bi.-ihop of the first See of

Mauretania Sitifensis, 483.
Nicholas, Pope, 22, 23, 179.
Nicholas Hydruntinus, 226.
Ninellus of Kusucarrum, bishop,

504.
Novatus, Bp., legate of Mauretania

Sitifensis, 442, 504.
Numerian of Kusguuium, bishop,

504.
Numidiiis, Bp. of Maxula, 445,

486.

Olvnipias, friend of St. Cbrysostom,

275.
Olympius at Gangra, 91.
Olympius, bishop at tbe Concilia-

bulum, 225.
Optatus, African bishop, 509.
Optimus, Bp. of Antiocb in Pisidia,

162.
Origen, 4, 8, 301, 314 seq., 359 seq.
Orontius, inclined to heresy, 239.
Orsi, arcbfeologist, 436.
Otreius, Bp. of IMelitina, 162.

Palatinus, African bishop, 509.

Palladius, Bp. of Amasea, 199.

Palma, John Bapt., 436.

Palmer, Sir \V., 524, 578, 579, 581.

Pammachius, 275.

Paniphilus .Martyr. 4.

Panuph, deacon, 614.

Papbnutius, 51 seq., 93.

Pappus at Gangra, 91.

Paregorius, presbj^ter and solitary,

308.
Parmenides, 6.
Pascbasinus, Bp. of Lilvbwum, 17,

56, 245, 247, 259,' 260, 261,

266, 289, 290, 291, 292, 292,

293.
Pastillas, Bp. of Perga, 547.
Patrick (Peter;, bishop in Pontus,

267.
Paul of Antiocb, Eustathian, 182.
Paul, Bp. of Emissa, 225.
Paul of Samosata, 4, 5, 40, 46, 516.
Paul, advocate of Constantinople,

268.
Paul, P,p. of Constantinople, 327,

337, 343, 353, 356, 357, 531.
I'aul, presbyter and Koman legate,

537,538, 539.
Paul, St., 9, 41, 42, 84.


Paul VIII , Pope. xix.
Paulinus, Bp. of Antiocb, 162 n.
Paulus, bi.s signature to the Anti-

ochean Synod, 121.
Pelagius, Bp. of Laodicea, 162.
Pelagius I., Bp. of IJome, 323.
Pelagius II., Bp. of Rome, 186, 187.
Penacchi, 351.

Pentadius. Bp. of Carpi, 504.
Percival, Dr. H. A., xxi.
Petavius, 200, 213, 578.
Peter, .Apostle, 203.
Peter, Bp. of Alexandria, 177, 180,

181.
Peter, Patr. of Alexandria, 356,

601.
Peter of Antiocb, 169.
Peter, Bp. of Constantinople, 327,

337, 343, 353.
Peter, Bp. of Sebaste, 162.
Peter, Bp. of Trajanopolis, 225.
Peter, presbyter and Roman legate,

537, 538, 539.
Peter, presbyter and primicerius, of

Alexandria, 197, 199.
Peter, presbyter and legate from

Alexandria, 326.
Peter Damian, 167.
Peter de Marca, 436, 562.
Peter Lomljard, 36.
Phileas, bishop, 592.
Philetus at Gangra, 91.
Philip, Bp. of Theodosia, 225.
Philip, presl>yter and legate of Car-
thage, 441, 443, 506, 506, 507.
Philip, priest, was legate at Ephe-

sus, 194, 195, 219, 221, 223,

224, 239.
Philip, consul, 495.
Philip IV. of France, 36.
Phillips, 16, 17, 52.
Philo. 28, 293.

Philologius, African bishop, 486.
Philostorgius, 28, 175.
Philoxenus, papal legate at Sardica,

415.
Phocas, bishop, 304.
Phcebe, 41.
Photius, Bp. of Constantinople,

xxxii, 45, 101, 167, 180 n.,

184, 235, 586, 587
Photius, Bp. of Tyre, 277, 290,

291, 310.
Pisanus, Jesuit, 43.
Placian, African bisliop, 480.
Plautius, African bishop and dele-
gate, 503.
Plumptre, Edw. H., ,32.
Polius, bishop at the Conciliabulum,

225.
Polychronius, Bp. of Heracleopolis,

'225.
Polychronius, Monothelite, 343,

353.
Polvcratcs. 9.

" Pope Martin's Council," 120.
Possidonius of Calama, bishop and

delegate. 504.
Pra?si(lius, inclined to heresy, 239.
Pra?textatus of Sicily, bishop, 504.
Prapidius, chorepiscopus and war-
den of hospital, 273.
Praylius, Bp. of Jerusalem, 18, 363.


Prisca or Priscilla, friend of Mon-

tanus, 128. 186.
Priscianus, bishop, envoy to Rome,

189.
Proterius. Patr. of Alexandria and

formerly (Economus, il>(j, 286.
Proaeresius at Gangra, 91.
Proclus, Bp of Constantinople,

303, 310, 363.
Projectus, legate at Ephesus, and

bishop, 194, 219, 220, 221,

223, 224, 239.
Prudcntius, iivmu writer, 159.
Pulcberia, Empress, 262, 289.
Puller, F. W., 113, 518.
Pusey, Rev. Dr. E. B. , xxi.
Pvrrhus, Bp. of Constantinople,

327, 336, 343, 353.

Quesnel, P., 94.
Quintin, John, xxxii.
Quodvultdeus Bp. of Carthage, 283.
Quodvultdeus, African bishop, 480.
Quodvultdeus, Bp. of Veri, 504.

Rainer, Archduke, 62.
Raphael, an Angel, 150.
Raymond of Pennafort, St., xxxv.
Reatus, presbyter and legate of

Leo, 258.
Recarede, King, 178.
Reginus. Bp. of Vegesela, 459,

480.
Remigius, Bp. of Dorchester. 281.
Restitutus, African bishop and dele-
gate, 495, 503.
Revillout, Eugene, 2 n.
Rheginus, Bp. of Cyprus, 234.
Richard, Charles Ludovic, xx.
Richer, xx, 414, 435.
Rodolph, Abp. of Bourges 22.
Rogation, African bishop, 480.
Rohrl)acher, 351, 436.
Rivington, Rev. Luke, 219 n.
Roman Correctors, 111, 115, 116,

117, 118, 119, 131, 141, 147,

152, 564.
Romanus, J. B., 43.
Routh, 21, 24, 64, 6.5, 69, 70, 73, 8L
Ruffianus, Bp. of Muzu])a, 504.
Ruffinus, Christian writer, 15, 16,

17.
Rufinus, 12, 15, 17. 44, 52.
Rufinus. Prsetoreal Prefect, 512.
Rumoridus, consul, 486.
Rusticus, Roman deacon condemned

by Vigilius. 302.
Ruttenstock, 436.

Sabas, Messalian writer, 240, 241.

Sabbas, hegumenos of the monas-
tery of the Studium, 535.

Sabinus, Bp. of Heraclea, xxx.

Sacbarelli, 436.

Sallust, Bp. of Corvcus in Cilicia,
225.

Salniasius (Saumaise), 15, 16, 17.

Sahnatia, Antonius, xxxiii.

Salmon, Dr. Francis, xx, xxi.

Salvia, her journey to the Holy
Places, 136

Samuel, priest of Ibas. 281.

Sanl)orn, Rev. F. A., ix.


INDEX OF NAMES


G27


Schaff, Dr. Philip, 173, 174.

Schelstraten, F. Emmanuel, 105.

Schcell, XXX, xxxi

Sebastian, Human deacon, con-
demned by Vigilius, 3-- 2, 303.

Sergius, Bp. of Constantinople,
327, 336, 342, 343, 353.

Sergius, Bp. of Rome, 357.

Servus Dei, Roman subdeacon, 304.

Servus-dei, African bishop, oOQ.

Severian, African bishop and dele-
gate, 503.

Severus, African Martyr, 49 .

Severus, Alexander, the Emperor,
xxix

Shann, G. V., 133 n , 390.

Sidonius ApoUinaris, 38.

Silvanus, African delegate, 486.

Simeon, Abp. of Thessalonica, 34,
389, 390.

Simeon, Messalian writer, 240.

Simon Magus, 353.

Simplician. African priest, 463.

Siricius. African priest, 463.

Siricins, Pope, 363.

Siricius, Roman notary. 219.

Sirmond, Jesuit, xix, l(i, 45.

Sisinnius Pastillas of Perga, 533.

Sixtu.s IV.. XXXV.

Socrates, Eccl. Hist., 3, 51, 52, 105.

Solomon, the King, 84.

Sophronius, Bp. of Jerusalem,
343.

Sozomen, Uccl. Nisi., 51, 52.

Spittler, 414.

Spyridion, Cypr. , bishop, 270

Stephen, bishop, 302. 344, 353.

Stephen, Bp. of Antioch 401. 414.

Stephen, Bp. of Corinth, 326.

Stephen, bishop, friend of Diony-
sius Exiguus, 591.

Stephen, bishop, deprived of bis
jurisdiction, 266, 271.

Steplien. Papal legate, 584.

Stephen, Pope, 517.

Stephen, St., 86.

Stephanas. 59.

Stilico, consul, 490.

Stolberg. 430.

Sulpicius Severus, 56.

Surius, patristia, Editor, xix, 497.

Swainson, The Creeds, 4.

Sylvester, Pope, 1.

Symmachus. Pope, 90, 95.

Synesius, 52.

Tarasius, Patr. of Constantinople,

356, 533, 535, 537, 53 3, 540.
Tarcodimantus, his signature to

Antiochean Synod, 121.
Tenasius, Bp. of Constantinople,

357.
Terentius, African bishop. 5C9.
Tertullian, 4, 30, 41, 128, 1S6.
Thalassius of Caesarea, 19, 248.
Tliearistus, translator of the

Canons, 40, 44.
Tbeasius, African bishop, 480,

495, 509.


Theilo, 40 44.
Theodebert, King, 38, 44.
Theodora, Empress, 301, 383, 576.
Theodore, Abp. of Canterbury, 38,

341.
Theodore, Bp. of Catanea, 538.
Theodore, Bp. of Constantinople,

351, 353.
Theodore, Bp. of Marcianopolis,

225.
Theodore, Bp. of Jerusalem, 234.
Theodore, Bp. of Mopsuestia, 211,

230.231, 234, 299, 302,512.
Theodore, Bp. of Pharon, 327,

336, 343, 344, 353.
Theodore, Bp. in Paniphvlia, 236.
Theodore, Bp. of Mitylene, 342.
Theodore, Bp. of Myra, 534.
Theodore, bishop, 304.
Theodore, signer at Antioch, 121.
Theodore, ]ire8byter and legate

from Jerusalem, 326.
Theodore, presbvter, legate from

Ravenna, 329, 350.
Theodore Ascidas, Bp. of Caesarea

in Capp., 314.
Theodore Studita, 576 n.
Theodoret, Bp of Cvrus, 3, 5, 206,

213, 22.5, 299, 302, 303, 344,

363.
Theodosius, Bp. of Ephesus, 547.
Theodosius I , Emperor, 19, 55, 180,

161, ISO, 181, 189, 281, 2b7,

3iO.
Theodosius II., 196, 359, 360,

458, 486 495, 496, 503.
Theodosius, the bumble Christian,

534.
Theodotus of Ancyra. 545.
Tlieophanes, Bp. of Philadelphia,

225.
Theophanes, 575.
Tlieophauus, Patriarch of Antioch,

343.
Theophilus, Bp. of Alexandria,

180, 303, 317. 361, 512
Theophilus, Bp. of Constantinople,

575.
Theophilus of Cfesarea, 17.
Theopliylact, Papal legate, 38.
Theophvlact, papal legate, 584.
Thomas, Abp. of York. 281.
Thoma.s Aquinas, 36, 526.
Thomassinus, Lud., xxi, 21, 23,

26, 42. 52.
Tiber.us (Augustus). 323. 340.
Tigris, presbyter in Constantinople,

8.
Tillemont, historical writer, 124,

200. 436. 512.
Timotheus, Chorepiscopus, 21
Timothy. Abp. of Alexandria, 127,

361.
Timothy Salophaciolus, 285.
Totus, African bishop, 509.
Trajan, Bp. of Augusta, 225.
Trench, Abp., 547.
Turner, C. H., 593.
Turrianus, 43, 592.


Ulpian, Roman jurist xxix.

Ultzen, 593.

Uranius, Bp. of Himeria, 281.

Urban III., Pope, 72.

Urban, African bishop, 459, 464,

465, 466, 480, 506.
Urbanus, Bp. of Mauritania Siti-

fensis, 463.

Valens, Emperor, 277.

Valcns, 28, 164, 172.

Valentine, Bp. of Mutloblaca, 225.

Valentine, Bp. of Numidia, 506,

508.
Valcntinian, 28,
V^alentinian III., xxix.
Valcntinian, Bp. of Scythia, 303.
Valentinus. 164.
Valerian, Bp. of Iconiura, 240.
Valerianus, bishop in svnod in

Rome, 188.
Valeriu.s, African bishop, 480.
Valesius, 52.
Van Espen, xxi. 12, 20, 36, 40, 64,

70, 73, 79, 81, 92, 93, 94, 97,

116, 120. 126, 134, 159, 368.
Vasquez, 4 n., 586,
Venables, Canon, 89 n.
Venerius, Bp. of Milan, 470, 471.
Venustianus, Afi'ican bishop, 486.
Victor of Aquitaine, 56.
Victor, African Ijishop, put to death

by the pagans, 495.
Victor, Pope, 17, 132.
Victorian, African bishop, 480.
Vigilius. Pope, 2, 187, 219, 299 seq.,

317.
Vincent of Capua 413.
Vincent, African bishop, 470, 491,

503, 509.
Visigoths, the, 282.
Vitaiis, Bp. of Antioch, 02.
Vitus, Bp. of Carres, 162.

Walch, Christian Wilhelm Franz,

XX. 414.
Westcott, Bp. of Durham, 9.
Wetzer, Prof. Dr., 413.
Wilson, bishop, 285.

Xantippus, bishops' tractory, senex,

4i.6, 493.
Xantippus, bishop of tlie first see of

Numidia. 4&3, 484
Xipbilin, John, jurist, xxxi.

Zacharias, Pope, 105.

Zacluiry (a.d. 745), 150.

Zeno, Bp. in Cyprus, 234.

Zeno, Bp of ilaiuma. 270.

Zoilus, Bp. of Alexandria, 336.

Zonaras, John, 10, 17, 20, 23, 24,
29, 30. 39, 40, 45, 64, 73, 81,
83. 85, 86, 93, 100, 152, 171,
276, 283, 368, 432, 514.

Zosimus, presbvter, 268.

Zosimus, Pope", 43 n., 44, 230, 435,
441, 506

Zosys, Bp. of Esbus, 225.


INDEX OF WORDS AND PHRASES


a^KxffTws, fiiaa-d/xevoT, 280.
absidem, 4G2
d-yeVrjTOS, 4, 5.
ayrvyrjTo'i, 4, 5, G, 7.
ayia. saiicta, 132.
ayv'i(TTOvs, avayvdoffrovs, 278.
a^Lacpdpcos, 29.
aKowfifvos, 26.

a/CTI(TT05, 4.

aKoyevadfj-evoi, 70, 71.

aAoyiUi, 149.

a\oyos, 174.

a.i/a.0aais, 34.

d;'a(f)Opas, 327.

aiayvwcrreov a.yiv7)ro^ tovt' fffri /UTJ

Tron)6eis, 5.
avaXrji'Qiura, 214.
angelos or angnlos, 150.
dvQpwTrSdeos, 174
avdpunos Snocpofjo^, 174.
dv^f>aiiTOT6Kov, 313.
anima animanx, 174
(ininia I'ationnlix, 174.
animale peccatuin^ 10.
Anoiiioion, 175.
dvTtSoipa, 132.
di'Tiuei'fTia, .560.
aTreTo^aj/TO. ii:iT(i.^avTO, 271.
avcouaXia, 152.
aTToAi/Ti/cr;, 112.
airpoaKOTTos, 336.
&prov StBovaL iv el'X?' ^5.
^pTos rfjs euxapioTias, 39.
dpx"i, 165.
diTTracrubi' (cai TifxrjTiKrjv irpoaKwriffiv,

550.
draliaj/, 109.
ayflsi/Ti'ai', 59.
d^rj^/ta^co, 273.
aiwpi^iffdai, 71.
dcpiivai, 83.

BaWlCeiv, 157.

^alTTt^OailiOL, 32.

Bef^piKiOis, 29.

76t'7jroj, 4 5, 6.
7ej'r)Tjis /ca' ayevr]TOi, 4.
genitns et myeidtus, 5.

761 yay, 5.

yii'V7)B^VTay 3.

■)evvr]dfVTa ou Troir]diVTa. 6.

y;vvriais, 6.

yivvrjhv (K TTjs ovalas tov narphs t6v

ilibv O/J-OOIKTIOV, 5.

7€v»'rjTbj, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Geiiufl'-ctcutc's, 26, 32.
7ri(ris, 319.
yovvK\ivovTes, 86.

Deipara, 209.
diacoiiissae, 41.
SiaK^vifrffot, 41.
Siaifoffcrcrcijv, 40.
SiaK'IrciJi', 40.
5iaTi';7rcO(rii', 274.

Si oAtjs auToC o'tKOVOfiiKris avaffTporpTJs,
346.


Do7ninatto, 557.
dojninica Jiostia, 14.

ecclesiastici, 129.

* V or:

€t TTlCTTOi, 40.

el ffToixovffi T?) Svycifj.fl, 342.
elSos, 29.

fipTji/i/cai, 21, 276.
e« 5vo (^utrei)!', 263.
e/c Svo, 204.

e/f TTjy 0€OTd«oLi Maplas, 208.
^K^ecrdai, 219.
(KSreaiu dW-qu, 249.
eKcprivai, 212.
elect i, 32

eV 5uo (|)we(rjv, i?i diiabus naturis,
263.

ivavBpcivri'Tis, 174.
ivadpKwffLS, 174.
f^opKiarriSy 146.
e'|a)yoCyU6JO(, 32.
fTrif?i;,U7)(rai, 81 .
iin6vfj.i\ffas, 81.
eTropKicTTrjs, 146.
67ri(TT oAal (ru(rTaTi»fo}, 112.
iinrpa-)(T)Kiov., 142.
iffTavpdifxevov elvai ©ebv, 209.
fvayye\ia, 133.
evXoyelv, 147.
eul()!;i;e, 132.
eiiXoylat, 32. 132.
euxaf^s ToJf 0710)!', 170.

EOxapio-Ti'a, the sacred meal, 14.

evxapiaTiav Toieiv, 14.

icpopKi^eiv., 147.

^j/ iroTe 0T« ou/f ^j/, 3.

afua 0€oC, 209.
Hecat(Mn\ 369.

T))S fUWCTfWSy 312.
fVoJcTIl', 211.

kripav TTiaTiv, 167, 232, 265.

(TepOV (TVI.iBo\OV, 265.

Hemiolite, 126.
UpoavXia, 38.

61 TTKTTol, 24.

o^iAeic, 63.
6/x6Bios, 4.
dfj-oyvdo/awv, 4.

OfXOlU^LO'-, 4.
6/JLOLOyVW/XCVV, 4.

Homoion, 175.

llomoiousion, 3 n., 5. ^

6,uoAo77jTai, 146.
6jj.oovaiov, 3, 173.
Homoou.sion, 3 11., 4, 173, 175.
Honiousios, 3 11, 4, 7, 175.

(ipos e/CT€0€(TaZ, 40

Jwstias, ioY ostia, 141.
Hyperberetitus, 596.
vTr€p<pv^t (TvyxXriTos, 247.

UTTTjpeTrjS, 83.

S^earS. coTOS, 1 74.
i&^eia yiidu-nara, 277.
i&ei'Kois, 206.
,&6i'&)s, 206 n.


©ebs 7ei'rrjT($s, 7.
06j»s 7re7ror0a)S, 209.
id^ebs aa.pKo(p6^>us.i 174.

,&60T(iK0S, 206 S9.

aeo^rjpos, 174, 207, 212, 213.
i^epo'TTcias, 129.
eifiv, 11.
0u(r»a, 14.
tbymelici, 157.

rSi/foJs, 360.

i5i(i)iJi.a, jSicijUora, 209.

/fad^eU eaurbv eis Kfvwcriv, 202.

Ka6l(TTaaOai, 12, 130.

fcai e/c Toi'i Tj'oO, 108.

KaKoSo^os, 232.

KaXiffTpa, Ka\ivSri^pa, aXivSri^pa, 397.

KOfoi/t/cbs, 9.

KOi'OJ'i/ca'S for KavoviKo7';, 376.

Ko;'cbj', excursus on the use of the

\vord, 9.
6 Kavcbv, 8.

Kara tov taov iv avrw rpSirov, 202.
Kara (tvatv, 202,
Kar' oiKelwaiu olKOVOfxiKriv, 211.
Karayciyia ro7s ^cVois, 275.
KardaTuaiv, 12.
KevwaavTa, 319.
Kei/wcTtf, 204.

KOLl'hs &pT09, 14.

comessalia, 157.
comi.ssalia, 157.
commensalia, 157.
confertum 157.
convertibilis = Tpeirrov, 4.

KOTTJOTOi, 144.
KOiriccvres, 146.
criwina rnotialia, 25.

KTl^eLV, 5.
KTlCThs, 4.

Aarpeia, 527.

XeiTOvpxf'TCo, 110.

X6iToiip7erj' Tt Twf' IfpaTiKUv AeiTOup-

7ia)r, 63.
A€(T0yp7iai, 101 .
A.6i-paJ(TorTas, 70.
Ad7os, L(JgOS, 4.

martyria, 101.

Maler Dei, Dei Gcnetrix, Deipara,
209.

Matri.x, the mother church or ca-
thedral. 458.

jUecrauAioj', 25.

fierdPaais, 34.

ufTa^ecris, 34.

fJLiXi"'^ ^^ "^V KOiya) i) Ttji €TTiffK6ira), 13.

flit avv6vros tov TrpecrfivTfpov KaTCi
yyw/j,r)v t(iv iTnaK/}TTOv, 94.

H^TTIp TOV @(0V flOV, 209.

militiam, 272.
jui|js, 174
fxopdri 3-1.5.
inunusculn, 370.


INDEX OF WORDS AND PHRASES


639


naturnliUn- flius = Logos, 212.

v6as, 318.

vovt, 174, 319.

NoOs SrjjUioi/pT'Jj, 318.

^evfwcrt Kai Trrcoxf^oty, 276.
^evoSoxf^a, 375.
^evorpocpta, 275.
xenon, 276.

obscene. 377.

OlKOVOUflU, 184.
OlKOvS/XOS, olKOVOfJiia, 286.

oSf6vn, 142.

ordinariy and ordinalio, by laying

on hands, 12.
op^is Kat aK-l)-KT<iis ex^"') 237.
opijD T€ fcal AJyo), 345.
ovK -fiv rplv yevyq^iiyai, 6.
ovTos 6 KavHy, 8.

ira^Tlfiara Qeov, 209.
Tra&or 0€oC, 209.
TlaKaTiavrjs, 124.
jHinis beiiedictus, 32.
Trapa7ai7r)«', 318.
Trap' Iv^s eiprjo-^-ai, 204.
Trap^fuos ayi'V), 41.

passio Domini, used eucharisti-

cally, 14.
•rra(TT0(p6pia, Tra(rTo(p6poi, 31 n.
ireAas, neighbour, anyone, 505.
per forinsecam (or forasticam) po-

te.'itatem, 111.
irepLoSevTai, periodcutes, 158.
philtrvm, 605.
Tri/eOiUa, 174.

TToieii', sacrificiully, 14, 14 n.

■Koiitv — (vxapiffTiav, 14.

pnefectu-s urbi, 16
•jrpeff^eios, intercession, 533.
Ttpeo-SvT^pai, 41, 130.
irp6o-/8uT.5es, 41, 42, 129.
primatxs, ecclesiastical primacy, 17.
■n-poax^evTus, 147.
irpoeSpla and TrpocTTaaia, 287.
TTptJeSpoj/ (irpofSpos), 347, 385.
TTpoKa^'fl/j.eyai, 130.

irpoKOTTTj, j}er profectuvi operum, 322.

7rp5 TTajTcijj/ Toi TrpoiTeia, 295.

Trp^s evQicrov (pvcriKiif, 203.

irpo(TK''V7)<ns^ 520, 527.

■KpoirvXaiov, 25.

TTpofjpepeiv, excursus on the word,

1, 13 sq. ; its use, 63.
irpocrcpepfii/ TO, Swpa, 14.


5J irpon<poph. rov (rSfxaros Kal rov af/xa-
TOS, 14.

Prothesis, 26.

irpoff^opai, 14.
irpoffcpopa, 65.

irpox«ptCf"'» '~4.
psa'miidiotici 135.
pi^ahn'/s responsorius, 138.

ITTWXS'Ol', 273.
TTTWxe^'rov, 273.

1TTWXOTpO(pUOV, 273.

wvKwpoi, 144, 145.
regiones suburhicarioB,
Regula fidn, 9.
pinlSiou, 286.

sacerdotes, 143.

sacrariuni, 26.

sncriflcare (eucharistic), 14.

sacnfieatum, 85.

sacricifici'um celibrare, said of the

Lord's supper, 14.
sancta, 132.
sanctificatum, 85.
sanctimoniales, 41.
sanguis Domini, used eucharisti-

cally, 14.
crapKtKws, Kara crapKUy 206.
aap^, 174.
5rr??io entlironisticus, 177.

(TTparfiav, 272.
CTi-paTeueo-^ai, 273.
CTpaTo'-n-eSoj', 272.
subintroducta>' , 11.
<ru7K'A.aioi'Te?, 25.
avAAajSal ivSrpovKTTMaX, 177.
(Tv/LKpooioy opov, 262.
tr i/a^oi-yT), 101.
cryj'aiTOi'i'Tes, 32.
(n/;'a|lS, 101.
(Twavaarrpecpea^ai, 71 n.
crucaTrTW, 211.
(rvva(peias, 2()3, 211.

(TVVilaaKTOSy 11, 52.

(Tvvepiovpyeiv, 35.
avvr]afxeuoi', 319.

(TUJ/eCTTCOTeS, 26.

o-uo-TaTiKai, eommendatitice literce,

276.
sj'mbola, 157.
syna.ris^ 239.
synousioSy 4.
(T(pd\ua, 391.
o-x^fuo, 29.
(Txri'^'aTt, 29, 40.
ffiifjLa, 174.


TO apxe'B e^^r; Kparfiro, 288.
Ta-y^a, 41.

TO iv^pOVKTTlKa, 177.

Ttt -^^x 071'as cru^/oSou (TTfTpexpe, 259.
reXfiwTfpoi, perfeciiores, 32.

T(i ivStpOVlCTTlKO., 177.

tV ila'tpiTov Tifx^v, 295.
T^y i'epos (rii7K\ir)Toii, 247.
tittdus, a small country church,
458.

TIjUTJTl/CWS irpo<TKVI/€Q), 533.

248.

Tov^pvaix6v, TOV^OpVfffidv, 421.

T?) TeA.fioj', 65.

toCto TToierre, 14.

rpacp^ euxapi(rTr]^f?<Ta, 14.

TpeTTTov, 3 n.

TpeTTTt^TTyS, 174.

unigenitus impassiHKs, 209.
u))igenitus pn^mbilis, 209.
vnitts siibstantioi, 4.
vicarius urbis, 16.
virginem Deiparam et Deigenitri-
cem, 209.

fluentes, 25.
forniatrp, 112.
fossarii, 146.
fossores, 146.
(pvffiKocs, naturaliter, 336.
(pvffiv ^yovf ovcriai/, 314.
(puri^S/LLefot, 32.
(pccTia^fj, 84.

Xeil^o(oij.evoi, 25.
Xe'pi'C'fiJ', 24.
Xeipo^etria, 40.
Xf^pfi^irovfxei/ovs, 20.
XeipoTO^/fro-i&ai, 130.

X^ipoTovia., imposition of hands, 12.
XeipoToviai/, 12.

XptfTTOTSKOV, 313.
XC'^pf^'liyKOTfOl, 21.

Xa»pis Trpo(T(}opas, 24.
X^pos, X'^P°'-i X'^P'"'', 228.

il^aArai, 144.

i|/€uS67r.'7pa<^a, .598 n.

■i\ii)(pWy 12.

'I'vx^, 174.

<|/ux^ Ao7i/c^, 174, 314.

>|/uX"f« afxapT7)/j.aTa, 10.
;//iiX»f^'' Ti afMaprrifxa, 10.
upapiof, 142.


INDEX OP PLACES.


Abbirita, 504,

Abernethy in Scotland, 284.

Abyssinia, 177.

Acliaia, 55.

Adrianople, 184.

Adiumetuni, 458.

^Elia Capitolina, 17, 18.

^Emilia, 56.

Africa, 31, 32, 44, 45, 55, 283, 300,
323, 395, 430, 438, 452, 469,
474, 475, 484, 490, 494, 502.

A^de, 270.

Aix, 38, 166, 287, 294, 295.

Alexandria, xviii, xxxiii,9, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 44, 45, 46, 48, 53,
55. 56, 72, 112, 127, 173, 176,
177, 178, 179, 180, 192, 201,
208, 219, 220, 222. 224, 232,
238, 251, 259, 262, 286, 291,
294, 299, 302, 326, 327, 335,
336, 344, 347, 356, 360, 361,
362, 363, 413, 414, 434, 442,
443, 493, 507, 508, 512, 513,
514, 547, 576, 582, 592, 600,
601, 013, 615.

Araasea, 199.

Anazarbus, 225.

Ancvra, xviii, xxvi, xxvii, 23,
24, 29, 51, 57, 59, 60, 62, 74,
78, 90, 101, 105 secj-, 125, 158,
163, 172, 176, 361, 363, 386,
513, 533, 539.

Antioch in S3'ria, xiii, xviii,
xxvi, xxvii, XXX, xxxi,
xxxii, 4, 8, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22,
32, 40, 44, 46, 47, 48. 57, 59,
60, 69. 137, 144, 147, 152, 158,
177, 178, 179, 181, ls2, 185,
189, 192, 200, 222, 225, 235,
237, 238, 241, 242, 250, 251,
253, 266, 274, 281, 286, 287,
288, 289, 291, 293, 299, 308,
326, 342, 343, 344, 347, 356,
357, 360, 361, .363, 383, 413,
414, 416, 443, 456, 576, 591,
592.

Apamea, 225, 237.

Apulia, 16.

Aqua?, 504.

Aquileia, 323.

Aquitaine, 56, 583.

Arabia, 18,21, 107, 260.

Aradas, 225.

Ariminum, 173.

Aries, 8, 28, 30, 40, 303.

Armenia, 89.

Arzug, 465, 466.

Asia, 55, 323, 435.

Asia Minor, 21, 62, 288.

Assuri, 458.

Auiisburg, XX, 45.

Augusta, 225.

.Vuiun, 143.

Balnes, 162.
IJansror in Down, 284.
Battle, 271.
Berea, 162, 363.


Berlin, 62.

Berrha'a in SA'ria, 32.

Berytus, 277,"281, 290, 291.

Bethlehem, 275.

Bithynia, 260, 279, 508, 549.

Biza (Bizya), 242.

Blachernse of Constantinople, 547.

Bosphorus, 547.

Bostra, 512, 51-3, 514.

Bourges, 22.

Braga, 120, 142, 156, 157, 159,484.

Brechin in Scotland, 284.

Britain, 55, 56.

Brussels, xx.

Brutii, 16.

Bulgaria, 177.

Byzacena, 440, 443, 503, 504.

Cajsarea in Cappadocia. 3, 17, 19,
89, 90, 162, 248, 270, 273, 275,
292, 356. 380, 604.

Csesarea in Palestine, 162, 175.

Calabria, 16.

Calama, 504.

Calcuth in England, 576.

Calvita, 503.

Campania, 16.

Canterbury, 35.

Cappadocia, 89.

Capua, 413, 464.

Carpi, 504.

Carres, 162.

Carthage, xviii, xxvi, 36, 37, 41,
44, 127, 279, 300, 362, 371, 372.

380, 402, 410, 444, 445, 446,
448, 449, 455, 456, 458, 464,
465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470,
472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477,
478, 479, 480, 481, 4«2, 483,
484, 485, 486, 488, 489, 490,
491, 492, 493, 494, 495, 496,
497, 498, 499, 500, 501, 502,
503, 504, 506, 508, 514, 515,
516, 517, 570.

Castabala in Cilicia, 225.

Catanea, 537, 538, 539.

Cenchrea, 41.

Centuria, 484.

Chalcedon, xiv, xv, xviii, xxxiv,
3, 12, 17, 18, 23, 29, 41,59,60,
110, 111, 112, 116, 129, 130,
102, 167, 175, 179, 187, 199.
200, 225, 233, 244 seq., 259,
260, 263, 265, 268, 271, 272,
273, 275, 276, 278, 289. 290,
291, 292, 299, 300, 302, 303,
310, 311, 344, 360, 368, 373,

381, 382, 386, 388, 404, 430,
438, 468, 479, 512, 523, 547,
559, 503, 567, 592.

Chalons, 38, 283.

Chrysopolis, 847.

Cilicia, 55, 107.

Cade-Syria, 107, 242.

Cologne, xix., 413.

Colonia, 162.

Constantia in Cyprus, .384, 539, 581.

Coustauliuople, xi, xiv, xv,


xvni, XIX, xxvi, xxx, xxxiv,
8, 16, 20, 30, 34, 35, 42.
44, 45. 59, 89, 112, 162, 163,
165, 167, 169, 170 seq., 192,
200, 207, 222, 229, 230, 244,
247, 248, 253, 260, 263, 265,
268, 274, 275, 280, 281, 282,
283, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290,

292, 294, 295, 299, 300, 302,
303, 316, 317, 323, 326, 335,
336, 343, 344, 347, 349, 356,
357, 359, 360, 361, 363, 374,
376, 382, 383, 384, 389. 405,
410, 435, 443, 446, 507. 510,
512, 513, 523, 540, 546. 547,
550, 556, 562, 566, 584.

Cordova (Corduba), xiii, 89, 415.

Corinth, 357.

Corsica, 16.

Corycus in Cilicia, 225.

Cos, 289.

Cyprus, 47, 177. 234, 235, 383, 384.

581.
Cyrus, 162. 225, 363.
Cyzicu.s, 44, 383.

Dalmatia, 300.
Diosopolis, 162.
Dorchester, 281.
Dorozy, 23.

Dorvlanim, 179, 187, 288.
Dublin, 576.

Dunkeld in Scotland, 284.
Durazzo, 34.

Eclanum. 230.

Edessa, 86, 162, 270, 272, 281, 286,

299.
Egypt, xxxiii, 16, 51, 52, 53, 55,

293, 434.

Elvira, 36, 51, 112, 145.

Emissa, 225.

England, xxxiii, 25, 34, 39, 70,
"323, 372, 387, 396, 508.

Epaon, 130.

Ephesus, xiv, xv, xviii, 3, 18,
19. 23, 29, 48, 59, 167, 186,
187, 191 seq., 244, 259, 262,
266, 268, 271, 273, 274, 286,
299. 302, 303, 308, 309, 310,
315. 322, 344, 360, 383, 547.

Es!)us, 225.

Ethiopia, 47.

Florence, xv, 45, 166, 181, 232,

290, 587.
France, 21, 34, 323, 397, 548, 578.
Frankfort, :J85, 404, 539, 583, 584,

585, 586.
Fulda, 271.

Gangra, xviii, xxvi, xxvii, 51,
57, 59, 60, 89, 91 seq., 286,
361. 447.

Gaul, 21, 22, 55, 56, 143, 283, 583.

Gaza, 414.

Gentilly. 548.

Germany, 583.


INDEX OF PLACES.


631


Germinus, 614.

Gloucester, 524.

Gortyna in Crete, 356, 357.

Hellespont, 383, 384.

Henicleu in Tbnice, xxx, 225, 242.

Heracleopolis, 225.

Hertford, 271.

Hierapolis, 225, 23'?.

Himeria, 281.

Hippo Diarrlivtus. •^80.

Hippo Reuiiis; 120 286, 401, 443,
449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454,
458, 459, 461, 462, 463, 464,
466, 478, 483, 489, 490, 504,

Horrea-Cascilia, 504.

Iberia, 177.
Iconiuni, 128, 162.
Icosiuni, 504.
Illyria, 261, 300.
Illyricum, 288.
IreuopolLs, 225.
Isauria, 107.
Italy, 16, 55, 142, 323.

Jerusalem. 9, 17, 18, 19, 32, 37, 47,
93. 137, 162, 173, 189, 208, 222,
223, 266, 274, 293, 299, 302,
343, 356, 857, 363, 547, 576.

Justiuianopolis, 356, 383, 384.

Kaiserwertl), 41.
Kazan, xxvii.

Langres, 23.

Laodicea in Phrygia, xviii. xxvi,
xxvii, 9, 22, 42, 57, 59, 112,
124 seq., 162, 279, 361, 870,
378, 399, 405.

Laodicea ilagna, 225.

Lebanon, 359.

Leipsic, xx, xxi.

Libya, 16, 55, 434, 615.

Lilybanim, 56, 259.

Lindsay, 281.

Llanbadarn Vawr, 284.

London, xxi, 413.

Louvain, xx.

Lucania, 16.

Lucca, XX, 127.

Lyco, 286.

Lyons, xv, xx^ 23, 587.

Magnesia, 59.

Main ma, 270.

Marcianopolis, 225.

Mareotis, 434.

Marmorica, 53.

Mauretania, 461, 463, 466, 484, 486,

517.
Mauretania Csesariensis, 440, 486,

492, 504.
Mauretania Sitiphensis, 450, 483,

486, 503, 504.
May e nee, xxxiv, 23, 38.
Meaux, 244.
Melitina, 162.
Mesopotamia, 107, 241.
Metz, 283.
Migirpa, 458.
Milan. 143. 181, 272, 328, 413.414,

470, 471.


Milevis, 438, 488, 485.
Mocta, 504.
Monte Casino. 271.
Mopsuestia, 208, 231,234. 299,300,
301, 303, 3U4, 306, 821, 322,

360, 512.

Moscow, xxiii, xxv, xxvi, xxvii,

45.
Municli, 418.
Mutloblaca, 225.
Muzuba, 504.

Naples, 288, 504, 530.

Nasliotah, ix.

Nazianzum, 33, 34, 37, 177, 277,

Neocsesarea, xviii, xxvi, xxvii,
22, 23, 24, 32, 40, 43, 44, 45,
51, 52, 55, 57, 59, 60, 78, 79,
81, 86, 90, 113, 125, 154, 225,

361, 368. 373, 542, 579, 602.
Neustria, 176.

New York, xxi.

Nice, Nica?a in Bithvnia, xi, xiv,
XV, xvii, xxvi, 1, 2, 3, 8. 10,
12, 13, 15, 17, 18. 20, 22, 23,
24. 32, 33, 36, 60, 92. 93, 105,
108, 112, 113, 125, 126, 140,
151, 158, 178, 186, 187, 192,
199. 231, 235, 238, 249, 260,
2(;i, 2<)7, 274, 2S8, 294, 302,
344, 359, 360. 368, 403, 428,
436, 441, 442, 443, 5U6. 507,
508, 517, 524, 525. 580, 540,
548, 549, 552. 579. 582. 583,

584, 585, 586. 587. 592, 603.
Niconiedia, 32, 225, 267, 278.
Nicojiolis in Epirus, 267.
Nisibis, 48.

Novgorod, xxvi.

Numidia, 440, 441, 448. 447, 461,

464, 465, 483, 484, 486, 503,

504. 506, 517.
Nyssa, 87, 88, 272, 286, 803, 512,

611.

Ombria, 16.

Orange, 42, 130, 863.

Orleans, 38, 130, 270, 283, 385,

585. 592.
Ostia, 576.
Oxford, xvii, 45.

Palestine, 18. 107, 263, 266.

Pamphylia, 240.

Paphlagonia, 242.

Paris, xvii. xx, xxi, xxxii,

xxxiii, 45. 142, 526.
Parnassus, 225.
Pavio, 279.
Pelusium, 142. 286.
Pennaforte, 416.
Pentapolis, 16, 615.
Perga, 547.
Pcrrlia in Syria, 286.
Persia, 47.
Pharnn, 327. 343, 344, 347, 349,

353, 360.
Pharon, 836.
Phasis, 242.

Pl.iladelpliin, ix, 225, 231, 286.
Philippi, 220.

Pliilip])opolis, 184, 414. 435.
Phcenicia, 18, 107. 232. 266.


Pbrvgia, 150.

Picenuni in Italy, 16, 440, 508.

Pisidia, 150.

Poitiers, 37, 484.

Pontion, 23.

Pontus, 55, 78, 176, 287, 294, 295.

Potentiii, 441.

Prura, 536.

Ptoleniais, 225.

Puppiana, 458.

Ravenna, 25, 143, 329, 857.

Rheims, 38, 45, 283, 420, 526, 575.

Riez, 21.

Rome, xiv, xix, xxxiv, 9, 13, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 25. 44, 55, 56, 86,
113, 142, 145, 162, 166, 167,
178, 179, 180, 186, 187, 188,
219, 223, 2i6, 232, 248, 259,
261, 262, 272, 274, 275, 283,
288, 291, 294, 295, 299, 30(',
304, 305, 317, 323, 342, 343,
345, 352, 358, 360, 882, 418,
419, 423, 424. 454, 456, 475,
477, 493, 4'. 5, 507, r,08, 532.
583, 537, 538, 548, 571, 615.

Rusguninm, 504.

Russia, 134.

Rusucarrum, 504.

St. Alban's, 568.

St. Asapb's, xvii.

St. Brieuc, 231.

St. Petersburgb, ix, xxiii, xxv,
xxvi.

Salamis, 163.

Salona, xxxiv.

Samnium, 16.

Samosata, 4, 40, 46, 158, 162, 516.

Sardica, xv. xxvi, xxvii. xxxiv,
34, 44. 55. 60, 158, 177. 181,
182, 272, 274, 861, 410, 413,
414, 434, 435, 436, 442.

Sardinin, 16, 538.

Sasima, 177.

Scotland. 284,

Scytbin, 303.

Scytbopolis, 18.

Sebaste, 89, 97, 162. 295.

Sebastopol, 249, 261.

Seleucia, 47, 173.

Seville, xxxiv, 286.

Siccn, 506.

Sicily, 16. 357, 504. 530.

Silic'ia. 259.

Simidica, 504.

Sitifi,504.

Sorl)onne in Paris, 417.

Spain, 34, 56, 323.

Sufetula, 504.

SufRtula. 443.

Sweden, 35, 55, 508.

Svloeum, 547.

Syria, 21, 32, 62, 516.

Tagaste, 441, 486. 504.
Tarsus, 162, 225, 609.
Tbe Oaks, 512.
Thebais (Upper), 51.
Tlieodosia, 225.
Tbeopolis, 302.

Tbessalonica, 34, 180, 222, 357,
389, 390, 430.


G32


INDEX OF PLACES.


Thrace, 1T6. ITT, 28T, 294, 295.

Toledo, 1G(), 107, 168, 2T1, 286,
363, 385.

Tours, 36, 271.

Trajanopolis, 225.

Trastevere, 142.

Trent, 10. 93, 157.

Tripoli, 440, 465, 466, 486, 487.

Trullan, in Trullo (Conslantino-
ple), 60, 97, 110. 112.127,130,
149, 178, 229, 268, 2T9, 282,
28T, 349, 356 seci.. 3(i0, 366,
410, 414, 516, 556, 570, 591,
612.

Tubinia, 464.


Turin, 2, 45.

Tuscia, 16.

Tyana. 225, 2T7.

Tyre, 272, 290, 291, 363.

United States, 35.
Urspurg, 526.
Utica, 504.

Vagal, 485.
Valeria, 16.
Vannes. 385.
Vatican in Rome, 45.
Vazarita, 468.


Vegesela, 459.
Venice, 45. 379.
Verdun, 38.
Veri, 504.
Verona, 413, 421.
Vienna, 316.
Vienne, .xx.xv, 526.
Villa Regis, 464, 480.

Wales, 56.
Warsaw, xxv.
Westminster, 371, 526.

York, 38, 281.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Abbess. [See Clergy.]

Abbot. [See Clergy. J

Abortion, procurers of, 73, 604,
605 i fornicators causing, 73,
604 ; those giving and those
receiving drugs for, are guilty
of murder, 404.

Abraham, liis story reproduced in
painting, 639.

Absolution on promise of amend-
ment, 80 ; does ordination
grant it ? 83.

Accusations against bishops and
clerg}' regulated, 183, 505 ;
not allowed, if from mere feel-
ing or faction, 183; liave to
be stated in writing, 183. [See
Clergy.]

Accused or accuser may clioo.se his
place of safety if he fears vio-
lence, 457.

Accusers of bishops, how they are
to be dealt witli, 183.

Acolyte. [See Clergy.]

Actius, archdeacon, 59.

Actons, on their conversion, are not
to be denied, 463 ; cannot ac-
cuse the clergy, 504.

Actress, marriage to one is a bar to
ordination, 595.

Acts, The, as an historical author-
ity, 373.

Acts 11. 42 136 n.

Acts III. 15 209.

Acts VI. 1-6 86.

Acts XV. 28, 39 . . . . 92-93.

Acts of first two ecumenical coun-
cils are lost, 2 ; speculations
on their recovery, 2 n ; of the
third ecumenical council, 3,
197 seq. ; of the fourth ecu-
menical council, 3, 344 seq. ;
of the fifth ecumenical coun-
cil, 301 seq. ; of the sixth ecu-
menical council, 326 seq. ; of
the seventh ecumenical coun-
cil, 523 seq., 533 .seq.

Adam was not created subject to
death, 496.

Adjure, as part of the Exorcist's
office. [See Clergy.]

Administration of the churches,
184, 189.

Adulterer, seven years' penance,
73, 604; if priest, how to be
disciplined, 79; form of the
ancient discipline to, 402,
604 seq., 608.

Adulteress, seven years' penance,
73 ; if put away by lier hus-
band, 83 ; if she departs with-
out reason, 402 ; her penance,
402, 604 seq., 608 ; degrees of
fault, 606, 607.

Adultery charged against one who
marries a woman betrothed,
406.

Advocate of the most holy Church


of Constantinople, 284. [See
Clergy.]

Aedituus, a temple officer, 145 ;
magister and minister, 145.

^lia, the position and honor due
to its bisliop, 17; is next in
honor to the Metropolitan see,
17 ; is identified with Ctiesarea,
17 ; is identified witli Jerusa-
lem, 17, 18.

Africa, one not communicating in,
but going across seas, is cast
out, 494.

African Bishops, 44. 45 ; occasion
scandal, 370 ; have been ap-
pealing to court, 421, 422,
422 ; councils and canons, 438 ;
opposed to an appeal being
carried "acro-ss the water,''
456; dislres.sed condition of
the church, 471, 477, 483 seq.,
486 ; church promises to follow
the Roman, 474; bishops are
to be represented by the bisliop
of Carthage, 483; previous
decrees are confirmed, 483 ;
primacy not locallj' fixed, 484.

Agatho I., Pope, 325 seq., 343,
349; sent a legate to the
sixth ecumenical council, 326,
328 seq. ; was cited as one of
the patriarchs by the Emper-
or, 326 ; had been consulted
bj' the Emperor. 326 ; sent let-
ter to the council, 328 seq. ; his
letters were examined and ap-
proved, 328 ; confirms the five
general councils, 329, 330;
the statement of his faith,
330 seq. : confes.sed the two
wills, 331, 332 ; letter of
Agatho and the Koman Synod
to tlie Emi)eror, 340, 345; his
profession of faith, 340; his
suggestions confirmed bj' other
bishops, 342, 347 seq. ; letter
from the Synod at Constanti-
nople to him, 349 seq.

Albiuii, church register, 32.

Alexandria, its juri.sdiclion con-
firmed, 15 ; extent of its juris-
diction, 15, 180 ; was patri-
archal in its jurisdiction, 15,
16, 180, 287 seq. ; had jurisdic-
tion over the whole dioce.«;e of
Egypt, 15, 180 ; was placed
after Constantinople, 178, 180,
287 seq., 382; was under a
Metropolitan or Archbishop,
291 ; its see ranked as the
third, 382.

Alexis Comnenus, Emperor, 27 ;
extent of his penance, 27.

Alms-house. [See Poor-house.]

Altar set up in private assembly,
an act of schism, 110; priest-
hood alone go to it, and
communicate, 136; may not


be approached by ■women,
153 ; the only place for mak-
ing the oblation, 158 ; the set-
ting up is a mark of schism,
447, 448.

Alypius, Bp., atSardican Council,
424, 441 ; Bp. of the Tai;as-
tine Church, 441, 442, 480,
486, 503, 504 ; delegate of the
Council, 503, 504.

Ambo, the reading desk in church,
26, 132, 137, 381, 564; u.sed
by the canonical singers, 132;
used only by one who is ton-
sured, 381 ; used irregularly
by tonsured youths unor-
dained, 563.

Ambrogio, the church in Milan, 25.

Ambrose, on the Easter quest ion, 56.

Amphilochius, bishop of Seleucus,
from his iambics, 613.

Amulets are not to be made by
priesthood or clergy, 151 ;
those who wear them are to
be cast out of the church, 151 ;
givers of, are to be avoitled,
393.

Anastasius, Bishop of Rome, warns
the African Church against
the Donatists, 475.

Anathema from Christ, 148, 150;
for changing creeds, 167, 168.

Anchorites reserved the Holy Com-
munion, 392. [See Clergy.]

Ancient customs in Egypt, etc., to
prevail, 15 ; meaning of the
phrase in the Canon, 17.

Ancyra, council of in 314 a.d.,
62 seq. : its canons, 63 seq.

Angels, their invocation is forbid-
den, 150, 150 ; their invoca-
tion is covert idolatry, 150;
their invocation is a forsaking
our Lord Jesus Christ the Son
of God, 150 ; tliose who in-
voke will receive anathema,
150 ; their a.sscmblies •' for-
sake the Church of God,"
150; Christians are forbidden
to name (hvoixa^eiv) them, 150 ;
the cultus of, 151 ; Origenistic
ideas upon them and their re-
lation to Christ, 318, 319.

Anglican communion, its ages for
ordination, 372. [See Clergy.]

Annunciation, the feast of the, 155.

Anointing of converted heretics on
their reception, 127.

Anthimus, Archbishop of Constan-
tinople,was deposed, 34.

Antiraensia, or superaltar in an ora-
tory, 560 ; its special consecra-
tion, 561.

Antioch, the see of, 18, 382; its
privileges were secured by Ni-
cene Canon, 176; jurisdiction
of its bishop defined at CHialce-
don, 266 ; its see ranked as


634


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


fourth, 382; its jurisdiction
and privileges contirmed at
Nice, 15, 15, 47 ; its see in rela-
tion to that of Jerusalem, 19 ;
to that of Cyprus, 47 ; its rela-
tion to Constantinople, 178,
180, 382; received Flavian as
its bishop, 189 ; was placed
after Constantinople, 178, 180,
287 seq. ; the lAleletian party
there, 181.
Antioch, in Enca?niis, the Sj'nod of,
103 seq.; historical introduc-
tion, 105-6 ; its dale known,
105 ; held in the summer of
341, A.ii. 105; had no West-
ern bishops, 105 ; historical
difficulty surrounds it. 105-6 ;
was o])posed to Athanasius,
105; was "Synodus Sancto-
rum," 105 ; its canons obtained
great authority. 105 ; {lerhaps
the true solution of the dif-
ticulty, 106 ; the synodal letter,

107 ; titles given "to the synod,

108 n.
Autiphon, 138, 159.

Apiariiis, presljyter at Sicca, 44,
506 ; was excommunicated for
scandal, 506; was restored to
the rank of the presbyterate,
506; formal report upon the
case, 509 seq. ; was cast out of
the church, 510.

Apollinare, churches in ]?avenna,
25.

Apollinaris. [See Heretics.]

Apostates, 66; compelling others
to apostatize, 66; their pen-
ances, 66-7; on their conver-
sion are not to be denied, 463 ;
here probably referring to the
Lapsi, 463.

Apostolic Canons were confirmed
by Nicene Canon, 8, 10 ; are re-
ferred to, 10, 11, 12, 93, 555;
decision at Jerusalem, 92, 93 ;
their authority, xi, 113, 366,
591 seq.; confirmed by the
Quinisext Council, 361, 366,
591 ; not directly ascribed to
the authorshi]) of the Apostles,
361, 362, 366, 555, 591 seq.;
witness to contemporary cus-
toms, 366, 555 ; may be of Apos-
tolic origin, 591, 592; their
probable date, 591 ; their place
in early collections, 591, 592;
recent di-scussions upon, 592,
593 ; index of printed editions
in Slavonic and Russian,
XXV seq.

Aposlolic Synod and decisions, 92,
93.

Apostolical Constitutions, was re-
jected at (Juinisext Council,
361; is believed to have been
corrupted, 361; if written by
Clement, 361; its origin, 137,
361; Harnack's theory upon,
593.

Apparel, strange, assumed by Eus-
talhians, 91; strange, also by


slaves, 91; plainness and fru-
gality commended, 101 ; ex-
cess to be eschewed, 101.

Appeals to the Emperor, how regu-
lated, 114, 420, 495, 502,
507; on a doubtful synodical
decision were to extra provin-
cial bisho})S, 115, 510; none
against a unanimous judg-
ment, 115; made discreditable
among the clergy, 183; no re-
course to the secular powers,
276; question of appeal for
the highest Pontiff, 374 ; might
be made to Julius, bishop of
Home, 417, 417 seq. ; di.scus-
sion upon the cjuestion of ap-
peals to Rome, 417 seq., 442,
456, 495, 507, 510; court of
appeal for the cleriiv. 442,448,
449. 456, 502, 507, 510; from
the African church are not to
be carried " acro.ss the water,"
456 507,510; in the African
church the Court of Appeal
consists of 12 neighboring bish-
ops, 456, 456, 502, 507'; to an
universal council. 456, 510;
clergy must appeal within the
year, 481; those appealing to
the court must give notice to
the bishops of Rome or Car-
thage, 495 ; they shall receive
and carry formal letters from
the primate, 495 ; " all matters
should be settled in the places
where they arise," 510 ; to the
synod against bishops, 111,
448, 459, 510; appeals from
presbvters, deacons, laitv, and
all clerics. Ill, 448, 449; by
the church to the secular pow-
ers for protection, 472, 476,
488, 489; no appeal from
judges chosen by the plaintilf.
491, 501; one may ask from
the Emperor an episcopal trial,
494; as between the Donatists
and Calholics at the former's
conforming. 500, 501.

Arabic canons spurious, 1, 43 seq.;
given, 46 .seq.

Archbishop. [See Clergy.]

Archdeacon. [See Clergy.]

Aristenu.s, Alexi.s, canonist,
xxxiii ; his life and work,
xxxiii.

Armenian irreirularities, 381, 391,
407.

Asceticism, underlying Eustathian-
ism, 92 seq. ; merging into un-
enlightened hyperasceticism,
92 se([., 101; in special features
of the Roman church, 98 ; not
in itself to be spoken against,
101 ; objected to on the score
of pretence, pride, and want of
charily, 101.

Ascetics, none of the class ought to
enter a tavern, 144; nnist not
batbe with women, 149.

Asian diocese, its bishops adminis-
ter Asian affairs onl}-, 176;


its bishops are to be ordained
by the Patriarch of Constanti-
nople, 177, 287.

Assemblies for the invocation of
angels is forbidden, 150 ; those
leaving the church for such are
open to anathema, 150. [See
Angels.]

Astrologer, definition of, 151 ;
priesthood or clergy shall not
be, 151.

Astronomy is not forbidden to the
clergy, 151.

Athanasius was acquitted by Jeru-
salem Synod, 18 ; bishops op-
posed him at Antioch, 105 ; his
return to Alexandria, 413, 414 ;
discoverv of his Paschal Let-
ters, 413^414, 433, 434 ; he was
received bj' theSardican coun-
cil, 435 ; his reception caused
a rupture in the council, 435 ;
his epistle to the Monk Ani-
mus (or Amun), 602 ; his epistle
upon the Canon of Scripture,
603 ; his epistle to Rulianus,
603 seq.

Atrium in a church, 25.

Atticus, Bp. of Constantinople, 44.

Audientes. [See Hearers. ]

Aunt maj^ live with clergyman, 46.

Aurelius, bishop of Carthaire, 441,
458, 465, 485, 486, 487,
489, 5C6; his allocution to
the African Council, 458 ;
held a council to receive \\\i
report of delegates to the
West, 486; was authorized. to
sign decrees, letters, etc., 495,
503, 500.

Autocephalous churches, 177.

Auxentius, a notary of Liciuius,
anecdote of, 28.

Azymes of the Jew.s, are not to
be received, 151.

Bacchus's name ^hall not be in-
voked. 393.

Ballerini, The, 37.

Balsamon, Theodore, scholiast,
xxxiii ; his Schok'a. xxxiii ;
the Piiratitles, xxxiii.

Baptism is preceded by the ste]is
in the catechumenate, 185;
shall not take place in private
oratory without the bishop's
leave, 379; is to be given to
unknown infants, 402 ; the
virtue of such a mystery, 402 ;
for putting on Christ and his
life, 405; should not be given
to the bodies of the dead,
450, 451 ; is to be given to the
sick if they have desired it,
463; is not to be repeated,
464 ; bv heretics, questions
upon, 470, 471, 516 ; the
spiritual laver, 10 ; not to be
hurried on, 10, 10; its spirit-
\ial effect, 24, 154 ; followed
l)y confirmation and commun-
ion to infants. 29, 30; in
name of the Trinity, 20, 40 ;


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


635


the Piuilianisl's invalid, 40;
by imnieision, 41, 82; dea-
conesses were useful in the
rite, 41 ; sponsors in, 47 ;
names given, 47 ; covers pre-
vious siu, 68, 126 : clinical, is
a bar to ordination, 84, 154 ;
given in sickness, 84, 154 ;
was often postponed, 85 ;
heretical, as held inv;ilid,
128, 185; forms of, by the
heretics, 604; candidates for,
cannot come after the second
■week in Lent, 153; time and
modes of preparation for, 153 ;
is not to be repeated on clinics,
154 ; must be followed by
chrism, 154; shall not take
place in an oratory within a
house, 392; should be given
to infants, 496 ; question of,
heretical, 517, 518; shall not
be repeated, 597 ; shall be
into the Father, the Sou, and
the Holy Ghost, 597, 610;
shall not be into three unorigi-
nated beings, or three sons or
three comforters, 597; shall
be with three immersions and
not with only one, 597, 610;
th.e renunciations at, 610; at
Easter, 611.

Barbarian churches, 379, 379.

Barbarians, the church suffering
from, 282, 374, 382; priests
among them, to be cared for,
379 ; church standing is pre-
served under disorders from,
382 ; indulgence to irregulari-
ties caused by, 382; their op-
pression of the Christians, 602;
canons made necessary by
them, 602 ; date of the canons,
c. 240, A.D. 602 n.

Basil, bishop of Ancyra, 234. 533;
his withdrawal from the Icono-
clasts and his submission, 533;
his confession on his return to
orthodox V, 533; his confession
of the faith, 533.

Basil, Bp. of Cii^sarea (the Great),
25, 71, 127, 131, 132, 213, 248,
273, 275, 277, 303, 361, 380,
545, 567, .583 ; allowed Valens
to witness the holy mysteries,
127 ; his hospital near Caesarea,
273, 275 ; enjoins the use of
water and wine in the eucha-
rist, 380; his Basiliad, 273,
275 ; his canons for regulating
the order of Virgins, 384,
384 ; his first canonical epistle,
604 ; his second canonical epis-
tle, 605 ; his third epistle, 607 ;
his epistle to Amphilochius,
307, 609 ; to Diodorus, Bp. of
Tarsus, 609 ; to Gregory, a
presbyter, 610; to the chor-
episcopi. 610; to the suffra-
gans, 610; from chapter xvii.
of his book to Amphilochius,
610 ; from letter to the Nico-
politans, 611.


Basiliad, built by S. Basil near
Cffisarea, 273, 275.

Basilides, a Spanish bishop, 63.

Bassianus, 59.

Belt, the soldier's badge, 28.

Bema, in a church, 26.

Benedict XIV., in favor of the
new views of usury, 39.

Benenatus, African bishop, 496 ;
received legation against the
Donatists, 496.

Berus, common upper garment,
97.

Bestial sins — how dealt with, 70;
penance measured by age, 70 ;
penance measured by condi-
tion, 70.

Betrothal, its close relation to
marriage, 406, 407.

Beveridge, bishop of S. Asaph,
value of his collection in the
Sfinodicon, xv ; contents of the
Synodieon, xvii. seq.

Bigamy, a bar to ordination, 23;
its discipline, 47, 80 ; matter
of penance, 50, 80 ; is dis-
tinguished from digamy, 125.

Birds or other living things shall
not be offered on the altar,
594.

Birthday feasts are not to be cele-
brated in Lent, 156.

Bishop. [See Clergy.]

Bishops, the translation of, excur-
sus on. [See Clergy.]

Blasphemy a bar to ordination,
23.

Blastares, Matthew, his collection
of canons, xxxiii.

Blood, eating of, forbidden, 92,
93, 395, 395, 598; how al-
lowed to a dainty stomach,
395 ; the slackening of the
restriction, 395.

Bond servants are not to be or-
dained, 46. [See Slaves.]

Boniface, Pope, 44, 45.

Books, uncanonical, may not be
read in church, 158 ; canoni-
cal books of the Old and New
Testament may alone be read,
158 ; canonical list, 159 ; but
the canon and list are proba-
bly not genuine, 159 ; of the
Old and New Testament are
not to be cut up or corrupted,
396 ; of holy and approved
preachers and teachers are not
to be cut up, etc., 396; were
used by heretics to support
their errors, 396.

Bota is to be abolished from the
life of the faithful, 393, 394.

Bribery resorted to with the Chris-
tian soldiers, 28.

Britain, 55. .^36.

British church, its Easter tradi-
tion. 56.

Brwnnlia is to be abolished from
the life of the faithful, 393,
394

Bulgaria, lu-ivileges belonging to
its bishop, 177.


Csecilian, Bp., 44.

Caesarea, had its metropolitan un-
der Antioch patriarchate, 16 ;
its bishop above him of Jeru-
salem, 46.

Colatores, 145, 146.

Calendars on Easter, 56, 108.

Calends, so called, shall be abol-
ished from tlie life of the faith-
ful, 393.

Calvin has given the modern moral
code of usury, 37.

Calvinistic teaching on the Eu-
charist, 39.

Oaricelh, or chancel, in a church,
26.

Canon, the ecclesiastical, as a bind-
ing law, 125, 193 ; its ecclesi-
astical value, 127-8; some
were of a local or temporary
character, 373.

Canon, excursus on the word, 1,
9, 557; "the Canon of faith,"
9 ; " the canon of truth," 9 ;
contrary to ecclesiastical, 10,
101,234; early collections of,
59 ; of the church, 91, 101 ;
named with the Scriptures,
101; the holy canon, external
honor due to, 108; "ancient
canon which prevailed from
our fathers," 112, 113; "ac-
cording to the canons," 176;
"forbidden by the ancient
canons," 283 ; canon-law, and
its collections, xxxii. seq.

Canonical Books of the Old and
New Testaments, 158, 453-4,
599, 612 ; may alone be read
in church, 158, 454, 612;
their names, 159, 453-4, 599,
612; list of Laodicea prob-
ably not genuine, 159.

Canonical Hours. [See Choir
Offices.]

Canonical Letters. [See Letters
Commendatory. ]

Canonization by the Pope, 162,
162 n.

Canons of Nice, the twenty, with
the ancient epitome and notes,
1, 8 seq. ; excursus on the num-
ber of the Nicene, 1, 43 seq. ;
spurious Arabic, 1, 46 seq.;
" contrary to the canons of
the Holy Apostles," 234; the
canons made in synods preced-
ing Chalcedon are to remain
in force, 267, 388 ; forbidden
by the ancient canon, 283;
often the revival of a former
canon, 388, 557 ; must be
obeyed by bishops and clergy,
556, 5.56 ; collections of, xv
seq., xxxii seq. ; Nomocanon,
xxxii ; Syntagnia, xxxii ;
'S.vvoSiKhv, sive pandectae,
xxxii.

Cantharus in a church, 25.

Cantor. [See Singer.]

Captives by the barbarians shall
be dealt with leniently, 6C2 ;
those who have eaten wiih the


636


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


barbarians are not as those
eating with itiols, 682.

Carmelites in making their profes-
sion, 3b7.

Caroline books, examination of, 578
seq. ; tlieir authorship, 578 ;
theirauthority, 578 sec]. ; their
contents, 579 seq. ; the cliief
cause of trouble a logomachy,
582 ; chief strictures of Hefele
ui)oii them, 582 seq.

Carosus, 59.

Carthage, the canons of, 410, 438
seq. ; canons of the council
held under Cyprian, 410, 510
seq. ; its inqxirtance in Africa,
438 seq., 465, 4()9. 483; its
bishop had the privilege of or-
daining liishops at his discre-
tion, 468-9.

Carthage, tlie council of, held
under Cyprian 257, a.d. 515
seq. ; introductory' note, 516 ;
tlie most ancient of synods,

516 ; synod of 84 bishops, 516,

517 ; Cyprian's letter upon
lieretical baptism, 518 seq.

Cartilage, the 217 blessed fathers
who assemlilcd at, in 419, a.d.
commonly called tlie code of
canons of the African church,
441 seq. ; upon the councils at
Carthage, 438 seq. ; standing
and authority of the African
code, 438, 506 ; had vast num-
ber of synods or councils. 488 ;
list of the councils, 439, 458
seq. ; value of collection of can-
ons as a collection, 439, 506;
question as to the genuineness
of their Niccne decrees, 442
seq.; orders issued for exam-
ination into that question, 443 ;
the canons, 444 ; note upon the
ratitication, 506 ; case of Apia-
rius taken up and reported
upon, 506, 509 seq.; proposed
that a plenary council meet in
Carthage, and the other prov-
inces, 490 ; decreed that a
universal council be held in
the African church when
necessary, 490, 491.

Castration, its relation to church
discipline, 8, 8, 9, 595 ; by
surgical operation, 8, 595 ;
by barbarians, 8, 8, 595 ; l)y
voluntary action, 8, 8, 595 ;
on a slave, 8, 8 ; Nicene canon
upon, confirmed by later syn-
ods, 9 ; was common among
the Messalians, 241 ; counted
in the church the same as self-
murder, 595.

Castrensians, otiicers of the palace,
273.

Catechumens, need time and prep-
aration for baptism, 10, 10,
11, 185 5 where they stood in
church. 26 ; how disciplined
if they have lajxsed, 31; tlieir
place in the service, 31, 136,
138 ; different kinds or classes,


31, 32, 81, 82, 185; how they
were instructed, 32, 185 ; had
their names registered, 32 ; j)e-
riods for their registration, 32 ;
the lap.sed, how they were to
be disciplined, 31, 68 ; though
lapsed, could be ordained, 68 ;
how disciplined when they
fell, 81 ; prayer said for, and
dismissed, 136, 138 ; invited
by the deacon to leave, 138 ;
how classed, 147, 153 ; by dis-
pensation made readers and
singers, 363 ; recited the creed
on Friday to the bishop or
presbyter, 399; confes.sed the
faith prior to baptism, 82 ;
professed their desire for bap-
tism, 82.

Catholic phraseology, 39 ; goes
with a Catholic church, 392.

Cattle or other beasts shall not he
driven into a church, 403 ; ne-
cessity may allow it to be done,
403.

Celestine I. charges Nestorius with
heresy, xiii, xiv n., 192 ; re-
ceives from Cyril a full ac-
count of Nestorius's teaching,
192 ; put Nestorius under the
tJireat of excommunication,
192 ; sent his deputies to the
Council of Ephesus, 193,

219 seq. ; wrote a letter to the
closing council, 195 ; his let-
ter to the synod of Ephesus,

220 seq. ; his legates or depu-
ties acted in his name at Nesto
rius's de]iosition, 223 ; is not
to be mistaken for Celestius,
225, 226, 229 ; letter of the
sj-nod of Ephesus to Celes-
tine, 237 seq.

Celibacy, a vow by deaconesses, 41.
[See Clergy.]

Cemeteries, heretical meetings in,
129 ; the faithful must not
attend such meetings, 129 ;
discipline for attending such
meetings, 129.

Chalcedon, the fourth ecumenical
council, 451, a.d. 243 seep ;
under JMarcian and Pulcheria,
emjierors in the east, 243,
262, 359 ; under Valentinian
III., emperor in the west,
243, 267; the history is high-
ly controversial and difficult,
3, 12, 18, 19, 23, 29. 59, 86,
111, 112, 116, 130, 167, 169,
171, 177, 178, 186, 199, 200,
201, 233, 244, 277, 278, 302,
382 ; Bossuet's account of,
244 seq. ; its fathers expound-
ed the canon of Elphesus, 233 ;
Leo's letter or tome was gen-
erally accepted, 244 ; the tome
was tested for its agreement
with the Nicene faith, xiv,
244; its code of canons. 111;
extracts from the acts, 247 seq. ;
Nicene creed was read and
approved, 249 ; its statement


upon commendatory letters,
112; creed of Ephesus was
read and approved, 249; Cy-
ril's letter to Nestorius was
read, 250; Cyril's letter to
John, Bp. of Antioch, was
read, 250 ; text of Cyril's let
ter to John, 251 seq. ; the
reading of the Tome of St.
Leo, 254 seq. ; definition of
faith, 262 ; its sentence against
Eutyches, 111; the xxx. canons
of the holy and fourth Syn-
ods, of Chalcedon, 267 seq. ;
contirniMtion given to the can-
ons ot all earlier synods, 267,
302; canon xxviii. long held
ill susjieuse by the Latins,
287; controversies regarding
the synod itself, 302 ; its deal-
ings with the Three Chapters,
309 seq. ; condemned Euty-
ches, Nestorius, and Diosco-
ru.s, 260, 312, 344, 359; its
faith continued liy the Quiiii-
sext Council, 359; its canons
also confirmed there, 361; its
relation to the Roman see, xiv,
xxxiv ; it granted special
honour and privilege to Con-
stantinople, xiv.

Chalcedon, the see was made a
titular metropolis, 278.

Charisius, his libelhim against Nes-
torius, 231, 232.

Charities to the poor commendable,
101.

Charles L, King, his vow to restore
church proiierty, 284 n.

Chartophylax. [See Clekgy.]

Chasuble, 143.

Cheese, as used in Armenia, is for-
bidden in Lent, 391.

Child unborn has no part in the
mother's baptism, 82; under
his father for nurture and
training, 98.

Children, must not be neglected on
any pretence of piety, 98 j
must honor their parents, es-
pecially believers, 99; must
not withhold reverence from
them on any plea of piety, 99.

Choir offices, excursus on, 134, 35 ,
their origin in the Jewish, 134 .
tlieories as to their origin, 134.

Chorepiscopi, excursus on, 21 seq.
[See Clergy.]

Chrism for anointing converted
heretics, 127 : must follow bap-
tism, 154, 154 ; called " the
heavenly," 154, 154 ; on the
forehead of the baptized, 154 ;
as related to confirmation,
154 ; its consecration and the
rites thereat, 1.54, 610; restric-
tions as to the persons making
it, 445, 446; and on their us-
ing it, 446.

Christriiis last act.s, 56 ; in relation
to the Logos, 174. 175, 176;
"one only Christ both God and
Man at the same time," 210,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


G37


210 seq. ; the union of natures
in Christ is hypostatic, 211 ;
cannot be spoken of as two
persons or subsistences, 211;
scripture expressions belong
to Him as one person, 211;
how He increased in wisdom
and stature, 312; His Hu-
miliation, 211, 212; is Very
God, and not Theophorus
(God-bearing), 212 ; heresy to
say He is only energized by the
Word of God, 213; heresy to
say the glorj'' of the Only Be-
gotten is not properly His, 213,
219; Nestorius's account of
His working miracles, 214,215
seq.; Nestorius's account of
His gloriticatiou by tlie Holy
Ghost, 214, 215 seq. ; excursus
on how He worked miracles,
215 seq. ; His relation to the
Holy Ghost, 215 ; discussion
at Chalcedon on " of " or " in "
two natures, 263 seq. ; the
union in Him as differently
understood, 312 ;only one Hy-
postasis or Person, 312 seq.,
335, 340, 341, 345, 347; the
union is not relative but real,
in One Person, 312, 313, 322 ;
how He ought and ought not
to be worsliipped, 314,322;
true God, Lord of Glory,
One of the Trinity, 314, 340,
346, 347 ; Origenistic ideas of
His assuming angelic forms,
318 seq. ; Origenistic ideas of
His relation to angels and de-
mons, 319; the teaching of
Theodore of Mopsuestia upon,
322 ; question of the one will in
Christ, 327, 330 seq., 342 seq.,
345, 347 ; the two natures, two
natural wills and operations,
330 seq., 345, 347 ; set the ex-
ample of celibacy, 365 ; Virgin
Christ and Virgin Mary, 367 ;
was I)orn without parturition,
399, 400 ; speculations on the
mode of His birth, 400 ; the
time of His resurrection is
unknown!, 403; one denying
Christ antl repenting may be
received on his death-bed, 609.

Christianity decreed to be taken at
one's own free choice, 496.

Christians, some tried a compro-
mise with idolatry, 66 ; must
not leave thechurc'hand invoke
angels, 150; must not join in
wanton wedding dances, 156,
157; should only modestly
dine or breakfast at a wedding,
156 ; must observe their Chris-
tian standing, 157 ; shall not
take oil to heathen temples,
598 ; or to the sj'nagogues of
the Jews, 598.

Christians plundering Christians
during a lieathen invasion shall
be excommunicated, 602.

1 Chron. xxix. 20, 527.


Chrysostom, 80, 33, 52, 114, 132,
281, 303, 379, 545 ; canon used
against, 110, 114; was de-
fended in canon, 379, 380.

Church, arrangement in the build-
ing, 25, 26 ; leaving it without
theEucharist isforbidden, 108,
109 ; and without the prayers,
108, 109; leaving it " by rea-
son of some disorder " is for-
bidden, 108 ; forbidden to
receive in one church malcon-
tents of another, 109 ; its ap-
peal to the civil power, 110,
111 ; its good to be considered,
118; its property under the
bishop, with the knowledge of
all the clergy, 120, 121; its
property must always be
known and carefully adminis-
tered, 120, 121, 614; its prop-
erty must not be lost or em-
bezzled, 120, 121, 614; its
funds arc administered bj^ the
bishop and clergy, 121 ; its
rent of farms, 121 ; embezzle-
ment of its propertj' forbidden,
69, 95, 285, 455, 457; recov-
ery of property lies on the
bishop, 69 ; evils in a vacancy
of, 69, 285 ; spoken against by
the Eustathians, 91, 94; her
tirst fruits squandered by the
Eustatiiians, 91, 95 ; sacred-
ness of her property, 95, 285,
455 ; public readings in, 394 ;
no beasts or cattle shall be
driven into, except under neces-
sity, 403; must have no boil-
ing of meat in the sanctuary,
407, 407 ; offerings of cooked
meat are to be made outside
the church, 407; her income
taken charge of by the steward
during a vacancy, 285 ; re-
garded as widowed, 285, 285;
must have a steward to act
under the bishop, 285 ; in all
the world should follow one
rule, 391 ; her music and sing-
ing, 398; is defiled by connec-
tion of husband and wife, 406 ;
her goods shall not be sold,
455 ; if it be of necessit}' let it
be laid before Metropolitan
and bishops, 455 ; the Meti'o-
poiitan is responsible if he
sell without consulting, 455 ;
a small country church called
titulus, 458.
Church, teaches the traditional
faith, 2 ; the Catholic and the
Apostolic, 19, 185; may receive
back tlie Catliari, 19; receive
heretics into communion on
definite profession, 19; ar-
rangement of the worshippers,
31 ; the Catholic, 19, 23 ; the
holy and great synod of the
church, 31, 32 ; recognized and
had a distinct hierarchy, 39 ;
obedience required to what is
rightl}' ordained in the, 108 ;


obedience to, under pain of ex-
communication, 109; its faith
is not for private judgment,
108 ; prescribes certain fasts,
100 ; her prescribed fasts are
not to be neglected, 100 ; mem-
bers of the church or Ecclesias-
tici, 129; the one holy Catholic
and apostolic, 164 ; becoming
stronger in moral and spiritual
force, 382, 382 ; lessening the
age of entering orders, 384 ;
" go to a Catholic church,"
392; the Catholic church
spread abroad throughout all
the world, 431.

Church, in Africa, followed the
civil reckoning for dates, 485 ;
at The Oaks near Chalcedon
was consecrated, 512 ; her
property is under the charge of
the bishop, 596; the churcli's
property and the bishop's must
be distinct, 596 ; the property
of neither must suffer from the
other on any pretext, 596 ; any
one stealing the sacred vessels
or the holy veil shall be ex-
commimicated, 598 ; any one
converting them to his own
use shall be excommunicated,
598; its vexations and abuses
under the barbarians, 602,
609 ; order preserved by in-
dulgence in barbarian disor-
ders, 382; in city, village,
martyry or monastery, 2*71;
the C5atholic, 278.

Church, of Bulgaria, 177; of Cy-
prus, 177 ; of England, hereu-
charistic teaching, 39 ; of Ibe-
ria, 177.

Churches, as houses of God,
spoken against by Eustathians,
91, 94 ; the despising them is
forbidden at Gangra, 94; the
speaking against them is com-
mon in all ages, 94 ; opposi-
tion assemblies are forbidden
at Gangra, 94 ; not to be for-
saken for private assemblies,
109, 109 ; not to be forsaken
for the invocation of angels,
150, 150 ; the singing is not
to be shouting in, 398 ; should
not be eating places, or for
selling food, 398 ; no place of
sale or exchange, 398, 399 ;
their consecration, 560; relics
used at the consecration, or
deposited after, 560; were ]iol-
luted, abused and destroyed by
the Iconoclasts, 564, 564 ;
canonof Nicaea II. directstheir
recovery, 564; to be rever-
enced as God's houses, 101,
146, 148 5 their assemblies are
holy and healthful, 101 ; gath-
erings in, are for the conunon
profit, 101 ; agnpa? mav not
be held in them,^148, 398," 461 ;
not to be used for eating, or
spreading couches in, 148,


G38


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


398 ; called tlie Lord's House. '
and the House of God, 148;
iu lieathen nations, must be ,'
goveined by ancient custom,
177.

Civil power, appealed to by the
church, 110, 111 ; appeals to
are resti'icled and rt-gulaleti,
114, 114; is used as a means
for ecclesiastical disturbance,
283, 284.

Clement, two epistles and con-
stitutions of, 600.

Clement V. commenced the Clem-
entines, XXXV.


CLERGY AND CLERICAL
CONNEXIONS.

Abbess, head of monastery for
women, 565 ; has less general
power than an abbot, 565 ;
shall not receive any into her
monastery for a monev gift,
567.

Abbot, must be under the bishop,
270.

Acolyte, history of the office,
144 seq. ; an otficial of the
Roman temple, 145, 146.

Adjure, part of the exorcist's
office, 147 ; none can, but
those promoted to the office
by the bishop, 147; done in
church or in private house,
147.

^avocate, is on the church roll,
268, 559; may be punished
for simony, 268, 559; IkSikos,
defensor, 268 ; office was held
by ecclesiastics, 268 ; Protec-
dicos acted as judge, 268,
284; shall not be advanced
for money, 559.

Alexandria, bishop of, has juris-
diction over Egypt, 176.

Anchorite life and its probations,
385.

Archbishop, absolves in unjust dis-
cii)line, 46, 48; must give
consent to an Episcopal elec-
tion, 46; his enthronization,
50.

Archdeacon, his rank and duty,
49, 285, 286 ; was replaced by
the Steward, 285, 286. [See
Stewakd.]

Archpriest, 49.

Bishop, excursus on the translation
of, 1, 415 seq.; shall not be a
recent convert, 10, 425 ; ap-
[lointetl by all the bishojjs in
the province. 11, 12, 117, 118,
131,420,448,557 ; appointed
by at least three of the jirovin-
cial bishops, 11, 12, 448; ap-
pointed with the written suf-
frages of the absent bishops,
11,"^12, 117, 118. 448, 557;
his appoinlnicnt to lie con-
firmed by the Meti'n])(ilit:in, 11, i
12, 15, 46, 117, 420, 448 ; his j


Clergy — Continued.

ordination, 11, 12, 117, 420,
425, 448, 460, 557, 594; his
election, 11, 12, 15, 15, 16, 46,

118, 131, 416, 426,426, 557;
liow nominated, 12 ; his ordi-
nation by three bishops, 12,
420, 557; his election ])y a
majority of bishops, 15, 117,
131, 557; never two equal in
one cily, 20, 22, 48; may be
lowered to the rank of a pres-
byter, 22, 71 ; crimes for which
the bishop is punishable, 23,
24, 46, 50, 119, 428, 429;
punishable equally with a pres-
byter, 23; must respect ex-
communication by another
bishop, 13, 46, 109, 427,
510, 594; must not excom
municate through captiousness
or contention, 13, 428, 429,
507 ; he laid hands on the
prostrator penitents, 26 ; was
judtre in the public penance,
27,28, 29, 63, 74 ; giving the
viatici/m, 29 ; laid hands on
catechumens, 32 ; forbidden to
go from citv to city, 32, 46,

115, 118, 119, 176, 271, 415,
416, 594; must have fair trial,
48; if married before ordina-
tion, 51, 370, 388 ; had power
in questions of penance, 63,
65, 66, 74, 462, 608, 609;
he must confine his ordina-
tions to his own clergv, 35,
47, 115, 119, 176, 429, 468,
596; has his ordinations can-
celled by irregularity, 35, 115,

119, 429 ; concelebrating, 39 ;
a custom in ordaining a bish-
o]) or presbyter, 39 ; nuist not
live with women. 46, 388,
567 ; if he forces his election,
46 ; must avoid irregularities
in ordination, 46, 115, 176,
428, 429, 599; is to be honored
by ])resl)yters and deacons,
46; shall not choose his suc-
cessor, 48, 119; judge in di-
vorce, 48 ; his enthronization,
50 ; a celii)ate, 51 ; some
were married, 52, 388; he
ma}' allow a deacon to be mar-
ried, 67, 67 ; has power of dis-
pensation, 67, 363 ; must not
usurp another parish, 71, 115,

116, 118, 119, 176, 416, 594;
if expelled from another par-
ish, 71 ; his consent c(Milirms
the presbj'ter in acting, 94,
94, 95, 158 ; must observe
the Nica\an Easter on pain of
deposition, 108; excommmii-
cated for comnumicating with
one excommunicated, 109,
447, 594, 595 ; must recall or
depose an absenting deacon or
presbyter, 109; must not nul-
iHv the ecclesiastical laws,
1C9. 119 ; to be deposed for re-
ceiving the deposed of another


Clergy — Cotitinui d.

parish, 109, 110, 594; if de-
posed, he can exercise no part
of his ministry, 110, 594 ; ap-
pealed against to synod by
priest or deacon or laity, 111,
507 ; his excommunication
stands unless altered by syn-
o(l, 111; must acknowledge
his nielroj)oliian, 112, 113.
428, 596; the position and
duties of a bishop, 112, 113,
594, 596; appeal to the Em-
]>eror restricted, 114, 423,
424; must have metropolitan's
con.sent for an appeal, 114,

424 ; if deposed by a synod
niav appeal to the irrcat svnod
of bishops, 114, 183, 418; if
dei^osed by a synod, may not
appeal to the Emperor," 114,
183, 420; if deposed by a
synod, must abide by the deci-
sion of the greater synod, 114,
183 ; cannot ordain in another
jMovince without consent of
the other metropolitan and
bishops, 115, 119, 176, 429.
594, 596 ; has no jurisdiction
or power in another ]>rovince,
115,119, 176,428, 596; must
suffer deposition for irregidar-
ity and interference, 115, 119,

425 seq. ; if condemned by a
divided judgment, he may ap-
peal to other bishops, 116,
418; if condemned by unani-
mous decision, he has no ap-
peal, 115, 116; shall not seize
a vacant throne, even with the
people's consent, 116; when
ordained, may be rejected b\'
his parish, 117, 596 ; when or
dained must accept the church
intrusted to him, 116, 596;
if he refuse to accept and
serve, he shall be excommuni-
cated, 116, 596; his case lies
for decision by a full synod of
bishops, 116; one rejected by
his parish, for no fault of his,
retains his rank and ministry,
117, 117, 382,383, 596; the
case of one thus rejected is de-
termined by a full synod, 117 ;
he shall not disturb the aflairs
of another church, 117, 119,
176, 594 ; he must remain quiet
until Ills case is determined,
117 ; not to be ordained with-
out a synod and metropolitan,
117, 131; not to lie ordained
without a majority iiresent or
assenting. 117 ; his ordination,
if contiary to canon, is in-
valid, 117 ; any later objection
to his ordination is to be set-
tled by a majority, 117; may
not be translated from parish
to ])arish, 118, 415, 594 ; is
not to intrude himself into a
vacant parish, 118, 176, 594,
must remain in the uaii^h


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


639


Clergy — Continued.

given him by God, 118, 594 ;
is not to be translated by com-
pulsion of the bishops, 118,
594 ; can ordain in another
jurisdiction with the other
bishop's consent, 119; for ir-
regularity a bishop is amena-
ble to the synod, 119; his in-
terference in another parish
must have been frequent, 119 ;
if chosen by his predecessor
he is disqualified, 119; must
be appointed by a synod, and
with the judgment of the bish-
ops, 119, 120: a coadjutor
cum jure suecessionia, 120 ; with
the presbyters and deacons,
bishop has charge of all church
property, 120, 120, 121, 596;
ins property at his decease
must be honestly cared for,
120, 596 ; his heirs must not
be vexed and harried with
lawsuits, 120, 596; he may
bequeath all his private prop-
erty to any one, 120, 596 ; he
controls the funds of the
church, 121, 596 ; must dis-
pense tiiem in piety and godly
fear, 121, 596; may apply
church - funds to necessary
uses, 121, 596 ; shall not ap-
propriate or waste church rev-
enue, 121, 283, 381, 458,
696 ; shall not allow friends
or relatives to do so, 121,
596; if accused of dishonest
dealing, he shall appeal to the
synodT 121, 183 ; qualifica-
tions necessary for his elec-
tion, 131 ; not to be elected
by popular tunuilt, 131. 415;
his sermon in the liturgv,
136, 138 ; his place and duty
in the liturgy, 136, 138,
139 ; his place among the
clergy, 140 ; his distinctive
dres^, 141, 142 ; wore golden
mitre or fillet, 141 ; when
called to a sj'nod, he must at-
tend, 152, 282, 420; and
either teach or be taught,
152; he can only be excused
by ill-health from attending
synod. 152, 282 ; or by other
unavoidable hindrance, 152,
282 ; should not he guilty of
contempt, 152, 282; enters
the bema accompanied by the
clergy, 157 ; presbyters form
the bishop's guard of honour,
157, 158 ; must not be appoint-
ed in village or country dis-
trict, 158; must not make the
oblation in a private house,
152; the bishops of the east
are to manage the east alone,
176 ; the bisliops of the Asian
diocese administer Asian af-
fairs alone, 176; the Pontic
bishops administer only Pontic
matters, 176; and the Thra-


Clergy — Continued.

ciau bishops only Thracian
affairs, 176; his enthroniza-
tion, 177 ; one setting aside
the decrees of the Council of
Ephesus shall be deposed, 230;
one teaching contrary to the
faith established at Nicsa
shall be deposed, 231 ; is not
to ordain for money payment,
268, 559, 595 ; is not to sell a
grace which cannot be sold,
268, 559; shall not be or-
dained simoniacally, 268, 559,
595 ; simoniacal ordination is
invalid, 268 ; must not engage
in secular management, 269,
599 ; he may be called by law
to manage for orphans, etc.,
269; must be watchful over
the monks, 270 ; is judge, in
the first instance, between cler-
gy, 274 ; against another bish-
op ai^peals to the synod of the
province, 274, 417 ; against
ills metropolitan appeals to the
Exarch of the diocese, 274;
against his Exarch appeals to
the Patriarch in Constantino-
ple, 274; appealing to secular
powers to divide a province
he shall be degraded, 276-7 ;
may grant indulgence to his
virgins and monks, 280;
charges against one shall not
be loosely received, 283 ; the
accuser of a bishop must have
his own character investigated,
283, 446, 451 ; often accused
slanderously in order to cause
confusion, 183, 446; the ac-
cusers must be strictly exam-
ined, 183, 283; all accusers
are not to lie received or all
excluded, 183,446; accusers
of a Ijishop for fraud and such
things have open court, 183 ;
heretic may not accuse a bish-
op on ecclesiastical grounds,
183 ; neither may one be ex-
communicated, 183; those un-
der charge of faults cannot ac-
cuse until themselves cleared,
183 ; an eligible accuser brings
the case first before the pro-
vincial l)ishops, 183 ; then the
case may be appealed to the
bishops of the diocese, 183 ;
but the case should not be car-
ried before the Emperor or
ecumenical synod, 183; the
goods of a f)isliop deceased
shall not be seized bv the cler-
gy, 283, 331, 596 ; shall have
a steward to manage the
church's business, 235, 476;
may not be married before or
after ordination. 363 ; deposed
if he has had intercourse with
a nun, 364 ; shall not put away
his wife on pretence of piety,
370, 594 ; was allowed by
Eastern custom to have his


Clergy — Continued.

wife, 371 ; the higher aim of
bishop's position, 371 ; depriv-
ing for lawful cohabitation
he shall be deposed, 371; age
for consecration, 372, 372 ; the
name a later introduction be-
liind apostle, 373; liable to
deposition for receiving a cleric
who should have gone home,

374, 595 ; shall not teach
pul)licly in any foreign city,

375, 594; under pain of act
ing only as a presbyter, 37 5 ;
on his consecration he must
remove his wife to a distance,
388; supports his wife who is
so removed, 388 ; they must
separate by mutual consent,
388 ; absent three Sundays
from church without necessity,
he is under penalty, 400,425 ;
opinion upon bishop's transla-
tions, 415 ; shall not be elected
by bril)ery or intrigue, 416;
or on fraudulent commenda-
tions, 416; one so appointed
is deprived of communion even
in extremis, 416, 416 ; was in
earlier days elected by the peo-
ple, 416, 426; shall not pass
uncalled into another province,
416, 594 ; his form of proced-
ure in dispute with another
bishop, 417 ; his appeal to Ju-
lius, bishop of Rome, 417,
417 seq., 418, 418 seq. ; shall
not be ordained for a village or
petty town, 420, 421 ; let'him
be ordained for a former see or
large town, 420, 421 ; should
specially care for the widows
and orphans, 422 ; should not
go up to court unless sum-
moned by letter, 422 ; and
then use his influence for truth
and right. 422 ; was often
summoned by the princes for
consultation and advice, 422;
should not be long absent from
his diocese, 422 ; shoidd inter-
cede at court for criminahs,
422 ; on appeal to court he
should send a deacon as dele-
gate, 423 ; the bishop's going
to court excites jealousy and
suspicion, 423, 423 ; the form
of procedure in sending a pe-
tition to court, 423 seq., 432,
502 ; may use the influence of
friends at court, 423, 424 ;
must have passed slowly
through all the orders of the
priesthood, 424, 425 ; must
have shown himself worthy of
the episcopate, 425 ; should
not have been merely a rich
man, or lawyer, or courtier,
425 ; should not be a novice,
425, 599 ; stranger shall not
boast and bring the proper
bisliop into contempt, 425,
426 ; stransjer shall not iu-


640


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Clergy — Continued.

trigue and procure a transla-
tiou, 426 ; some bishops have
large estates, 426 ; directions
for their attending to their
private affairs. 426; shall not
excommunicate his clergy ))as
sionately, 428, 442; must sub-
mit to having the whole case
reopened and judged, 428,
442 ; shall have to show cause
before the Metropolitan court,
428, 442 ; shall not ordain a
minister whom he has taken
from another bishop, 429,
468 ; must have sincere love
and regard for his clergy, 428 ;
driven bj' violence from his
see, he should be received by
other bishops, 431 ; s\iffering
in persecution he should be re-
ceived in kindness, 431 ; the
title has been brought into con
demnation. 432; those who
cause offence will be held by
the other bishops answerable,
432 ; inquiry to be made
about a stranger bishop, 432 ;
mode of inquiring about the
stranger in the city, 432;
caution and tact in the inquiry
about the stranger, 433; shall
be chaste and continent, 444,
445, 454, 478 ; if accused of
crime he appeal to a secular
court, he loses his office, 449 ;
his sons should not seek secu-
lar spectacles, 449 ; he may
not be " conductor " or " proc-
urator,'" 450; if accused, he
shall have due trial before the
Synod of Primates, 451; and
shall have time and ojiportu-
nity to argue his case, 451 ;
but if he decline to attend, it
will be held as confession of
guilt, 451 ; conditif)ns of the
tri:d for accused and accuser,
441 ; accused bishop shall
come first before his own pri-
mate, 451, 502; shall give no
donation to a uou-Catholic,
even though a relative, 453;
shall not go beyond seas, with-
out his primate's commenda-
tory letter, 453, 470 ; shall not
sell church property, tinknown
to the council and presbyters,
458 ; or appropriate what be-
longs to his mother church or
catiiedral, 458 ; shall not easily
set his sons free, 459 ; until
they are of age, and are re-
sponsible for their own sins,
459 ; not to be ordained until
all his household is Christian,
460; shall not feast in church,
461; except when comiielled
by necessity of hospitality,
461 ; one ordained by only
two Numidian bishops, 465 ;
question discussed as to twelve
bishops being necessary, 465 ;


Clergy — Continued.

decided in favor of at least
three bishops consecrating,
465 ; he of Carthage can or-
dain a bishop at his discretion,
468-9; each shall hold the
see for which he was ordained,
469, 470, 594; for making
strangers, hereticsor paganshis
heirs, one is severely blamed,
481 ; dying intestate he is
blamed, 481; should discoun-
tenance false memories of mar-
tj^rs, 482 ; should have false
memorials thrown down, 482;
no one shall alone, takecogniz-
anceof a cause 496; neglecting
his diocese he shall be deprived
of communion, 502, 597 ; shall
be energetic against heresies
and heretics, 501, 502 ; re-
vealing a confession, he need
not be believed, 505 ; shall not
excommunicate without suffi-
cient evidence of wrong, 505;
shall be excommunicated if
he excommunicate unreason-
ably, 505, 506 ; shall not be
listened to when coming from
a distance, 510; shall not be
deposed by two or even three
bishops. 513 ; of Bostra was ir-
regularly deposed by two bish-
ops, 513, 514 ; each has the
license of liberty, power and
will, 517; must know the
Psalter by heart, 556; must
be prepared before ordination
to observe the canons, 556 ;
his intimate knowledge of
Scripture. S-IG ; a bishop's elec-
tion by a prince is null, 557;
nuist l)e chosen by Bishops,
557; shall not extort money
or gifts from any one subject to
him, 557, 558; shall not exact
money by closing churches
excommunicating, etc., 558;
some received their ordination
by a money p.iyraent, 559 ;
those boasting such a fact over
a poor brother are to be degrad-
ed or fined, 559; shall not be
ordained for money, 268,
559 ; shall not alienate any of
the church's farm lands, 563 ;
or surrender them to any other
person, 563 ; shall appropriate
nothing to himself. 563; or
confer anything on his poor
relations, ' 563; shall not
squander and sny the land is
unprofitable, 663; shall give,
if he give at all, to clergymen
and husbandmen, 563; if he
does not partake he must give
a reasonable excuse, 594;
must not have been digamist
after baptism, 595; or have a
concubine, 595; if guilty of
fornication, perjury or theft,
he shall be deposed, 595;
who strikes anj' one, shall be


C 1 ergy — Continued.

deposed, 595 ; if justly de-
posed he shall not meddle with
divine offices, 595; obtaining
a church through the civil
power, he shall be deposed and
excommunicated, 595 ; in
matters of discipline shall give
three admonitions, 595, 599;
foreign bishops shall not be
received without letters com-
mendatory, 596 ; and even
then, not without further close
examination, 596; every
bishop must acknowledge his
superior and do nothing with-
out his consent, 596 ; but must
attend to his own parish and
country places, 596 ; the chief
bishop must do nothing with-
out the consent of all, 596 ;
all must seek after unity an<l
unanimity. 596 ; bishops shall
meet twice a year, 596 ; shall
examine decrees and settle
ecclesinstical controversies,
596 ; shall meet in Pentecost,
and October, 596; shall have
full control over their own
property, 596 ; shall unike a
clear distinction between their
own and the church's, 596;
shall distrilnite freely to the
clergy and in hospitality, 596 ;
shall supply his own needs
and the needs of others, 596 ;
shall not be given to dice or
drinking, 597 ; he who has
prayed with heretics shall be
excommunicated, 597 ; but if
he has allowed them to per-
form any clerical office, de-
posed, 597 ; he who has al-
lowed the baptism or sacrifice
of heretics shall be deposed,
597 ; shall baptize into the
Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, 597 ; shall not ba]itize
into other names, 597 ; shall
baptize with three immersions
and not with only one, 597;
shall not ab.stain from mar-
riage, flesh or wine as abhor-
ringthem,597; shall not refuse
flesh and wine on festival days,

597 ; for negligence or idle-
ness shall be excommunicated,
597; shall supply the needs of
any of the clergy in want,
598; shall not eat flesh with
the blood, or killed by beast,
or naturally died, 598; if in a
contest he kill an3one with
one blow let him be deposed,

598 ; shall observe the fast.s,
unless hindered by infirmity,
598 ; shall not keep fast or
feast with the Jews, 598; shall
not receive gift of unleavened
bread or other such from the
Jews, 598 ; if credibly ac-
cused shall be tried by the
bishops, 599; and on refusal


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


641


Clergy — Continued.

to attend, shall be three times
duly suninioued, 599; but if
he still retuse, lie shall be duly
sentenced, 599; shall not, out
of favor, ordain any relation
to be bishop, 599; or make
the church subject to heirs,
599; a man lame, or blind in
one eye, but otherwise worth}',
may be made bishop, 599 ; one
deaf or blind may not be made
bishop, 599 ; shall not give
himself to the management of
public atTairs, 599 ; but must
devote himself to ecclesiastical
business, 599; shall not serve
in the army, and remain bish-
op, 599.

Bishops, were anciently called
Popes, 118 ; and presbyters of
the church, 128; are said to
have the administration of the
churches, 183; are slandered
in order to confuse ecclesiasti-
cal order, 183; how accusa-
tions against them are to be
treated, 183; only certain
classes of persons can bring a
charge against, 183; have
their synods of the province
for trial and appeal, 183; may
not appeal to Emperor, tem-
poral judge or ecumenical syn-
od, 183; one who so appeals
may not be an accuser, 183;
a bishop's accuser stands under
the lex talionis, 183, 184 ; are
forbidden under penalties to
join the Nestorians, 225, 228,
230, 231 ; must attend provin-
cial synods, 282; cannot be
degraded to the rank of pres-
byter, 290; may not be mar-
ried men, 36o ; cause scandal
by living with their wives after
consecration, 370; the living
with their wives is forbidden
on pain of deposition, 370;
shall be deposed for celebrating
■without wine and water mixed,
380 ; one has all his rights
preserved when he is oppressed
by barbarians, 382 ; their or-
dinations are valid in times of
disorder from barbarians, 382 ;
inpartibns infidilium, 383; the
order of precedence is to be ob-
served among them, 483-4;
those ordained in Afric* shall
receive letters of orders duly
attested with dates, etc., 435;
decreed that people who have
not had bishops, shall not re-
ceive them at once, 492 ; dele-
gate their power to a commit-
tee of synod, 503; fifteen
elected for the five African
provinces, 503'; enjoined to
study one's duty by the 7th
ecumenical synod, 555 ; set
on a hi<;;hcr level for exami)le
in purity, 567,567; shall not


Clergy — Continued.

receive a clerg3'man for money
paid, 567 ; shall not act for
the sake of filthy lucre, 567;
iiuist cease from selling his
patronage or be deposed, 567,
568 ; are ordained by two or
three bishops, 594; shall not
undertake worldly business,
594, 697; shall celebrate
Easter before the vernal equi-
nox, 594; must partake of the
offering when it is made, 594.

Business, in how far allowable to
clergy, 269 seq. ; or forbidden
to the clergy, 594.

Canon, clergy are bound by it, 59.

Canonical age for the priesthood,
84; fixed at thirty on Christ's
example, 84; allowed at less
on plea of necessity, 84 ; re-
duced to twenty-five, 84 ; cen-
sure, 273.

Cantor. [See Singer.]

Cathedral chapter, 120.

Celibacy, excursus on clerical, 1,
51 seq. ; its early practice, 11,
93, 365 seq.; fully discussed at
Nicoia, 51 seq.; Greek view
and custom, 51 seq., 83, 93, 129,
366; Latin view and custom,
51 seq., 367 ; fixed in the west
by the Trullau synod. 52 ; its
transgression by a priest, how
disciplined, 51 seq., 79, 365
seq. ; East and West aim at dif-
ferent objects in, 362, 365 seq.,
371 ; objects aimed at in East
and West, 362, 365 seq., 371,
371, 372 ; excursus on the mar-
riage of the clergy, 865 seq. ;
views of Epiphanius upon celi-
bac}', 366 seq. ; rule of Roman
church on, 371 ; Latins direct
candidates to put away their
wives, 371 ; Eastern church
confirms the marriage bond,
371.

Celibates must not have women,
46, 52 ; clergy who are, 46, 51,
67, 79; falling, are dealt with
as Digamists, 71, 72.

Chanters,"l46. [See Singer.]

Chartophylax, his duty, 35, 562 ;
one of the quasi ecclesiastical
dignitaries, 368 ; had charge of
the Episcopium at Constantino-
ple, 561, 562.

Chorepiscopi, excursus on, 1,
21 seq. ; confirmed bishops
from the Cathari, 20; different
theories regarding them, 21,

22, 85, 113,^47 ; their history,
21, 22, 113 ; question of their
being true bishops or presby-
ters,'^21, 85, 113,113, 147,158;
duties allowed them, 21, 23,
49, 68, 85, 113, 147, 158, 394;
their power of ordination, 21,

23, 68, 113, 147, 158; one
ordination of a presbyter is
recorded, 21 ; con Armed in
country and villages, 21, 113;


Clergy — Continued.

consecrated churches, 21; were
condemned in the West by
papal bulls, 22 ; and their or-
dinations annulled, 22 ; all fur-
ther appointment forbidden,
22, 23, 158; counted parallel
to the Seventy, 22,85, 85 ; some
were consecrated by a single
bishop, 22 ; their con.secration
by three bishops, 22 ; were
consecrated for villages and
the country, 22, 23, (38, 113,
158; reappeared in the West
in the Middle Ages, 23 ; their
election and duties, 49, 68,
113; must have bishop's con-
sent for ordinations, 68, 113,
158 ; appear to have had liber-
ty of ordination in the coun-
try, 68 ; can offer as fellow-
ministers, 85 ; are honored in
making the oblation, 85 ; of
good report may give letters
pacifical, 112; ordain readers,
subdeacons, and exorcists, 113,
147 ; may be deposed for ir-
regularity, 113, 559; are ap-
pointed by the bishop of the
city to which they are subject,
113, 158; classed with visit-
ors, 158 ; shall not be ordained
for a money payment, 268,
559; may ordain the reader
in a monastery with the bish-
op's leave, 564; exhorted by
St. Basil to maintain better
discipline, 610.

City, erected by imperial authority,
shall follow the political juris-
diction, 280, 383.

Clergy, not to be hastily advanced
after baptism, 10, 126 ; to be
degraded if convicted of sen-
sual sin. 10; of the cathedral
church, 12 ; not to be enrolled
among the clergy of another
parish (diocese), '^35, 275, 282,
374, 562; to be deposed if
convicted of usury, 38, 46,
126, 597 ; bound by canon
and decent order, -39 ; a distinct
hierarchy, 39, 140, 140, 394;
forbidden .suretyship and wit-
ness bearing. 47, 597 ; not to
associate with Jews, 49, 370 ;
their clerical ranks, 49, 140 ;
their marriaiie, 51 seq., 79, S'3,
129, 362, 363, 363, 365, 594,
595 ; must put away adulter-
ous wife, 82, 83 ; preside in
the church, 108, 108; appeal
to synod from "all who are
enrolled in the clergy list,"
111; are under the bishop and
metropolitan, 112, 113; must
be cognizant of the bishop's
administering all church prop-
erty, 120, 121 ; if accused of
dishonest dealing, they shall
appeal to the synod, 121, 457 ;
when travelling, may be aided
from church funds bv the


642


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Clergy — Continued.

bishop, 121 ; their children
may not marry heretics, 129,
278 ; may not carry away tlieir
portion from the love feast,
148; may not cast a reproach
upon their ecclesiastical order,
148 ; may not bathe with
women, 149, 399; shall not
be magicians, enchanters,
mathematicians or astrologers,
151; shall not make amulets,
151 ; if inliibited by Nestorius
shall be restored to tlieir proper
rank, 228; those who are or-
thodox, must avoid apostate
bishops, 228; in city and
country must not sul)mit to
Nestorian bishops, 228 ; de-
posed clergy can have no help
from restoration by Nest'~-
rians, 230 ; resisting the de-
crees of Ephesus are to be de-
posed, 230 ; teaching co^^trary
to the Nicene faith shad be
deposed, 231 ; must not engage
in business or secular manage-
ment, 269, 562, 599; may be
charged by the bishop with
church l)usiness. 269; may be
called on by the law to care for
orphans, etc., 269 ; in how far
the canon can be lawfully wid-
ened, 269 seq. ; forbidden to go
from city to city, 271, 27i2,
275, 282, 562, 594; shall not
be ordained at large, 271 ; or-
dained in public, 614; one
enrolled among the clergy shall
not accept military or secular
dignity, 272, 599 ; one so ac-
cepting and not repenting shall
be anathematized, 272; those
of pooriiouses, monasteries,
and martyries are under the
bishop, 273 ; and they must
not cast off the rule of their
own bishop, 273, 562 ; or they
come under canonical censure,
273 ; shall not go to secular
court against a clergyman,
274; shall appeal first to their
own bishop, 274; or lay the
case before a third party with
the bishop's consent, 274 ; go-
ing to the secular court are
liable to canonical penalties,
274 ; against their bishop they
appeal to the synod of the prov-
ince, 274 ; or bishop against the
metropolitan shall appeal to the
exarch of the diocese, 274;
against the exarch of the dio-
cese shall appeal to the patri-
arch or l)ishop in Constantino-
ple, 274, 274, 275 ; cannot be
enrolled at one time in two
churclics, 275,282, 374; shall
not interfere in the alTairs of a
former ciiurch, 275, 282; shall
not interfere with martyries,
almshouses or hostels of an-
other church, 275; for dis-


Clergy — Continued.

obedience to the canon they are
liable to degradation, 275,
374; if wandering tliey shall
be returned to the church of
their ordination, 275, 282,
374 ; should not be i)lural-
ists, 275, 282, 565; unknown
and without letters commenda-
tory are absolutely prohibited
to officiate, 278; any conspir-
ing against their bishops are
liable to deposition, 281, 381;
against their fellow-clergy are
liable to deposition. 281,381;
those who are driven from their
own country may be received
in another, 282, 374; who are
not moved of necessity are not
to be received, 282, 374, 374,
562, 594; but are to be re-
turned to their own church,
282, 374, H74, 594; shall not
seize the property of their bish-
op :U his death, 283, 381 ; such
acts are forbitlden by the an-
cient canons, 283; some go to
Constantinoi)le and remain,
raising trouble, 283, 562 ; but
such are tobe notified by thead-
vocate to dejiart or lie expelled,
284 ; they go '' to the imperial
Constantinople" for their
scheming, 283, 284, 562 ; in
digamy, must separate before
a fixed date, 362; but if un-
repentant, shall be canonically
deposed, 362 ; may not marry
a widow, 362 ; may not marry
after ordination, 362, 367,
595 ; their penances for un-
canonical marriage, 362, 363 ;
list of persons whom they mav
not marry, 363, 363, 377, 595";
list of women whom they can-
not have in their house, 364,
567,595; deposed if they per-
sist in having; women who are
forbidden, 364, 595, 610; ex-
cursus on the marriage of, 365
seq.; difference between " mar-
ried clei'gy " and '* marriage of
clergy," 365 seq.. 368; marriage
of cler<j:y always forbidden,
365 seq^ ; King" Henry VIII.
on clerical marriage, 368 ;
shall not keep a " public
house," 369 ; shall not enter a
tavern, 369; sliall not serve
one in a tavern, 369 ; shall not
eat the unleavened bread of the
Jews, 370; or have any famil-
iar intercourse with them, 370;
or summon them in sickness,
370 ; or receive medicines
from them, 370 ; or bathe with
them, 370; shall keep aloof
from the .lews on pain of de-
position, 370; shall not put
away their wives on pretence
of piety, 370, 379, 597; in the
East they retain their wives,
371, 379"; in the West they re-


Clergy — Continued.

nounce them, 371; any or-
dained earlier than prescribed
ages shall be deposed, 373;
anj'^ one receiving clergy who
have no letters dimissory is
liable to deposition, 374; must
return home wlien a barbarian
invasion has ceased, 374; shall
be liable to deposition if he
refuse to return home, 374;
when deposed become as lay-
men, 375, 594 ; but on re-
penting their crime they may
be restored, 375; yet if unre-
pentant, they must remain as
laymen, 375; shall not tnke
part in horse-races, 376, 388 ;
or assist in theatrical represen-
tations, 376, 376, 388 ; they
must leave the marriage when
the games begin, 376 ; or if one
persist in remaining, he shall
be deposed, 376,376 ; punish-
able for acts of ignorance as to
marriage, 377, 606 ; to be pun-
ished for making an illegal
marriage, 377, 606 ; to be de-
prived of exercising any office
of the ministry, ""377", 606;
shall not wear unsuitable dress
either at home or travelling,
37 7; shall wear the dress as-
signed to them, 377 ; shall
obey the canon or be cut off
for one week, 377; shall not
baptize or celebrate in private
oratory without the bisho|i's
leave, "379, 562; if they dis-
obey they are liable to deposi-
tion, 379 ; shall not be or-
dained because they are of
priestly descent, 381 ; shall be
ordained as they are examined
and found worthy, 381 ; shall
have charge of the church
property on the bishop's de-
cease, 381, 382 ; shall have
custody of the deceased bish-
op's property, 381, 382 ; their
good standing unprejudiced
in barbarian disorders, 382,
383 ; shall not play at dice,
under penalties, 388; forbid-
den to frequent plays, hunts
and theatrical dances, 388,
388 ; have received the gift to
teach divine things, 394; an
order appointed by the Lord
arnd having their offices, 394 ;
if absent three Sundays from
church without necessity, 400,
426; when disciplined by their
bisliop shall not find refuge
with another, 427; when ex-
communicated in justly should
appeal to the Metropolitan,
428 ; ought to be respectful
and obedient to their bishops,
428 ; some flock to large cities,
])ut must be sent home, 430,
562; who have given in loan,
let them receive only their own,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


643


Clergy — Continued.

450; or let them receive as
much, 450 ; on being ordained
should be adnionislied to ob-
serve the constitution, 450;
shall give no donation to a
non-Catholic, even though a
blood relation, 453 ; those
convicted of the graver crimes
cannot be restored, 455 ; shall
not carry their appeals " across
the water," 456 ; shall appeal
to a court of neighbouring
bishops, 456, 502; or shall
appeal to a universal council,
456; refusing promotion shall
be incapable of promotion,
457 ; if out of poverty he be-
comes rich, he must hand it
over to the church, 457 ; un-
less he has received from friend
or relative, 457 ; shall not visit
virgins or widows without the
bishop's or presbyter's leave,
460; and should not visit alone,
but with some grave Christian,
460 ; those condemned bj' their
bishop shall not be justified
by any one, 473 ; must ap-
peal to court within a year, or
stand condemned, 481 ; those
in Africa appeal to their
own African church, 502 ;
definition of what persons
cannot accuse the clergy,
504 ; neither excommunicated
nor slaves nor other infamous
persons, 504; those boasting
against their poorer brethren
are to be degraded or fined,
559; shall not be received with-
out their showing a license,
562 ; shall not be received
from another diocese without
letter dimissory, 562 ; shall not
take to se(;uiar occupation,
562, 565, 594; may devote
themselves to teaching, 562;
ought not to be set over two
churches, 565 ; yet in country
places a dispensation may be
granted, 565 ; warned earnest-
ly against the running after
filthy lucre, 565 ; how far they
may turn to other occupations,
565, 565 ; shall not affect the
wearing of costly apparel, 566;
shall not affect the anointing
themselves with perfumes,
566; had an evil example set
them by the Iconoclasts, 566;
shall be dressed in modest and
grave clothing, 566 ; ordained
by one bishop, 594 ; must par-
take of the offering when it is
made, 594; or else give a rea-
sonable excuse, 594 ; joining
in prayer with a deposed cler-
gyman as a clergyman they
shall be deposed, 594; excom-
municated, shall not be re-
ceived in another city, 594 ; on
pain of the receiver being ex-


Clergy — Continued.

communicated, 594 ; or of
having his excommunication
lengthened, 594; the excom-
municated may be received if
they bear letters commenda-
tory, 594 ; shall not leave
their parish and remain in
another, 594; shall not leave
their parish without their bish-
op's leave, 594; shall not be
surety for any one, 595 ; he
who mutilates himself is a
self-murderer, 595 ; of those
unmarried, readers and singers
alone may marry, 595 ; of the
city to be excommunicated for
the people not receiving their
bishop, 596 ; shall not insult
their bishop, 597 ; shall not
mock the lame, the blind, the
deaf or one infirm in his legs,

597 ; an}' one reading falsely
inscribed books as Scripture
shall he deposed, 598 ; if any,
through fear, deny the name
of Christ, let him be cast out,

598 ; if any deny the name of
a clergyman, let him be de-
posed, 598 ; but if he repent,
let him be received as a lay-
man, 598; shall not serve in
the army and remain in the
ministry, 599 ; any who ran
away in persecution and re-
turned shall not perform the
olfice, 601 ; those guilty of for-
nication are not as married,
604; one guilty is deposed and
not excommimicated, 606;
lapsed shall be deposed, 607;
disorders among clergy imder
chorepiscopi, 610.

Clerical order, 148, 149; priest-
hood, clergymen, laymen, 148;
UpuTLKol, K\riptKoi dtr/cTjToi, 148,
149.

Clouds, expellers of, shall be avoid-
ed, 393.

Confessors are sometimes included
among the clergy, 146.

Continence observed by the clergy,
371, 372.

Copiatw, called clerici, 146, 147.

Country presbyters, how restricted
in the cit}', 85. [See Chore-
piscopi.]

Courts of appeal for the bishops
and clergy, 183, 274, 274, 275,
280; for outlying or rural
parishes, 280.

Deacon as parallel to the Levite,
13, 14 ; not usually ordained
by chorepiscopi, 21 ; forbid-
den to pass from city to city,
32, 109, 110, 271, 594; must
not desert his own church, 35,
109, no, 594 ; ought not to be
received by another church,
35, 109, 110, 594; the disci-
pline for desertion from their
own church, 35, 109, 110,
594 ; must not lend money on


Clergy — Continved.

usury, 37, 369, 597; forbid-
den' to give the Eucharist to
the presbyters, 38, 39 ; cannot
offer the Eucharist, 38, 39 ;
forbidden to touch the Euchar-
ist before the bishops, 38, 39 ;
must remain within their own
bounds, 38, 39 ; are inferior to
presbyters, 38, 39, 46, 140.
368 ; should not sit anion*;- the
presbyters, 38, 39, 140, 368;
liable to deposition for disobe-
dience, 38, 103, 110, 368;
must not have women, 46,
364, 595 ; must honour a pres-
byter, 46, 140 ; if he put away
his wife, 49, 364, 594; disci-
pline for adultery, 50; a celi-
bate, 51, 67, 444; lapsed and
truly returned, 63 ; his work
and office, 63, 108, 138, 139 ;
his penance, 63 ; may marry
but on conditions, 67,363, 364,
365 ; his lustful purpose pre-
vented by grace, 81, 81; one
polluted in the lips by a kiss,
81 ; one in carnal sin is de-
graded to be a minister, 83 ;
said to have been seven in num-
ber, 86; the number variable,
86, 373 ; the number of seven
is based on a mistake, 86 ; car-
dinal, 86 ; must observe the
Niciean Easter on pain of de-
position, 108; excommunicat-
ed for communicating with
excommunicated, 109 ; if de-
posed he cannot officiate, 110,
111 ; how to be disciplined in
acts of schism, 110, 111, 595;
if he refuse the third call, he
is put beyond hojie of restora-
tion, 110, 111, 595; has right
of appeal to the synod against
his bishop. 111, 118; must
accept excommunication vuitil
cleared by synod. 111, 595;
not to be received by others
until cleared by synod. 111,
595 ; forbidden to appeal to
the emperor without the bish-
op's consent, 114; forbidden
to sit in presence of a presby-
ter unless invited, 140, 140 ; is
to be honoured by the subdea-
cons and lower clerg3% 140 ;
stands in the presence of bish-
ops and presbyters, 140. 368 ;
had distinctive insignia, 142 ;
ought not to enter a tavern,
144, 597 ; shall not be or-
dained for a money payment,
268, 595 ; a simoniacal ordi-
nation is invalid, 268, 595 ;
should not be ordained at
large, 271 ; used as a messen-
ger, 304 ; restrictions on mar-
riage of, 362, 363, 365. 595;
penances for uncanonical mar-
riage of, 362, 364 ; deposed
if lie has had intercourse with
a nun, 364; some hold ecclC'


G44


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Clergy — Continmd.

sfastical offices, 368 ; on score
of office some presume against
the presbyters, 368 ; if the
representative of his own pa-
triarcli or metropolitan, he is
to be honoured, 368; was al-
lowed by early Eastern custom
to have a wife, 371, 371 ; in
the West he must separate
from his wife, 371 ; age for
ordination of, 372, 372; 450;
the deacon of Acts vi. defined,
373; opinion of John C'hry-
sostom, 373 ; the name a later
introduction, 373; one ex-
communicated by his bishop
should appeal to tlie metro-
politan, 428, 439, 507; may
be tried by his own bishop
or h\ neighbouring bishops,
442,"507 ;"shall be chaste and
continent, 444,445,454; his
appeal to a court of three dea-
cons, 448, 452, 478; if ac-
cused of crime lie appeal to a
secular court, he shall lose his
office, 449; he may not be
"conductor" or "procurat-
or," 450; if accused he shall
come tirst before his i)ishop
and three deacons, 452; if
convicted of graver crime,
cannot be baptized again, or re-
ordained, or reconciled, 455;
some in better position than
the priests, 457 ; none to be or-
dained until his household is
all Christian, 460; stands in
the council or S3'nod, 48(3,
490, 496, 504, 506 ; shall not
be ordained for money, 559;
ordained by one bishop, 594;
shall not put away his wife
under pretence of religion,

594 ; shall not undertake
worldly business, 594 ; shall
not celebrate Easter before the
vernal equinox, 594; shall
partake of the offering when it
is made, 594; or else give a
reasonable excuse, 594; the
refusing to partake may excite
suspicion against the offerer,
594 ; shall not marry twice
after ordination, 595; guilty
of fornication, perjury or theft
shall be deposed, 595; he who
strikes anyone shall be de-
posed, 595 ; if justly deposed,
he shall not meddle with the
divine offices, 595 ; if excom-
municated, he shall not be
received by another bishop,

595 ; foreign deacon shall not
be received without letters
commendatory, 596 ; and not
even then without further close
examination, 596; though re-
jected by the people after his
ordination, he shall continue
deacon. 596; should not be
addicted to dice or drinking,


Clergy — C<intiiincd.

597 ; he who has joined in
prayer with heretics shall be
excommunicated, 597; but if
he has allowed them to perform
any clerical office he shall be
deposed, 597 ; shall not ab-
stain from tlesh, wine or mar-
riage as abhorring them, 597 ;
shall observe the fasts, unless
hindered by infirmity, 598;
shall not keep fast or festival
with the Jews, 598 ; shall not
accept from them unleavened
bread or other such, 598 ;
shall not serve in the army
and remain in the ministry,
599 ; if guilty of fornication
shall be deposed, not excom-
municated, 604 ; if polluted in
his lijjs he shall cease from his
function, 608.

Deaconess, not sharer in ordina-
tion, 40, 130 ; Paulianist, to be
dealt with as a laic, 40 ; was
blessed with prayer ami impo-
sition of hands, 40, 42 ; excur-
sus on, 41, 42, 130, 131 : prob-
ably of apostolic origin, 41,
130 ; her aire at reception,
41, 279, 372, 384, 606; had
a vow of celibacy, 41, 279 ;
her duties, 11, 50; the modern
ins.titiitio!^, 41 n. ; mother-
house at Kaiserworth, 41 n. ;
institution in ancient church
was short-lived, 42, 130 ; her
election, 50; sometimes was
president, 130 ; an Eastern de-
velopment, 146 ; received by
laying on of hands, 279 ; re
ceived after searching exami-
nation, 279 ; her age not under
forty years, 372, 384 ; com-
mitting lewdness with a pagan,
607; shall not give herself in
marriage under pain of anath-
ema, 279, 365 ; and the hus-
band will be under anathema,
279.

Defensor, is on the roll of the
church, 268, 269 ; African
bishops ask leave from the
Emperors to have one chosen,
479, 491 ; the nature of his
duties, 491, 492.

Degradation as a clerical punish-
ment, 275, 283.

Deposition, clerical, 10, 11, 23, 24,
67 [see Clergy. Penalties] ;
may be for ordained and ir-
regular ordainer, 11 ; deprives
of " the external honor due to
God's priesthood," 108.

Dignitaries, quasi ecclesiastical,
list of, 369.

Dimissory letters for the clergy,
35.

Doorkeeper, ought not to enter a
tavern, 144; history of his of-
fice, 144 .«('(]., 269 ;■ ofticial of
the Roman temple, 145 ; some-
times the subdeacon, 152,153.


Clergy — Contin ued.

Doorkeeper deposed if he has had

intercourse with a nun, 364.
Dress suitable and unsinlable for

the clergy, 377.
Economist, ecclesiastical, 49 ; fidel-
it}' required in the church
benefactions, 95; shall not be
advanced for money, 559; has
charge of the churcii's prop-
erty, 614.
EcououuLS, fficonomus, 562 ; one
shall be in each church, 562,
614; must be had in churches
and monasteries. 562, 614.
Elders, probably jMelropolilans,
446 ; bishops, presbyters, 447.
Election of a bishoji, how carried
out, 11, 11, 12, 118, 119, 119,
120, 131, 465, 466; interfered
with by princes, 12 ; to be done
so as to prevent nepotism, 119,
120 ; that of St. Augustine of
j Hippo considered, 120; must

not be by tumult and violence,
131 ; people excluded from all
share in, 131, 466 ; the ancient
j custom was ])robably bj' the

people, 131, 466 ; objections
I are to be heard, considered,

and decided upon, 465, 466; in
a disjiuled election two bishops
are to be coopted for the de-
1 cision, 465, 406.

' Enthroning, the, of a bishop, 177.
I Eparchies, the Western, 17 ; the
j Russian, 281.

Eunuch, his relation to the minis-
try considered, 8 ; self-mutila-
tion always condemned, 8, 5*J5.
Exarch of the Diocese, court of ap-
peal, 274; or Patriarch, 274.
Exarchs, t^apxoi, 21.
Executor appointed in tlie five
provinces of the African
church, 491, 492, 502.
Exorcist, ordained by the chore-
piscopu.s, 21, 113, 147; ought
not to enter a tavern, 144;
history of his office, 144 .seq.,
147, 148 ; shall not be or-
dained, 146 ; promoted to the
office, 147, 147 ; his duty in the
office, 185.
Hegtime/ios, head of a monastery,

563, 505 ; shall not alienate
parts of the farm-lands of the
monaster}', 563 ; or surrender
them to anyone, 563 ; shall
not appropriate them to him-
self, 563 ; or give them to his
poor relations, 563 ; or use
any pretext for smuggling
away God's property, 563 ;
shall not give away on the
plea that the land is unprofit-
able, 563 ; or hand it over to
secular powers in the neigh-
bourhood, 563; shall give it,
if he give at all, to clergymen
and husbandmen, 563 ; may
or may not be a presbyter,

564, 565 ; shall avoid even


IXDEX OF SUBJECTS


G45


CIer,2:y — Continued.

tlie appeanmce of evil with
women, 567 ; shall not receive
a monk for the sake of money
gift, 567; shall cease from the
evil practice of receiviniz: bribes
or be deposed, 567, 568 ; his
consent is necessary for the re-
ception of a monk. 569.

Hypo-deacon. [See Subdeacon.]

Impediments to ordination, 23, 46,
599. [See Ordination. ]

Intercessor, guardian of the si;)irit-
ualities, 479 ; a bishop shall not
hold the see where he is inter-
cessor, 479; a bishop shall be
provided within the year, 479.

Lector. [See Reader.]

Magno Sacello Priiepositus, 369.

Magnus oeconoraus, 369.

Magnus vasorum custos, 369.

Mansionarius, perhaps ostiarius,
269.

Meizoterol. their office, 562, 563.

Metropolis, its bishop has prece-
dence in rank, 112.

Metropolitan, has to ratify the
election of a bishop, 11, 11,


112, 113, 131

consent nullities


12, 15, 15,
want of his
consecration, 15, 112, 420;

every metropolitan has his
jurisdiction contirmed, 15, 15,

16, 112, 113 ; his rights to be
preserved in due dignity, 17,

17, 112; must be acknowl-
edged b}'' every bishop, 112,
113 ; has to take thought for
the whole province, 112, 113;
no bishop acts in anything
unusual without his consent,
112, 113, 115; does not act
without the consent of others,
112; ins consent required for
an appeal to the emperor,
114 ; may invite a bishop from
another province to ordain,
115; his presence makes a

full synod, 116; was head of
his own province, 177 ; was
ordained by his own synod,
177 ; this close relation was
changed by canon at C'lialce-
don, 177; one forsaking the
ecumenical synod shall be
degraded, 225; one joining
the apostates in the concilia-
bulum shall be degraded, 225;
one adopting the doctrines of
Celestius shall l)e degraded,
225; all the ancient and cus-
tomary rights are to be pre-
served, 235, 267 ; none shall
assume jurisdiction outside
his province. 235; his rii:lits
reserved to Nicomedia, 267 ;
his rights reserved to Nice,
267 ; is court of appeal be-
tween bishops of his province,
274; has appeal to his own
exarcii of the diocese, 274;
against the exarch aiijieals to
the bishop of Constantinople,


Clergy — Con ti7iued.

274; only one can be in a
province at one time, 276;
two have been in the same
province by imperial rescript,
276, 377 ; metropolitan by
imi)erial rescript shall take
the bare title, 277, 377; case
of Photius bishop of Tj're,
277 ; is responsible for calling
the provincial synod, 282 ;
has to approve the place for
the synod, 282, 369; shall
not delay episcopal ordination
longer than three months,
285; unless he be compelled
by inevitable necessity, 285 ;
by delaying he is exposed to
ecclesiastical penalties, 285;
shall have charge of the prop-
erty of a bishop deceased,
381 ; shall have charge of the
church and church property
in a vacancy, 381 ; shall not
appropriate the private prop-
erty of the deceased, 381 ;
shall hand the church property
over to the new bishop, 381,
383; may be ordained in the
absence of a provincial bishop,
420, 421 ; bishops from other
provinces invited to his ordi-
nation, 420, 431 ; should take
charge of petitions from bish-
ops to the court, 424 ; with
the other bishops, takes charge
of a vacant parish, 119 ; in his
absence appeals are made to
neighbouring bishops, 428,
429 ; his council consists of
twelve bishops, 452, 455,
456 ; is in Africa called pri-
mate, 448, 461; shall not take
gifts from a bishop at synod,
560; received the legal s^/^Of?-
icum, 560 ; shall appoint an
oeconomus in his church, 562;
shall do nothing without the
consent of all his bishops,
596; they shall all aim at
unity and unanimity, 596.

Minister, lying with his espoused,
shall 1)6 disciplined, 608.

Minororders, 83, 144, 144 seq. ; who
are enrolled in the " clergy
list," 111, 144 seq.; excursus
on, 144-147 ; their forerunners
found in the Roman temple
its officers and officials, 145.

Monasteries for monks. 111 ; have
one to preside over them, 111;
cannot be founded witiiout
leave of the bishop, 270, 270 ;
must be provided for by the
l)ishop of the city, 270, 270 ;
how thej' became exempt
from episcopal control, 271 ;
exempt at Monte Cassino,
Tours. Fulda, Battle and St.
Alban's, 271 ; the clergy must
be subject to tiie bishop of the
city, 273; must have mconomi,
562, 563 ; shall not be robbed


Clergy — Continued.

by the hegumenos, 563 ; shall
not, on any pretext, have their
lands alienated, 563; shall not
be turned into public houses,
564; the hegumenos may or-
dain a reader for his own mon-
astery, 564; to ordain a reader
the hegumenos must be a
presbyter, 564; money given
to them as dowry for children,
567; or contributed to them as
a gift to God, shall remain, 567;
unless there be a complaint
against the superior, 567 ;
double, are forbidden to be
erected, 568, 568 ; the double,
have become an offence and
cause of complaint, 568 ; of
men shall not receive women,
568 ; of women shall not re-
ceive men, 568; how visitors
shall be received, 568; cases
of double and triple, 387, 388,
568.
Monasteries, double, 387 ; conse-
crated by the bishop, 388.
Monastic life, its purity and
strength guarded by canon,
384.
Monastic vow, as an impedimen-
tum dirigens of marriage, 386.
Monk, requires bishop's licence,
46 ; discipline for, 48 ; should
have a distinctive dress, 50,
97 ; how to be disciplined, 111 ;
how coerced when rebellious,
111 ; must not engage in secu-
lar business, 269 ; may be
called on by the law to manage
for orphans, etc. , 269 ; may be
called on by the bishop to
manage church business, 269;
must not use his office to cause
confusion, 270; must be sub-
ject to his bishop, 270, 270 seq.,
273 ; must not desert his mon-
astery or meddle in secular
affairs, 270 ; no slave without
leave can become a monk,
270 ; the true and sincere is to
be honoured, 270; shall not
accept military or secular
dignity, 272 ; one so accepting
and not repenting shall be
anathematized, 272 ; monks
in religious houses are subject
to the cit}' bishop, 273 ; monk
casting off the bishop's rule
is liable to excommunication,
273 ; forbidden to marry, 280,
386, 605 ; unless as indulged
by his bisho]), 280; question
as to the validity or invalidity
of a monk's marriage, 280 ;
if found conspiring against his
bishop is liable to deposition,
281, 381 ; or against a fellow
monk is liable to deposition,
281, 381 ; on marriage is to
be excommunicated, 365, 386;
shall not take part in horse-
races, 376 ; or assist in theat-


646


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Clergy — Continued.

riciil representations, 376,
569; but leiive the marriuge
when the games begin, 376;
age for entering the order,
384; entrance under the sanc-
tion of tlie bishop, 384, 569;
his lengthened probations be-
fore full profession, 385; con-
victed of fornication, shall be
punished as fornicator, 386 ;
marrying a wife for her
company is as a fornicator,

386, 606 ; shall not go outside
the monastery without leave,

387, 569; leave to be had
from the ruler of the monas-
tery, 387 ; and disobedience
shall meet with suitable pun-
ishments, 387 ; shall live witli-
out offence or scandal, 387,
569; reserved the Holy Com-
munion for his own use, 31)2;
has no tonsure, 890 ; should
not visit virgins or widows
without the bishop's leave,
460; and never alone, 460;
shall not be taken from a
foreign monastery, 481 ; for-
eign monk shall not be made
superior, 481 ; or ordained to
be one of the clergy, 481 ;
how the monks wei'e treated
by Copronymus, 540 ; taught
decorum and unseltishness by
the seventh ecumenical coun-
cil, 555 ; none shall have ac-
cess to a nunnery, 568, 568 ;
none shall eat with a nun,
568 ; how one may visit a nun,
a kinswoman, 568; how he
may bring food to a canoness,
568 ; he shall not leave and
go to another monastery, 569 ;
in another monastery he will
be received as a guest, 569 ;
can only be received in a mon-
astery with the consent of the
hegumenos, 569 ; his life is
one of entire self-surrender,
569; ought to avoid the soci-
ety of women, 569, 570; may
lodge in an inn if travelling,
570; at least tacitly he pro-
fesses celibacy, 605, 606.

Neophite is not ordainable, 126.

Nuns, the distinctive dress, etc.,
50, 385 ; protection of their
puiity, 364; on marriage are
to be excommunicated, 365 ;
some are richly dressed before
taking their vows, 386; but
this is strictly forbidden as un-
becoming, 386; many reasons
against this vain disjjhiy, 386;
may shed a few tears at admis-
sion to the order, 387; may
not leave the monastery with-
out leave. 387; shall not leave
■without a companion, 387;
leave shall be had from tiie
mother superior, 387; shall
not stop outside, 387 ; may


Clergy — Continued.

onl}' go outside on urgent ne-
cessity, 387; and disobedience
shall meet with suitable pun-
ishments, 387 ; must live with-
out offence or scandal, 387 ;
chaplains to, 569 ; a nun ought
not to leave her nunnery and
go to another, 569; in an-
other she shall be received as
a guest only, 569; cannot be
received without the consent
of the superior, 569.

Oratories, Domestic, 270.

Orders, the minor, 40, 113, 144,
364 ; some in them preferred
the inferiority and marriage,
457.

Ordination, is not to be hurried on,

10, 10, 11, 126, 154; of a
bishoji, how conditioned, 11,

11, 13, 113, 117, 119, 365,
465,595; distinguished from
election, 12, 118; by imposi-
tion of hands, 12 ; by chorepis-
copi, 21, 22, 23 , must be pre-
ceded bv examination, 23 ;
bars to ordination, 23, 23, 24,

46, 84, 363, 363, 365, 366.
595, 599; formsof irretrularity
in, 23, 24, 119, 376,429; ini-
pediments named, 23. 24, 46,

47, 84, 429, 595 ; its spiritual
effect, 24, 83 ; of the lap.sed
forbidden, 24; in ignorance
how dealt with, 24, 24; can-
celled by irregularity, 11, 35,
119, 429; to be repeated on
the Paulianists, 40; does it
give absolution of previous
sin ? 83 ; given on account of
zeal and faith, 84 ; given for
lack of men, 84 ; cannot be
lightly laid aside, 116, 117 ; as
equivalent term for election of
a bishop, 118, 126, 127 ; is al-
ways on a title to definite work,
152, 271; simoniacal, is invalid,
268, 376, 558; ordination of
one at large prevents his offi-
ciating, 271 ; ordination at
large, illicit and invalid, 271,
272 ; ordination at large causes
suspension of function, 272 ;
of bishops must not be delayed
beyond three months, 285;
unless delayed by inevitable
necessity, 285; by examina-
tion and choice of life, 376,
614; shall not be in a diocese
without the bishop's consent,
429; should be followed by
explanation of the canons,
451; shall not be repeated,
464, 598; of a bishop shall
be by at least three other
bishops, 11,12, 448, 465,465;
after a proper examination,
556, 614 ; by at least three of
the neighbouring bishops, 557 ;
was sometimes given in I'ecog-
nition of benetits to tliecliurcli,
559 ; shall be repeated after


Clerg}' — Continued.

liereticid ordination, which is
mdl, 598; shall not be given for
money, 268, 610, 615; must
be in the face of the public,
614; shall not be held in the
presence of hearers, 126; pray-
ers of ordination not to be said
aloud, 127 ; alter the people's
being askeil for their testimony,
614; after careful examination
into condition, life, etc., 615.

Ostiarius, ■KvXuipi'i. [Sec Door-
kp:epek.]

Paramonarius, a clerical official,
269, 559; shall not be advanced
for money, 559. [See Pkos-

MONAKIUS.]

Parvo Sacello Propositus, 369.

Patriarch, or Exarch, 274; has ju-
risdiction over metropolitans,
15, 16, 48, 274; the name
later than metropolitan, 15, 16 ;
absolves in unjust discipline,
46; of Alexandria, his juris-
diction, 46; of Antioch, his
jurisdiction, 46 ; of Jerusalem,
his residence and honour, 47 ;
of Seleucia, his residence and
honour, 47; of Constantinople,
his pre-eminence as court of
appeal, 274, 274, 275; four
under Pome, 48; collection for
support of, 48; his duties, 48.

Patriarchate, excursus on the rise
of that of Jerusalem, 1, 18seq.;
of Cfcsarea, 17, 18 ; that of Con-
stantinoi)le, the highest court
of appeal for the clergy, 274;
how the final appeal to Con-
stantinople was restricted, 274,
275 ; the iiiuicnt order defined
by name, 2.'-8.

People's place in episcopal elec-
tion, 12. 426 ; have no share in
appointing to the priesthood,
131.

Periodeutes. [See Visitors.]

Physicians of the soul, 158.

Plui'alities forbidden to the clergy,
275, 282.

PrcEjiositns domus. [See Stew-
ard.]

Preaching, the duty of the clerg}',
374; especially on the Lord's
Day, 374 ; fr'om the Script-
ures. 374; according to the
tradition of the God-bearing
fathers, 374; following in
controversy the lights and
doctors of the church, 374;
not to be a glorying in one's
own composition, 374; to
give the ju'ople the knowledge
of the good and desirable, 375;
also to let them know what
is useless and to be rejected,
375; to lead the people by
knowledge and not by igno-
rance, 375; to lead them to
work out their salvation in
fear of im])cn(ling )ninisliment,
375; its importance, 375 i its


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


647


Clergy — Continued.

rule in the English Church,
375.

Presbyter or priest, forbidden to
have a siihintroducta, 11,46;
can only have mother, sister,
aunt, or such as is beyond
suspicion, 11, 46, 364, 567;
forbidden to pass from city
to city, 32, 110, 271, 594;
should not receive the Eucha-
rist from a deacnn, 38 ; how
distinguished froiu the deacon,
38; superiiir to the deacon,
38, 368; must abide within
his own bounds, 39, 110 ; con-
celebrating, 39 ; impediments
to his ordination, 46, 595;
must not discipline in anger,
47 ; his ranking, 49 ; lapsed
but truly repentant, 63 ; those
who pretended to be forced,
63 ; should not be a recent
convert, 10, 10 ; should be de-
graded if convicted of sensual
sin, 10, 10, 79; as parallel to
the Jewish priest, 13, 14; not
usually ordained by chorepis-
copi, 21 ; must be blameless
at ordination, 23; must not
remove from his own church,
35, 50, 110 ; sbould be restored
to his own parish (diocese),
35, 110 ; if he will not return
to his parish (diocese), must
be excommunicated, 35, 110 ;
must not force himself into
orders, 46 ; his discipline if a
bigamist, 47; putting away
his wife, 49, 51, 379, 594;
a celibate, 51, 444; may
not embezzle church property,
69 ; on marriage he is deposed,
79, 364, 365 ; on fornication
or adultery he is expelled, 79;
polluted by lustful kiss, 81 ;
may retain his wife after ordi-
nation, 93, 94, 364; election
to his office is not to be com-
mitted to the multitude, 131 ;
question of popular election,
131 ; in barbarian churches is
to be cared for, 379 ; granted
a liberty in putting away his
wife, yet conditionally, 379 ;
if the wife is put away, it
must be by entire separation,
379; or if he still cohabits he
shall be deposed, 379 ; the
sacerdotal functions, 63,110;
for sin before ordination he
shall not make the oblation,
83; for present zeal he shall
discharge his other f mictions,
83; married was contemned
by the Eustathians, 91, 93;
married, services refused by
the Eustathians, 91, 93 ; must
observe the Nlctean Easter on
pain of deposition, 108 ; ex-
communicated for communi-
cating with one excommuni-
cated, 109, 109, 447; must be


Clergy — Continued.

disciplined for continued ab-
sence, 109, 110 ; forbidden to
ofliciate, if a wilful absentee,
109, 110 ; forbidden to ex-
ecute any part of his minis-
try if he be deposed, 110;
cannot be restored by another
synod but his own, 110; how
disciplined in acts of schism,
110 ; refusing the bishop's
third call, he is deposed, not
to be restored, 110, 111 ; can
appeal to synod against his
bishop, 111, 118; must accept
the bishop's ruling until the
appeal is decided, 111; ex-
communication continued or
relaxed by court of appeal,
111 ; country presbyter cannot
give canonical letters, 112;
he can send them to the neigh-
bouring bishops alone, 112;
forbidden to appeal to the
emperor without tlie bishop's
consent, 114; had distinctive
insignia, 143 ; ought not to
enter a tavern, 144, 369, 461,
597 ; except when travelling,
461 ; must not bathe with
women, 149 ; shall not be
magician, enchanter, mathe-
matician or astrologer, 151;
shall not make amulets, 151 ;
should not be addicted to dice
or drinking, 597 ; shall not
travel but at the bishop's bid-
ding, 152, 152 ; shall not
travel without letters canoni-
cal, 152, 152 ; must not wit-
ness plays at weddings, 157;
or plays at banquets, 157;
must leave wedding or banquet
when the players enter, 157;
must not be seated in the
bema before the entrance of
the bishop, 157; must enter
with the bishop, if the bishop
be present, 157 ; must do
nothing without the bishop's
consent, 158; must not make
the oblation in a private
house, 158; are often accused
in order to stain their charac-
ter, 183; teaching contrary to
the Nicene faith they shall
be deposed, 281 ; shall not be
ordained for a money pay-
ment, 268, 595 ; sliould not
be ordained at large, 271 ;
one ordained at large cannot
officiate, 271 ; restrictions on
marriage of, 362, 364, 595 ;
penance for uncanonical mar-
riages of, 362, 364, 606 ; de-
posed, if he has liad inter-
course with a nun, 364 ;
deposed if he receive usury,
and does not desist, 369, 597 ;
was allowed by early Eastern
custom to have his wife, 371 ;
this liberty was allowed to
him up to the TruUau Coun-


Clergy — Con tinned.

cil, 371 ; can be ordained
although living with his law-
ful wife, 371 ; his illegal mar-
riage deprives him of the work
of his ministry, 377; shall be
deposed for celebrating with-
out wine and water mixed,
380; shall not accept portions
of meat in the church, 407 j
is sufficient for a village or
small town, 420, 421 ; when
refused communion by his
own bishop, shall not find
refuge with another, 427 ; the
law of his appeal for justice,
442; shouhl be chaste and
continent, 444, 445, 478;
shall not make the chrism,
446 ; or consecrate virgins,
446 ; or reconcile any one in
the public mass (missa), 446 ;
shall not give viaticum to a
dying penitent without the
bishop's advice, 446 ; shall not
make a schism, 447, 448 ;
against his own bishop shall
appeal to neighbouring bishops,
448, 507 ; his appeal to a
court of six presbyters, 448,
452 ; if accused of crime, he
appeal to a secular court, he
shall lose his office, 449; if it
be a civil suit he shall also
lose his office, 449 ; he may
not be " conductor " or " proc-
urator," 450; if accused he
shall come first before his
bishop and six presbj'ters,
452; presbyter convicted of
graver crimes cannot be re-
ceived back as a layman, 455 ;
such presbyter cannot be
baptized again, or ordained,
or treated as a penitent, 455;
shall not sell his church's
goods without the bishop's
knowledge, 458 ; or usurp the
property of his charge, 458 ;
not to be ordained until all his
household is Christian, 460 ;
shall make the Eucharist fast-
ing, 155, 378, 461, 464;
should not neglect the chief
cathedral for another church
in the diocese, 478; should not
neglect his own cathedral for
his own private affairs, 478;
shall not be ordained for
money, 559; ordained by one
bishop, 594; shall not put away
his wife under pretence of re-
ligion, 594; shall not neglect
worldly business, 594; shall
not celebrate Easter before the
vernal equinox, 594 ; shall
partake of the offering when
it is made, 594 ; or else give a
reasonable excuse, 594; the
refusing to partake may ex-
cite suspicion against the of-
ferer, 594; shall not leave his
parish without his bishop's


648


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Clergj' — Continued.

Teuve, 594; .guilty of fornica-
tion, perjury or theft shall be
deposed, 595; who strikes
anyone shall be deposed, 595 ;
if justly deposed, he shall not
meddle with the divine offices,
595; if exconunwnicated he
cannot be received by another
bishop, 595 ; no foreiiju pres-
byter shall be received with-
out letter commendatory, 596 ;
and not until further close
examination, 596; though
rejected b}' the peoi^le, he
retains his rank, 596 ; he who
has prayed with heretics shall
be excommunicated, 597 ; but
if he has allowed Ihem to per-
form any clerical office he shall
be deposed, 597 ; he who has
admitted the baptism or sacri-
fice of heretics sliall be de-
posed, 597 ; shall not re-
baptize one already baptized,
597; may baptize one who has
been polluted by the ungodly,
597 ; shall baptize into the
Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, 597 ; shall not baptize
into other names, 597 ; shall
baptize with three immersions
and not one only, 597 ; shall
not abstain from marriage,
flesh or wine as abhorring
them, 597 ; shall not refuse a
repentant sinner, 597 ; shall
not refuse flesh and wine on
festival days, 597 ; for negli-
gence or idleness shall be
excommunicated, 597 ; shall
supply the needs of anj^ of the
clergy in want, 598 ; shall
observe the fasts, unless hin-
dered by infirmity, 598 ; shall
not serve in the army and be
in the ministry, 599; polluted
on his lips he shall cease from
his function, 608 ; one aged
70 years was directed to send
woman away and enter a mon-
astery, 610.

Preshytides, female presidents, 129,
130 ; are not to be appointed in
the church, 129, 130 ; exposi-
tion of the canon upon, 130.

Priest. [See Presbyter.]

Priesthood, is an established order,
564; must have its promotion
carefully guarded, 564; is af-
fected by tonsured youth, un-
ordained and in the ambo,
564; alone should communi-
cate at the altar, 136; mem-
bers of, may not be in club for
drinking entertainments, 157.

Primate, African title to a metro-
politan, 448, 461 ; every prov-
ince may have its own, 450;
one for Mauretania Sitifen-
sis, 450; not to be called
prince of the priests, or high
priest, or other such, 461 ;


Clergy — Con tinned.

has charge of calling the
synod and marking absences,
479.

Primus Defensor, 369.

Prosmonarius, is on the roil of the
church, 268 ; may be guilty
of simony, 268 ; jierhaps Pa-
ramonarius or Mansionarius,
269 ; the office is obscure, 209 ;
perhaps the same as Paramon-
ARius, 269.

Province, with its metropolitan and
bishops, 11, 234,235; its synod
administers its own provincial
all'airs, 177; its synods and
courts of appeal, 183; under
the jurisdiction of its own
metropolitan, 235 ; has been
divided by secular court, 276.

Readers, ordained by chorepisco-
pi, 21, 113 ; were blessed with
prayer and laying on of hands,
4 ; ought not to enter a tavern,
144; where first mentioned,
144, 146 ; history of their office,
144 seq. , 279; without letters
commendatorj' are ]irohibited
from officiating, 278 ; in cer-
tain provinces were allowed to
marry, 278, 364; their chil-
dren, if baptized in heresy,
must be brought into commun-
ion of the Catholic church,
278, 279 ; they may not give
their children to be l)aptized by
a heretic, 278 ; or give them in
marriage to a heretic, 278 ; or
to a Jew, 278 ; or to a heathen,
278 ; or to any such unless on
the promise of such coming
over to the orthodox faith,
278; deposed if they have had
intercourse with nuns, 364;
mav marry after ordination,
365", 595; shall not be ap-
pointed on the score of cleri-
cal descent, 381 ; shall be ap-
pointed as they are examined
and found worthy, 381 ; re-
ceive the clerical tonsure, 381,
881; at puberty should be mar-
ried or avowed celibate, 450;
shall not salute people, 450 ;
shall not be advanced in an-
other diocese, 485 ; one in a
monastery may be ordained
by the hegumenos, 564; they
shall not be given to dice or
drinking, 597; shall observe
the fasts, iniless hindered by
infirmitj', 598; one lying with
his espoused shall be disci-
plined, 608.
Religious, forbidden to give on
usury, 46 ; twice a year meet
the l)isho]\ 49.
Secular courts are forbidden to the
l)isli()p and clergy, 274, 276.
Senate of presbyters and deacons,

120.
Singer, made by tlic choreiiiscopus,
113 ; ought not to enter a tav-


Clergy — Con imiied.

ern, 144; history of the office,
144 seq., 279 ; in some prov-
inces he is allowed to marry,
278, 364; children baptized
in heresy he uuisl bring into
the communion of the Catholic
church, 278 ; hereafter the
children may not be baptized
among heretics, 278 ; or given
in marriage to a heretic, 278,
279 ; or to a Jew, 278 ; or to a
heathen, 278; or to any such
unless on the promise that
such would come f)ver to the
orthodox faith, 278; shall not
be given to dice or drinking,
597 ; may marry after ordina-
tion, 365, 595 ; shall observe
the fasts, unless hindered by
infirmity, 598.

Steward, is on the church's roll,
268 ; economi, a'conomi, 268,
562, 563 ; may be punished
for simony, 268 ; takes charge
of the church's income during
a vacanc}', 285 ; must be in
every church where there is a
l)ishop, 285, 562, 563 ; must
be one of the church's own
clergy, 285 ; manages the
church's business under the
bishop, 285, 562, 563; must
see that the church's goods be
not squandered, 285; must
preserve the clergy from re-
proach, 285 ; history of the
office of church's steward, 285
seq., 562, 563; his accounts
are to be audited by the
bishop, 286 ; the great stew-
ard of St. Sophia, 285, 286,
563 ; shall be apjiointed in his
church by the metropolitan,
562; or by the bishop of the
church, 562 ; .shall be ap-
pointed in monasteries, 563.

Subdeacon, maj' be ordained and
retain his wife, 371; his age
at ordination, 372, 372, 373;
shall not be given to dice or
drinking. 597; must not wear
the orarhtm (stole), 140; or
leave the doors, 140 ; not even
for prayer, 142 ; ought not to
enter a tavern, 144; history
of his office, 144 seq. ; must
not give the l)read or bless the
cup, 147; was ordained by
chorepiscojii, 21, 113; was
blessed with prayer and laying
on of hands, 40 ; clerical order,
51, 83, 144 seq.; celibate. 51 ;
must honour the deacons, 140 ;
has no right to a place in the
Diaconiriim, 140; or to touch
the Lord's vessel.s, 140, 455;
restrictions on marriage of,
362, 364; penances for unca-
nonical marriage of, 362 ; de-
l>osed if he has hadintercour.se
with a nun, 364; may be mar-
ried bef(M-e ordination, 364.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


649


Clergy — Continued.

Subini roductw were forbidden to
all the clergy, 11.

Suspicion or scandal against the
clerg}', 46.

Titles lo\)rdination, 271, 272.

Tonsvire, the clerical, given to
readers, 381; the ambo was
wrongly used by tonsured
youths who were unordained,
564.

Trading, as allowed or forbidden
to the clergy, 270.

Translation of bishops, priests,
and deacons forbidden, 32,
118, 464; the practice not un-
known, 32; examples of, 32,
33, 35, 464 ; some exceptional
cases, 33 ; excursus on the
translation of bishops, 33 ; rea-
sons against, 33 ; the Nicene
canon against, 33 seq. ; by au-
thorit}^ of provincial synod,
33,34: with consent of the
pope, 33; practice traced chron-
ologically, 33 u. ; object and
occ^isionof the Nicene canon,
33, 34 ; the practice in differ-
ent countries, 34; different
kinds, 34; power assumed by
the secular authorilj', 34, 35 ;
by authority of the metropoli-
tan and Synod, 34 ; common
in the English church, 35 ;
restricted in the Protestant
Episcopal church in America,
35 n.

Villages and country districts have
visitors in place of bishops,
158.

Visitors, in place of bishops, must
be placed in villages and coun-
try districts, 158, 158 ; were
called Permieuies, 158.


Clinics, on recovery after baptism,
must learn the creed by heart,
154; and receive fuller in-
struction in the faith, 154;
they are not to be baptized
again, 154 ; and are not to be
rashly promoted to the priest-
hood, 154.

Clubs, for drinking must not be
formed by clergy or laity,
157; called Symboln, comissa-
lia, co7nme?isalia, comessalia,
157.

Code of canons of the African
Church, 441 seq. [See Car-
thage, the 217. Blessed
Fathers.]

<:V)1. ii. 18,150.

Columban and the Easter ques-
tion, 50.

Commemoration of the dead, 461 ;
if in the afternoon, it can only
be by prayers, 461.

Commination service of the
(liurch of England, 25.

Commiinitoi inm, read at Carthage,
441, 506, 507 ; of Theophilus


bishop of Alexandria to Am-
nion, 014.

Communicants, to be disciplined
for being with heretics at
cemeteries, 129; with the peo-
])lt' in prayers alone, 24, 64.

Commit nicatio idiornatum was de-
nied by Nestorians. 208, 209.

Communion of the Sick, Excur-
sus on. [See Eucuakist.]

Communion letters. [See Com-
mendatory Letters.]

Communion, repelling from, 64;
in full, 64, 73, 74.

Competentes, catechumens of long
standing, 31, 138 ; how they
were dismissed, 138.

Compline, its origin, 134.

Concelebrating, its meaning, 39.

Conciiiabulum, was held after the
council of Ephesus, 226 seq.,
581 ; consisted of John bishop
of Antioch and the discontents
from Ephesus, 227 ; its pecul-
iarly mixed character, 228,
579 ; was held at Constantino-
ple, 584 ; was held 754, a.d.
584.

Conciiiabulum, or mock council,
541, 542, 543 seti. ; definition
of the iconoclastic conciiiabu-
lum, 542, 543 seq. ; its anathe-
mas, 545, &46 ; account of its
history, 546, 547 seq.; its ac-
tion and decrees reversed by
the seventh ecumenical coun-
cil, 548.

Confession, questions upon, 27;
its value, 27, 125; a prelimi-
nary to restoration, 108, 125;
to make, 108; accompan3nng
penance and true conversion,
125, 129; sacramental, 126.

Confessors, 146.

Confirmation, as administered wnth
chrism, 154, 446.

Conjuration or jiiiarmacy, how
penanced, 608.

Conjurers and diviners, how disci-
plined, 611.

Consecration, by imposition of
hands, 12 ; of the Eucharist.
[See Eucharist.]

Consistentes, a class of penitents,
26, 29, 31, 80; their position
in church, 26, 31.

Conspiracy, or banding together, is
a crime prohibited by all law,
281, 381 ; specially forbidden
to clergymen and monks, 281,
381 ; those conspiring against
their bishops or fellow clergy
shall be deposed, 281, 381.

Constantine I., emperor, xxix, 8,
28, 105, 536 ; at the council of
Nica>a, 53, 108; " beloved of
God," 108; his contest with
Liciiiius, 28; convened the
Nicene council, 53, 359 ; his
letter on the Easter question,
54 ; his death, 413.

Constantine IV., Pogonatus, em-
peror, 328, 350, 353 ; report


made to him l)y the Pros-
l)honeticus, 347 ; confirmed
the synod at Consttuitinople,
348, 353; anathematized
Honorius, 352, 353 ; his de-
cree at the close of the Synod,
353.

Constantine V., Copronymus, 547;
his oppression of the monks,
and the church generally, 546
seq. ; sought to win Pepin,
548 ; his death and the conse-
quent reaction, 548 ; was a
violent iconoclast, 547 seq.

Constantine VI., emperor, sum-
moned the seventh ecumeni-
cal council, 521 ; his divine
Sacra or summons, 529, 53 .

Constantinople, church had 100
deacons, 86 ; its metropolitan
receives wider |)ower of con-
secrations, 177 ; its bishop has
prerogatives of honour after
the l)ishop of Rome, 178, 177,
287, 287 seq. ; is New Rome,
and hence privileged, 178, 178,
287, 287 seq. , 382 ; had a Latin
patriarchate set up in, 179 ; its
bishop or patriarch is the
highest court of appeal for
clergy, 274 ; its metropolitan
consecrates to Pontus^ Asia
and Thrace, 177 ; its patriarch
or bishop receives appeals from
exarchs, 274, 274 ; its see
shall have equal privileges
with the see of Old Rome,
382 ; in ecclesiastical matters
shall be second after it, 382,
382 ; its privileges confirmed
at Chalcedon, 287; received
at Chalcedon equal privileges
{"taa irperr^ela), 287; the rea-
sons adduced in the canon,
287 ; ranks next after old im-
perial Rome, 287, 512 ; its
bishop ordains the metropoli-
tans of tiie Pontic, Thracinn
and Asian dioceses, 287, 287
seq.; at Chalcedon council
Constantinople acquires a vast
new jurisdiction, 287 seq.; the
question regarding canon
xxviii. was fully discus.sed,
292-5; canons of the council
at, held under Nectarius and
Theophilus, 410 ; council held
under Nectarius 394, a.d. 511
seq.

Constantinople, the imperial, 283.

Constantinople I. The Second
Ecumenical Council, 381 a.d.,
161 se(]. ; undisputed ueneral
council, 162, cf. 186, 187 ; was
not convened to be a general
council, 162 ; was a local
gathering of 150 bishops, 162,
170, 359 ; had no connecticm
with the Roman bishop, xiii,
162, 186, 187; was wholly
Eastern and had no Western
representation, xiii, 162, 170,
186 ; was an assembly of il-


650


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


lustrious saints, 162 ; was pre-
sided over by Meletius, bishop
of Antioch, not in union with
Rome, 162 ; its second pi'esi-
dent was Gregory of Nazien-
zen, doubtfully translated,

162 ; its action continued the
Meletian schism, 162, 162 ;
canons were not in their natu-
ral position at Chalcedon, 162,
171, 186, 187 ; its creed was
notreferred to at Ephesus, tifty
years afterwards, 162, 187 ; its
title to ecumenicit}' rests upon
its creed, 162, 186, 187 ; it is
disputed if it ever set forth a
creed, 162; theories rcuarding
the origin of the creed, 162 n.,

163 ; excursus on the FiU-
oque clause, 165 seq. ; texts of
the creed, 163, 164 ; added to
the Nicene creed, 166 ; had its
creed added to, at Chalcedon,

166 ; decisions were contiiined
by the III. council of Toledo,

167 ; explanation suggested for
its being added to, 168 ; his-
torical note on its lost tome,
169, 189; acc(junt of its Sy-
nodical letter to Pope Dama-
sus, 169 ; dealt with Apolli-
narianism, 169 ; reassembled,
382, A.D. 169 ; was at first con-
vened bv Theodosius I., the
Emperor, 161, 170, 172, 359;
text of the council's rei)()rt to
Theodosius, 170; ratiried the
faith of the Nicene fathers,
170; anathematized heresies,
170; asked Theodosius's rati-
fication of their canons, 170;
on the number of its canons,
probably four, 171 ; text of the
seven canons, 172-86 ; its
date, 161, 172, 272 n. ; its com-
position, 163, 172; warning
to the reader on Canon VII.,
184 ; had disputes at its close,
186 ; was followed by a synod
next year, 382 a. d., 186; had
its creed received, but its can-
ons questioned, 186; Latin in-
fluence was against the coun-
cil, 186; Rome long resented
the third canon, 1«7, 287 seq.;
its faith confirmed by the
Quinisext council, 359 ; its
canons confirmed l)y the
Quinisext council, 361 ; its re-
lations to the Roman See, xiii.

Constantinople. The SupiihMnental
Council, 382, a.d. 181, 182,
183, 186 seq. ; excursus on its
authority, 186, 187 ; the sy-
nodical letter to the bishops in
Rome, 188 seq.

Constantinople II. The Fifth Ecu-
menical Council, 553, a.d.
597 seq. ; called by Justinian
1., 299, 360; witlmut the a.s-
sent of Pope Vigilius, xiii,
299; was opened on 5th May,
553, A.D., 299 ; followed tlie


order of preceding councils,
299, 307 ; excursus on the
genuineness of the Acts, 301 ;
Justinian's letter to the fath-
ers of the Council, 302 seq. ;
agreed with Justinian's order
to erase Vigilius's name from
the diptychs, 305 ; sentence of
the synod, 306-11 ; confirmed
the preceding four general
councils, 307, 310, 314; its
confession of faith and its
standards of truth, 310; con-
demned Theodore, Theodoret,
the letter attributed to Ibas,
and the Three Chapters, 310-
311, 317, 360; capitnla of
the council, 312 .seq. ; con-
fessed the one hypostasis in
Christ, the Son of God, 312,
313; anathematized Arius,
Eunomius, Macedonius, Apol-
linaris, Nestorius, Eutyclies
and Origen, 314, 360; Ilar-
nack's account of its work,
317 ; confirmed by Pope Vigi-
lius, 321 seq. ; confirmed by
Pope Pelagius I.. 323 ; not
well received at first in the
West, Asia and x\f rica, 323 ;
at last was acce]ited and recog-
nized, 323 ; recognized by the
sixth general council in 680,
A.D. 323; its faith confirmed
by the quinisext council, 360 ;
its relation to the Roman see,
xiv.

Constantinople III. The Sixth
Ecumenical Council, 680-681
A.D., 325 seq.; historical intro-
duction, 326 ; its meeting and
attendance, 326 ; summoned
by Emperor Constantine Po-
g'onatus, 326, 345, 353 ; pre-
sided over by the emperor,
326 ; had the five patriarchs
represented, 326 ; held in
Trnllo and so named, 326,
344; all the patriarchs were
cited by Sacras sent to them,
326 ; the sentence against the
Monothelites, 342, 353; the
definition of faith of the coun-
cil, 344 seq. ; confirmed the
preceding synods, 344, 345 ;
reasserted the creeds of ear-
lier synods, 344, 353 ; the
Prosphoueticus to the empe-
ror, 347 seq. ; letter of the
Council to S. Agatho, 349 seq.;
Imperial edict posted at the
great church, 353 ; its canons
as issued by the Trullan or
Quinisext, 357 seq. ; its faith
confirmed by the Trullan or
Quini-sext, 360; the degrees
neither add nor take away
from the faith, 360; its rela-
tion to the Roman see, xiv.

Constantinojile IV. The Quini-
sext or Council in Trullo,
692, A.D., 355 seq.; not truly
ecumenical, as the West was


unrepresented, 356, 358 ; ab-
jured by the Pope, 356 ; sup-
plementar}- to the two councils
preceding^ 356, 357, 358 ; con-
voked by Justinian ii , 356,
357 ; attended by four patri-
archs, 356, 357 ; its names and
place of meeting, 356 ; its pur-
pose, to form a body of tlis-
ciplinary canons, 356, 358,
362; its date doubtful, 356,
357, 540 n. ; the signatures to
the decrees and canons, 357 ;
the authority of its canons, as
belonging to the sixth council,
367 seq., '540; the character of
the canons, 358 ; the canons
CII., 359 seq.; confirms the
faith of the six preceding holy
synods, 359; confirms the
canons of the ecumenical and
other councils, 361 ; confirms
decretal letters of certain the-
ologians, 361; the Emperor's
object in convening the coun-
cil, 362; calls itself "this holy
and ecumenical council," 362;
its object in the canons, 362 ;
some canons renewed some of
the apostolic canons, 363 ; dealt
witli the apostolic canons as
having fixed the discipline,
466 ; the tone of the canons is
opposed to the West, 370, 379 ;
the desire of the council is for
the good of the fiock, 370; no
desire to abolish apostolic
authority, 370 ; accepted the
African code, 394.

Constantinople V. The so-called
Eighth Ecumenical Council,
869, A.D. 589 seq.; East and
West considered it ecumeni-
cal, 586 ; was opposed to Pho-
tius, 586 ; another met at Con-
stantinople, 879 A.D., 587;
under the auspices of Photius,
587 ; was accepted in the East
as the Eighth Ecumenical,
587 ; both councils acknowl-
edged the Seventh, 587.

Constantinople, Council held un-
der Xectarius394 a.d. ,511 seq.;
introductory note, 512 ; act of
convening, 513 ; case of the
bishopric of Rostra considered
and decided, 513.

Consul)stantial or Homousios, 4 n.

Continence, accompanied by godli-
ness and gravity, 101 ; to be
observed by bishops, priests,
and deacons, 444, 445, 454;
to be observed before and after
eucharist, 445, 454; all clergy,
including subdeacons, should
practice, 454; left to the di.s-
cretion of the aged, 599; in
connection with nocturnal pol-
lutions, 600, 602.

Contrary to ecclesiastical canon,
10.

Conventicles and their services for-
bidden, 94.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


G51


Converts from heathenism must
have time for instruction, 10,
10.

CopiatiB. [See Clergy.]

1 Cor. i. 17, 375 ; ii, 9. 136 ; vi. 1, 2,

473 ; vii. 38, 9 ; viii. 4, 553 ;
xi. 10, 99 ; xi. 20, 461 ; xiv. 34,
397

2 Cor. iii. 1, 113, 453.

Corn, ears of, may be offered on

the altar, 594.
Co-stauders, their place, 602.


COUNCILS.

African, 354 a.d., 63.
Ao:de, 506 A.D., 270, 385.
ATx-la-Chapelle I., 809 a.d., 156.
Aix-la-Chapelle II., 816 a.d., 38.
Alexandria, 330 a.d., 308.
Alexandria, 362 A.D., 173.
Ancvra, 314 a.d., 21, 33, 29, 59,

73. 74, 135, 158, 368, 361,364,

365, 386, 404.
Antioch, 269 a.d., 9, 23, 33, 59,

146, 148, 361, 383.
Anti()f:h, 341 a.d., 21. 59, 60, 144,

147, 158, 163, 178, 189, 268,
283, 383, 416, 438, 453, 456,
465.

Aries, 314 A. D., 36, 40.
Aries, 353 a.d., 8.
Bratra, 561 a.d., 142, 143.
Calcuth, 787 A.D. , 576.
Carthage, 257 a.d., 363.
Carthage, 345 or 348 a.d., 445.
Carthage, 348 a.d., 37, 361.
CartlKige, 387 or 390 a.d., 444,

446, 447, 448.
Carthage, 394 a.d., 459.
Carthage, 397 a.d., 33, 449, 459,

464, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470,

472.
Carthase, 398 a.d., 33, 127.
Carthage, 399 a.d., 472.
Carthage, 400 a.d., 372.
Carthnge. 401 a.d., 455, 472, 473,

474, 478, 481, 482, 483.
Carthage, 4()3 a.d., 387.
Carthaii-e, 405 a.d., 490.
Carthage, 407 A.D., 490, 491, 493,

494.
Carthage, 418 a.d., 456, 497, 498,

499, 500, 501, 502, 503.
Carthage, 419 a.d.. 36, 37, 44,

151, 361, 369, 504.
Carthage, 421 a.d., 458.
Carthage, 525 a.d., 475.
Chalce'don, 451 a.d., 365, 368, 373,

375, 381, 382, 386, 388, 453,

468, 479, 563, 567.
Chalons, 813, a.d., 38.
Clovesho, 747 a.d., 270.
Constantinople, 381 a.d., 16, 59,

86, 134, 161 seq., 167, 186 seq.,

302, 382.
Constantinople, 382 a.d., 181, 182,

183, 405.
Constantinople, 394 a.d., 362.
Constantinople, 448 a.d., 275.
Constantinople (Home Synod), 543

A.D., 317.


Councils — Continued.
Constantinople, 553 a.d., 200, 234,

263, 401.
Constantinople, 680 a.d., 234, 348,

369.
Constantinople, 869 a.d., xv.
Constantinople, 879 a.d., xv.
Douzy, 871 a.d., 23.
Elvira, 305 a.d., 36, 51, 73, 145.
Epaon, 517 a.d., 130.
Ephesus, 431 a.d., 3, 13, 18, 19, 23,

59, 167, 187, 200, 201, 286, 302.
Ephesus (Latrocinium), 449 a.d.,

186, 187, 233.
Florence, 1438-1439 a.d., x, 166,

167, 290, 587.
Florence, 1439 a.d., 181, 233, 233.
Florentine Union, 1439 a.d., 179.
Frankfort, 794 a.d., 385, 404, 539,

577 578
Gan<rra,'358'A.D., 51, 52, 59, 268,

2S6, 361, 447.
Genlilly, 767 a.d., 548.
Hertford, 673 a.d., 271, S85.
Hippo, 393 A.D., 401, 449, 450, 451,

452, 453, 454, 4r)9, 460, 461, 463,

466, 467, 479, 503.
Iconinm, 235 a.d., 128.
Langres, 830 a.d., 23.
Laodicea, 341 a.d., 9, 113, 146, 148,

150, 361, 369, 377, 378, 399,

405.
Laodicea, 343 a.d., xv, 34,60, 158,

177, 181, 182, 184, 373, 374,

361, 370, 453.
Laodicea, 363 a.d., 144, 879.
Lyons, 886 a.d., 23.
Lyons, 1274 a.d., xv, 287.
Mayence, 813 a.d., 38.
Mayence. 847 a.d., 23.
Meaux, 845 a.d.. 29.
Metz, 888 a.d. , 23.
Milan, 345 a.d., 414.
Neocsesarea, 314 a.d., 21,22, 23, 24,

32, 59, 125, 268, 361, 365, 368,

373
Nice l.\ 325 a.d., 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 23,

32 seq., 36, 59, 112, 125, 140,

167, 186, 282, 302, 344, 364,

368, 403, 428.
Nice II., 787 a.d., 127, 128, 166,

352, 590, 612.
Orange, 441 a.d., 42, 130, 863.
Orange, 529 a.d., 42.
Orleans, 511 a.d., 270, 385.
Orleans, 533 a.d., 130.
Orlean.s, 538 a.d., 38.
Pari.s, 839 a.d., 22, 271.
Paris, Convention of, 825 a.d., 577.
Philippopolis, 347 a.d., 414.
Pontion, 876 a.d., 23.
Qninisext, 692 a.d., xv, 60, 86,

124, 153, 155, 156, 185, 375 seq.
Ratisbon, 800 a.d., 22.
Rheims, 813 a.d., 38, 422.
Riez, 439 a.d., 21.
Rimini, 359 a.d., 172, 173.
Rome, 369 a.d., 182.
Rome, 380 a.d., 183.
Rome, 649 a.d., 309.
Rome, 745 a.d., 150.
Rome, 1139 A. D., 367.
Rome, 1315 a.d., 179, 290.


Councils — Continued.

Sardica, 343 a.d., xv, 34, 44, 55,
60,115,124,158, 177,181,182,
184, 273, 274, 361, 370, 453.

Seleucia, 359 a.d., 173.

Spanish II., 619 a.d., 33.

Toledo, 400 a.d., 166.

Toledo, 535 a.d., 373.

Toledo, 589 a.d., 166, 167, 168.

Toledo, 633 a.d., 143, 143, 371.

Toledo, 646 a.d., 385.

Toledo, 653 a.d. , 166.

Toledo, 681 a.d., 166.

Toledo, 694 A.D,, 363.

Tours, 675 a.d., 31, 36.

Trent, 1545-1563 A.D., 10, 93, 157,
■591.

Trullan, in Trullo, or Quinisc.xt,
693 A.D., XV, 38, 60, 86 113,
124, 127, 130, 148, 149, 153, 155,
156, 157, 185, 268, 279, 388,
855 seq., 883, 560, 570, 590,
613 n.

Vannes, c. 465 a.d., 385.

Vienna, 1316 a.d., xxxv.


Council (Ecumenical) disliked by
Gregory Nazianzen, 13 ; tests
writings on the faith, and ap-
proves or condemns, 299 seq. ;
ecumenicity of a council con-
sidered, 534 seq. ; question
over the .second Nicene, 524
seq. ; the four vv^ere revered by
Gregory Great, 535 ; the six
Ecumenical were confirmed
and adopted, 555, 555, 556.

Council (Provincial) held twice a
year, 46.

Courts of Appeal. [See Clergy.]

Creed, the Nicene, 1, 3, 349, 363 ;
of Eusebius, 1, 3; to be learned
by the catechumens and re-
peated to the bishop, 154,
399 1 or to be repeated to the
presbyters, 154; to be re-
peated by the catechumens on
the Thursday before baptism,
154, 154; of Constantinople,
difficulties about the, 163,
163 n., 103, 167, 168; text of
that of Constantinople, 163,
268 ; text of those in EiMpha-
uiu.s's Ancoratus, 164, 165 ; ad-
ditions to, were forbidden,
162, 163, 167-9 ; that of
Ephesus, 197; in Cyril's letter
to Nestorius, 202 ; those of
Constantinople and Nicfea
are one creed, 234 ; that given
out by the seventh ecumeni-
cal, NicvTa IL, 540. 549.

Cresconius bishop of Villa Regis,
464, 480; left his see and
invaded Tubinia, 464; re-
fused to leave and return to
his own church, 464 ; was
deposed for contempt and
handed over to the magistrate,
454, 480.

Crime shoidd not be punished
twice, 604.


652


IXDEX OF SUBJECTS


Criiiiiinil or criminous person
niuy not accuse a bishop, 446.

Cross should receive all clue honour
as the sign of salvation, 398,
401 ; its figure shall not be
placed on the pavement, 398 ;
should not be desecrated b,v
the tread of feet, 398 ; liow it
is to be venerated, 308, 401 ;
the act of signing with, 610.

Customs as guide and law, ancient,
15, 17, 234; followed in the
canons, 383.

Cylesfras, its meaning doubtful,
397, 397.

Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, 517 ;
presided over council, 257
A.D., 516, 517, 518; opposed to
heretical baptism, 517; ques-
tion of his relation to the see
of Rome at his death, 518 ;
his letter against heretical
baptism, 518 seq.

C^'^prus, its archbishop subject to
Antioch, 47, 234, 235, 235;
privileges belonging to him,
177, 235 ; the question of
jurisdiction is referred to at
Ephesus, 235 ; ordinations are
reserved to the bishops of
Cyprus, 235, 235.

Cyriacus was forced to take an oath
at ordination, 605 ; the conse-
quences of the oath, 605.

Cyril of Alexandria, his doctrine
condemned, 2 n. ; sends Ni-
cene canons, 44 ; in the Easter
question, 56 ; reports to Celes-
tine upon Nestorius's teach-
ing, 192 ; text of his letter
to Nestorius, 197, 198, 199,
201 seq., 250; his statement
of the faith is approved, 199,
264, 308 ; the historical posi-
tion of his anathemas, 199 seq. ;
were they or were thej' not
accepted at Ephesus? 199 seq. ;
creed delivered, 202 ; his
anatheraatisms against Nes-
torius, 206, 210, 233, 234,
238, 250; was accused of
Apoiiiiiarianism by Nestorius,
213, 238; a controversialist,
215 ; pronounces sentence of
deposition on Nestorius, 218,
223-4, 238; an o])ject of
attack in the Conciliabulum,
226, 227, 228, 238, 239 ; w-rote
a letter to John, Bishop of
Antioch, 250, 299, 308; his
teaching about the theotocos,
25 1-2, 264 ; accei)ted as teach-
ing the true faith, 259,264 ; his
writing and teaching accepted
by Vigilius, 322;' sent true
copy of the proceedings of the
Nicene Council to Carthage,
508 ; his canonical letter to
Domnu.s, 615.

Cyril, Rp. of Jerusalem. 92, 128.
137, 162, 173, 189; account
of his catechetical lectures,
137


Dances, public, of women in un-
christian fashion, 393; also
of men in the same fashion,
are to be abolished, 393; de-
scription of ancient, 393.

Deaconess. [See Clergy.]

Dead niav not be given the Eucha-
rist, 401.

Dead, service for the, 100 ; prayer
for the souls of the, 101 ; ba])-
tism or eucharist shall not be
given to the bodies of the, 450.

Decretals, the false, xxxiv, xxxv ;
collections, xxxv.

Defensor. [See Ci.kkoy.]

Demoniacs, those pretending .shall
endure the penance of demo-
niacs, 392 ; later claims to
demoniacal possession, 392.

Demons, theories upon, 318.

Deposed, one praying with a de-
posed clergyman as such is
deposed, 594.

Desideratus, Bp. of Verdiui, ar-
ranging a loan, 38.

Deut. xxii., 5, 07.

Devils, their double power over
men, 147-S, 392.

Diaconicum or vestry in church,
26, 140.

Dice, neither laj'man nor cleric
shall play at, 388, 597 ; tho.se
plavinc; at are liable to penalty,
382, 597.

Dicynibala, at the Great Church,
in Constantinople, 353.

Didache {StSaxv). 136, 137, 603 n.

Didaskale of the Apostles, 137;
incorporated in the Ajwstolical
Constitutions, 137.

Digamists, objected to by the
Cathari, 19, 20 ; excursus on,
75 seq. , 125 ; restricted use of
the term, 72 ; may receive the
commimion, 125.'

Digamy, priest is not to be present
at the nuptials, 82; is subject
to discipline, 82, 125, 362;
different kind.s, 125, 362; is
a bar to ordination, 363, 366,
595; always incapacitated the
clergy for the episcopate,
363 ; )^et often indulged and
dispensed with, 363, 607 ; how-
pen an ced, 604.

Digest, the Roman legal, xxx.

Diocese, variations in the use of
the word, 184, 470 ; width of
its meaning in the 4th century,
184.

Diocletian, his death, 62 n.

Diogenes, a lapsed, 62.

Dionysius, Abp. of Alexandria,
600 ; his re]ilies to Basilides
the bishop, 600; their date
about 247 A.D., 600.

Dion5'sius Exiguus tran.slated the
body of Canons, 591 ; his re-
lation to \.\iGApostoJical Canons,
591 , 592 ; his visit to Rome,
592 ; made several collect iouT,
of c.anons, xxxiv, 591, 592 ;
his Easter calculations, 56.


Dioscorus, Bp of Alexandria,
247, 276, 285, 344; was con-
demned at Chalcedon with
his a.ssociates, 248, 259, 260,
261 ; text of his condemna-
tion, 260.

Diptychs, written tables, 482 ;
names in honour were read
from them, 482; disgrace to
have one's name omitted, 481,
482.

DiscipUna arcani, a hindrance to
arclueological inquiries, 136.

Discipline, the public, excursus on,
25 seq.; in different periods,
25, 402 ; was intended to be a
moral reality, 29 ; not for a
covering over the wound, 29;
for the lapsed catechumens,
31; unjust, how met, 46; is
neutralLsed by party rivalries,
230 ; is valid against heretical
restoration, 230.

Dispensation, l)y the bishop alone,
67 ; a (langerous expedient,
84 ; frequent instances relat-
ing to marriage, 363 ; for one
clerk to hold two country
churches, 565.

Divination and Diviners, how dis-
ciplined, 611.

Divine monarchy, 167.

Divorce under tiie bishop, 48 ; its
general conditions, 49, 605 ;
subsequent marriage forms
adultery, 609.

Divorced women shall not be mar-
ried to a cleric, 595 ; man
married to such shall not be
ordained, 595.

Doctrine based on the traditional
faith, 2.

Door, the subdeacon's place at,
141. [See Clergy.]

Doorkeeper. [See Clergy.]
; Doxology, traditional authorit}^
! for by u.se, 610.

Dress, its excliauge by the Eusta-
thians anathemati.sed, 97.

Drink, strong-made, shall not be
used for eucharist, 594.

Drinking, clubs for, must not be
formed liy clergy or laity,
157; bishop, presbyter, and
deacon, shall not be given to
tliem, 597 ; neither shall sub-
deacon, reader, singer, or lay-
man, 597.

Drugs, those giving and those re-
ceiving for abortion are guilty
of muiiler, 404.

Dying, must not be deprived of
their viaticum, 29, 46, 65,
74, 79; in discipline, if he re-
cover after receiving the viati-
cum, 29, 65.

East, its teaching upon the divine
procession, 167 ; agrees with
West on tlie theoloirical (pies-
tion, 167, 168 ; its bishops are
to manage the East alone. 176;
pra3ing toward the cast, 610.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


653


Easter, synodical letter on 53,
54 ; Decree on the keeping of,
108, 508; synod held on the
controversy, 17, 108; Day,
42, 508 ; Rule, 44 ; settle-
ment, 54 seq., 108, 508; not
to follow the Jewish reckon-
ing, 54, 55, 108; excursus
on its later history, 55 seq. ;
cycles, 55-6, 108 n.; present
differences, 56 n. ; called the
great day, 65; its lawful tra-
dition is to be followed, 108 ;
Council of Nice probably took
action on the question, 108 ;
had a custom of sending the
eulogite, 132; the feast and
Easter Week are to be free
from labour, 395 ; they are to
be devoted to religious rejoic-
ing in the holy churches, 395 ;
but are not to have horse-rac-
ing or public shows, 395 ;
day fixed should be announced
in synod, 459, 478, 508;
time calculated at Alexandria,
and word sent out, 508 ; shall
not be celebrated before the
vernal equinox, 594; time
for baptisms and the reception
of penitents, 611.

Easter Even, its importance in
Russia, 134; the ancient time
for baptism, 153.

Easter Week, its celebration in
East and West, 395 ; calcula-
tions for the keeping of, 433
seq. ; the feast day is to be an-
nounced at the synod of the
church of Carthage, 466 ; the
octave day of the holy Easter
(Low Sunday), 473.

Ecclesiastical order as a law and
guide, 183.

Ecdesinsticus is called at Ephesus
"the divinely inspired Script-
ure," 236 ; xxxii, 19, 236 n.

Economist. [See Clergy.]

Ecumenical canon may be of tem-
porary force, 93.

Ecumenical Council, first, at Nice,
325 A.D., 1 seq.; not exposi-
tory but witness bearing, 2 ;
why the council at Sardica
was not ecumenical, 435; how
the Seventh Council, the
second of Nice, was, 523 seq.,
531 ; the six holy and ecu-
menical synods, 533, 540,
549, 555; definition of the
name and thing, xi ; Rome's
expansion of the idea, xi n. ;
not equivalent to general
council, xii ; in what sense in-
fallible, xii ; value of even
their obiter dicta, xii ; seven
properly so called, xii ; called
together by princes, xii.

Ecumenical Council, its relation
to the Roman see, xii seq. ;
the number — seven, xv ; list of
councils having a claim to
ecumenicity, xv.


Edessa, church had 38 deacons, 86.

Eggs, as used during Lent in Arme-
nia, are prohibited, 391.

Egypt, its ancient customs are to
prevail, 13; interpretation of
the canon, 13, 14 ; diocese un-
der xVlexandria, 15, 15, 16, 53,
54, 176 ; had its metropolitan,
16; its interests before Nicene
synod, 53-4.

Egyptian bishops, their scruples
met by the fathers at Chalce-
don, 291 ; are only required
to wait and give bonds or
their oath, 291 ; their action
explained, 291-2.

Embezzlement of church revenues
forbidden by canon, 95, 120,
121.

Embezzlers of church benefactions
are under anathema, 95.

"Emmanuel is very God," 206,
214, 252 ; the Nestorian no-
tion of, 206, 212, 214, 252.

Emperor within the sacrarium, 26;
appeals to, how restricted,
114, 421, 494; how venerated,
322 ; by ancient tradition he
entered the sanctuary to make
his offering, 396, 396 ; may
without ofTence be asked for
an episcopal trial, 494.

Emperors, petition to, about the re-
moval of idols, 470, 472 ; pe-
tition that the clergy be not
compelled to give testimony,
472; that they stretch forth a
helping hand to the church,
489 ; tlieir relation to the ecu-
menical councils, xii, xiii.

Enchanter, the definition of, 151 ;
priesthood or clergy shall not
be, 151.

Enchanters are to be avoided,
393.

Energumens, where they stood in
church, 26 ; how they were
dismissed, 138; how classed,
147.

Eparchies. [See Clergy.]

Ephesians ii. 14, 15, 530; v. 23, 385.

Ephesus. The Third Ecumenical
Council, 431 a.d. , 191 seq.; the
council, 18. 23, 59, 167, 187,
200, 201, 286, 302; preceded
by a controversy between Ce-
lestine and Nestorius, xiii,
192; was summoned by Theo-
dosius II. to consider the Nes-
torian heresy, 192 seq., 237,
359 ; was under the presidency
of Cyril of Alexandria, 193,
219, '233; had the Nicene
Creed read and approved, 193,
194, 237, 249 ; examined and
approved the teaching of Cy-
ril, 193, 237 ; examined and
condemned the teaching of
Nestorius, 194, 359; had
neither emperor present, 196 ;
had Candidian to represent the
Emperors. 196 ; extracts from
the acts of the council, 199,


218, 219, 223 ; it probably ap-
proved Cyril's letter and anath-
emas, 199 seq., 218, 237 ; in
vain summoned John of Anti-
och and his allies to join the
synod, 239; decree of the
coiincil against Nestorius, 218,
238 ; criticism of the usual
translation of the decree, 218,

219 ; Letter of Pope Celestine
to the Synod of Ephesus,

220 seq. ; the eight canons,
225-235; decree deposing
sympathizers with Nestorius,
225, 239 ; convened by the de-
cree of the Emperors, 225,

237 ; history of John of Anti-
och's Conciliabulum, 226 seq.,

238 ; canons intended to pre-
vent alliance with Nestoiius,
226 seq. ; number of Ephesine
canons, 231, 235; called "this
holy and ecumenical synod,"
231 ; how far it prohibited
any addition to the Nicene
faith, 231, 232, 233, 234 ; let-
ter to the synod in Pampliylia
concerning Eustathius, 236 ;
letter of the synod to Pope
Celestine, 237 seq. ; full report
made by the synod to Pope
Celestine, 237-239 ; definition
of the synod against the Mes-
salians, Euchetre or Enthusi-
asts, 240; decree of the synod
in the matter of Euprepius and
Cyril, 212 ; the Tome of S.
Leo, 254 seq. ; sentence of deg-
radation on Dioscorus, 259,
260 ; confirmed the rule of
faith given at Nice, Constan-
tinople and Ephesus, 260,
262 ; condemned Nestorius
and Eutyches, 260, 308 ; its
faith confirmed b}' the Quin-
isext Council, 359; its canons
confirmed by the Quinisext
Council, 361 ; its relation to
the Roman see, xiii, xiv.

Epiphanius, Bp. of Salamis, 52,
101, 128. 163, 168, 240, 545;
his creed, 163, 164; gives the
creed to be learned and taught,
163 ; in favor of clerical celi-
bacy, 52.

Ej)isco]num at Constantinople, and
what it was, 561, 562, 564, 567.

Epistle, a.iT6(TTo\us, 133.

Epitome, the ancient, of Nicene
Canons, xi, 1, 42, 8-42; of
Ancyra. 63-75; of Neo-Ca>-
sarea, 79-86; of Gangra, ii2-
100 ; of Autioch in Encceniis,
108-121; of Laodicea, 125-
159; of Constantinople, 381,
382A.D., 172-185; of Chalce-
don, 451 A.D., 267-291 ; of
Council in Trullo or Quini-
sext, 360-408 ; of Sardica, 415-
433; of African Code, 442^
510 ; of II. Nice, 555-570.

Epitracliilion (eirirpaxh^tov), 142,
143.


654


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Equitius, bishop of Hippo-Diar-
rliytus, 4y0 ; was coiKiemneti
and repelled, 474, 475 ; his
place was supplied b)^ a bisliop
appointed by a deputation,
480.

Eremites, clothed in black, act dis-
orderly, 385, 885 ; bring
odium on their profession,
385; must receive the habit of
the monks and the tonsure,
385 ; must be shut in a monas-
tery and counted as monks,
385 ; or they shall be expelled
from cities and banishe<i to the
desert, 385 ; represented in
the later dervishes and vaga-
bond monks, 385.


EUCHARIST.

Agapfe, love feast, 96, 461 ;
spurned bj^ those invited to it,
96 ; those making it ought
to be respected, 96 ; the posi-
tion of the Agap;e discussed,

96. 97, 461 ; its relation to the
Holy Eucharist, 97, 461 ; its
later forms and survivals, 97 ;
none may carry away their
portion from, 148; may not
be held in the Lord's houses
or churches, 148, 398, 462.

Alms, part of the sacrificial action,

14.
Aiitidoron, as related to the Agapae,

97, 132 ; e.xplanation of,^132.
Azymes, 370.

Bread, consecrated, sent as Eulo-
giw, 132, 133 ; differences in
sending and in blessing, 132;
offered for consecration and
was called holy, 133; was
given with praj'er, 85.

Bread and Wine in Communion,
63, 64. 85, 147; how distribut-
ed, 85, 85, 147; consecrated,
sent as Eidogice, 132 ; the re-
mainder, how consumed, 141 ;
and how ordered in the Eng-
lish Church to be consumed,
141 n. ; given by the priest, and
not by deacon or subdeacon,
147; commi.xture of the conse-
crated and unconsecrated, 389 ;
how to be received as the Im-
maculate Body, 407, 408,408.

Chalice, withdrawal of the, 31.

Communicate without oblation,
65, 66, 67, 70; meaning of
the action, 65.

Communion, the Holy, 29, 30, 65,
155, 156 ; spiritual. 30 ; highly
valued for the .sick and dying,
29, 30, 79; open to all but to
those under penance, 47 ; ex-
clusion from, 64, 79; with ex-
communicated is forbidden,
109; of the faithful described,
136. 138 ; how administered
in the early church, 147 ; was
always prepared for by fast-


Eucharist — Continued.

ing, 155 ; the universal law of
fasting reception of, 155, 156;
"having received his Holy
Flesh and the Precious Blood
of Christ the Saviour of us
all," 203; the true life-giving
food, 203, 204,217 ; body and '
blood of the Word, 217"; the
truth as used against Nesto-
rius's teaching, 217 ; " the im-
maculate communion" shall
not be given for money, 376;
clergy demanding money for
it are liable to deposition, 376 ;
was taken home by the faith-
ful and partaken of, 392 ; but
this was abused and forbidden,
392, 392.

Communion of the Sick. [See
Sick.]

Consecration essential to the Eu-
charistic idea, 14 n., 138, 139.

Consecration prayer, its place in
the Eucharist, 14 n., 138, 139.

Cup, the, given with prayer, 85.

Cup, given by the deacon but not
by the subdeacon, 147 ; how
blessed by the deacon, 147,
147.

Epistle (a-irSa-ToXos) in the liturgy,
133, 136.

Eucharist, name given to the sacred
meal, 14; given to the sick
and dying, 29, 79 ; its relation
to the viaticum, 29 ; given to
infants in the early church, 29 ;
in what order delivered to the
clergy, 38; accounted a sacri-
fice offered, 39,; accounted a
sacrifice and (offering of the
Body of Christ, 39 ; the power
of offering restricted to bish-
ops and presbyters, 39 ; ancient
doctrine of, 39 ; teaching of
the Nicene fathers upon, 39 ;
its relation to the Agapae, 96,
97, 461 ; one who comes to
church and turns away from
the Eucharist is to be excom-
municated, 108, 109; one who
refuses to join in the people's
prayers is to be excommuni-
cated, 108, 109 ; turning from,
for different reasons, 109 ; a
feast and unsuitable for the
Lenten fast, 156 ; service for,
in the early church, 136 ; ser-
vice began with the epistle and
gospel, 136; full description of
the service, 138 ; only upon
Saturday and Sunday in Lent,
155; the Unbloody Sacrifice,
203, 380 ; the sacrifice of the
Great God who is both offering
and high priest, 362; a sacri-
fice apprehended by the intel-
ligence, 362 ; grapes offered
with the Eucharistic oblation
an old custom, 378, 378 ; this
offering of grapes and Euchar-
ist is forbidden, 378. 460. 594 ;
oblation is for quickening of


Eucharist — Continvfd.

souls and remission of sins,
378; the unbloody sacrifice of
the oblation, 378; "the holy
mysteries of the altar," 378;
shall not be celebrated in pri-
vate oratory without the bish-
op's leave, 379 ; shall be cele-
brated with wine and water
mixed, 380, 380, 460; shall
not be with wine only, 379 ;
IIydroparastata>, heretics, used
water only. 380; authorities
given for the use of mixture
of wine and water, 380, 380 ;
.spiritual reasons for use of
mixture, 380, 380; ceremo-
m'al use of wine and hot water,
380; called the Holy Mys-
teries and to be frequented'in
the Easter season, 395; may
not be given to the dead, 401,
401 ; the proper mode of re-
ceivin<x the Immaculate Bodv,
407, 408, 408 ; should not be
given to the l)odies of the dead,
450, 451 ; a season devoted to
continence, 445, 454, 455;
made by a fasting priest, 155,
378, 461, 464; called the
Lord's Supper, 461 ; the his-
tory of this name, 461 ; noth-
ing to be offered but what the
Lord has ordained, 594.

Ev\oyiai, or panis benedirtus, 32,
132; made up from The Holy
Things, 132 ; with what object
they were blessed, 132 ; sent
out as a sign of fellowship,
122 ; those of heretics cannot
be received, 149; those of her-
etics are rather aXoyUi than
ei'Aoytai, 149.

Fraction of the Bread, 139.

Gospel in the Liturcy, 133, 136,
138.

Holy Communion. [See Commun-
ion and Eucharist.]

Holy Mysteries, the, 127.

Holy Things, the (to S-ym, sanctd),
132; cpiestion as to the mean-
ing in the canon, 132 ; Eulogim,
132.

Intinction. a practice in commu-
nicating, 31.

Invocation of the Holy Spirit to
sanctify the Eucharist. 610.

Last Supper, how carried out by
Christ, 155, 156.

Liturgies, 136, 139 ; earliest form,
136 ; may be reduced to four
tjq^es, 137 ; references to in
other works, 137.

Liturgy of the Presanctified, its use
in Lent, 389, 389 ; account of
the Rite, 389.

Love-feast. [See Kg\vm.'\

Mass, its early use, 446.

IMass of the Presanctified, 389 .seq.

Missa of different kinds, 32. 155.

Mixture of water and wine in the
Eucharist, 379, 380 ; spiritu.al
reasons for this mixture, 379,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


655


Eucharist — Continued.

380 ; commixture of tbe con-
secrated and unconsecrated
wine, 389. [See Euchahist.]

Non-communicants receive the
Antidora, 133.

Non-communicating attendance,
26, 27, 594 ; a cause of disor-
der in the church, 594.

Obhition, witliout the, 26 ; the
making it is part of the priestly
function, 38, 83, 85 ; refused in
the liouse of a married person
by Eustathians, 91 ; otfered in
private houses, 91, 158; re-
fused from a married pi'esby-
ter, 93 ; the Holy, asset about,
136; nuist not be made by
bishop or presbyter in a private
house, 158, 379; is the un-
bloody sacrifice, 158, 380; is
to be made only at the altar,
158; is not to be with the sac-
rament and tirst fruits to-
gether, 378; nothing to be of-
fered but what the Lord has
ordained, 594; yet some ex-
ceptions named, 594; what
things may or may not be of-
fered on the altar, 594. [See

EUCHAKIST ]

Passover bread, 370.

Reservation in Holy Communion,
30, 141, 392, 614 n. ; instances
of in ancient times, 30, 392 ;
for the viaticum, 31.

Sacrifice of the Eucharist defined,
14, 14 n. ; testimony of the un-
bloody, 530. [See Eucharist
and Oblation. J

Sacrificial idea of the Lord's Sup-
per, 13 seq. [see Eucharist
and Oblation] ; its develop-
ment in the church, 14 ; be-
longing also to prayer, 14 ;
belonging to almsgiving, 14.

Sick, communion of, excursus on,
30 seq. ; viaticum to the dying,
29, 29, 30.

Solemn entrance to the altar, 140.

Supper, the Lord's, 13 ; its sacri-
ficial idea, 13, 14 ; was con-
nected with Agupcp, 14 ; was
first associated with the priest-
hood by Cyprian, 14 ; Cyprian
promoted the sacrificial idea,
14.

Synaxis, the, 407.

Unleavened bread or azymes, 370;
used by the Latins, 370.

Viaticum, commiuiion for the dy-
_ ing, 29, 29, 30, 31 . [See Sick.]

Wine, commixture of the conse-
crated and unconsecrated, 389.


Eunuchs, eligible or ineligible for
the ministry, 8, 595 ; Leontius
made a bishop, 8 n. ; forbidden
by Roman law, 8 ; their self-
mutilation always condemned,
8, 595; restricted regarding
the women to be had in their


house, 364 ; by nature or vio-
lence may become bishops,
595.

Eusebius Pamphili, bishop of
Ca?sarea and historian, 3, 34;
his creed, 1, 3 ; epistle to his
own church referred to, 3.

Eusebius of Nazianzum, account
of his translations, 34 ; reasons
suggested for his translations,
34.

Eusebius of Nicomedia was trans-
lated from Berytus, 32.

Eustathius of Antioch was trans-
lated from Berrhoea, 32 ; in
favor of celibacy, 52.

Eustathius, bishop of Berytus,
his case decided at Chalcedon,
277, 290, 291.

Eustathius of Sebaste and his par-
tisans were condenmed at Gan-
gra, 91, 100, 556.

Euthymius, Life of., 18.

Eutychianus, his ordinations are
to be recognized, 431.

Evagrius, deacon, 316 ; condemned
at II. Constantinople, 316, 344,
360.

Evodius, African bishop, 480,
488 ; put to death by the pa-
gans, 495.

Excoftimunicated, to be avoided,
47; "excommunicated and
cast out of the church," 108,
109 ; one such cannot be ac-
cepted as accuser of a bishop,
183; one such who receives
the communion is self-con-
demned, 456; cannot be ac-
cepted as accuser of the
clergy, 504; one praying with
excommunicated is the same,
594.

Excommunication, to be respected
by other bishops, 13, 46; its
grounds investigated by semi-
annual synods, 13; not to be
through captiousness or con-
tention, 13, 47 ; to be done ac-
cording to canon, 13 ; may be
laid on clergy or laity, 13 ; may
be mitigated by the excom-
municating bishop, 13 ; may
be mitigated by the synod of
bishop.s, 13 ; special sense as
applied to the clergy, 35 ; its
meaning doubtful, 282 ; due to
a bishop who communicates
with one excommunicated,
446.

Exomologesis or tbe Public Disci-
pline, excursus on, 25 seq.

Exorcism, preparatorj- for baptism,
185, 405 ; delivering from the
energy of the devil, 392.

F(vnda in the church building, 26.

Faith, apostolic, is traditional, 2,
344 seq.; the Christian, as
stated and believed, 189, 197,
1 98, 202-6, 299 seq. , 3 1 1 ; the
Catholic failii and heresy in-
volve more than u logomachy,


207 ; the faith of Nicaea is to
be received bv all, under pen-
alties, 231, 233 ; the definition
issued at Chalcedon, 262, 310;
writings on the faith, how
tested by councils, 299 seq.,
310; the definitio!i issued at
Constantinople, 680, 681 a.d.,
344 seq.

Faithful, must not attend heretical
meetings in cemeteries, etc.,
129; are put under discipline
for attending, 129; must not
marry heretics, 129 ; or give
their childien in marriage to
heretics, 129; the communion
of, described, 138.

Farms, theirrentgoingto churches,
121. [See Steward.]

Fasting, a universal custom as ] ire-
ceding communion, 155, 461;
its character in Lent, 156 ; on
fish forbidden, 156 ; on oil and
shell-fish forbidden, 156 ; to be
observed by the celebrant,
378; an exemption given for
Maundy Thursday bv Synod
of Carthage, 378, 461 ; this
exemption abolished as a dis-
lionouring of Lent, 378; one
fasting on Sunday or Saturday
(one excepted) shall be de-
posed, 391, 598; does not al-
low eggs, cheese, or what is
killed, 391 ; must be observed
to the midnight of the Great
Sabbath, 403; special days
for fasting, 598, 599 ; on the
Lord's Day b}' the Eustathians,
91 ; forbidden by canon at
Gangra, S9; forbidden on the
Sabbath, 133 ; preparatory to
baptism, 153 ; must not be
broken on Maundy Thursday,
155, 378.

Fasts of the Church, their canoni-
cal authority, 100, 378; to be
observed with respect as pre-
scribed by the church, 100.

Fasts, the Quadragesimal of Easter,
the Preparation, the 4th day,
598 ; that of the Epiphanies
which was on Sunday, 613.

Father, His relation to the Son de-
fined, 4, 175; His relation to
the Logos, 4, 175.

Fathers, their duty to their chil-
dren, 98; forbidden to neglect
them under pretence of asceti-
cism, 98; "ordered by the
doctrine of our fathers," 376 ;
"decrees lately made by the
Fathers," 393.

Feasts, single and double, 133 ; of
the Jews, heretics or heathen,
are forl)idden to Christians,
151, 151 ; Christian, and how
they are to be observed, 395,
395; counted from evening to
evening, 403, 404 ; Greek, to
be forbidden, 473 ; their better
fare, 597.

Ferial days, 133.


656


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Filioque Clause, Excursus on,
165 seq.; now nor ever formed
part of the original C'onstanti-
nopolitan Creed, 165, 166 ; was
added contrary to the Pope's
wi.sli and command, 165, 1G6,
167 ; was never intended to
teacli or atHrni two a^xa^, 165,
167 ; was possibly insertecl
unintentionally, 165, 167, 168,
549 n. ; the ditference between
East and West is not theologi-
cal, 165 ; authorities on ques-
tion in dispute, 165, 166, 549 n.;
the phrase is of early Spanish
origin, 166, 167, 168 ; was op-
posed at Rome, 166, 167; em-
ployed against the Priscillian-
ists, 166 ; creed without the
FiUo'iue was engraved on
shields at Rome, 167 ; phrase
was accepted by the Pope in
the eleventh century, 167 ; sug-
gestion for the insertion of the
phrase, 168 ; emijloycd in the
eighth century, 549 n.

Fires lighted in the streets are to
cease, 394; customs connected
with them, 394 ; lighted at
the new moons, 394; their
pre-Christian origin, 395.

First-fruits, of the church squan-
dered by the Eustathians. 91,
95 \ squandering forbidden
under anathema, 95 ; offered
on the same day as the Eu-
charist, 460; offered on the
Eucharistic altar, but with a
separate benediction, 460;
only kinds to be offered are
grapes and corn, 460, 594 ;
given to bisliops and presby-
ters, but distributed to other
clergy, 594.

Flesh, refused by some priests, 69 ;
the eating abhorred by the
Eustathians, 91, 92; those
abhcjrring it were put under
anathenui, 92, 597; to be used
on feast days, 597.

Florentius, African bishop, re-
ceived legation against the
Donatists,"496.

Food, eating it, a species of lapse,
64.

Forgiveness of trespasses as prayed
"for by the Saints, 488, 499.

Fornicators, causing abortion, 73;
how priests are to be disci-
plined, 79 ; how fornicators
are to be dealt with, 606,
608, 611.

Fortune-tellers by amulets fates,
genealogies, are to be avoided,
etc , 393.

Fossarii, fossorea. 146, 147.

Frankfort, the Council of, 794 a.d.,
583 secj. : its iclation to the
Iconoclastic controversy, 583 ;
its historical position, 584
seq.

Freedmen caimot accuse the
clergy, 504.


Free-will in the Christian profes-
sion of belief, 82, 82.

Friday, with its vigil, 134 ; the day
for the catechumens repeating
the creed, 399 ; whv a fasting
day, 601.

Funeral of bishop and clergy, 49.

Gangra, the Council of, 87 seq. ;
historical position of the coun-
cil, 87, 88 : its date 325-381
A.D., 89 : it condemned the
Eustathians, 89 ; its president,
89 ; synodical letter of the
council, 91 ; the holy synod
as its proper title, 91 ; gave
twenty canons, 94.

Gates, those in the church, 25,
26.

Gelasius the j^ope, issued his decree
de libris non reeipiendis. 591.

Gen. i. 5, 404 ; xxix. 20, 527.

Generation, how true of the Son,
4.

Gennadius of Constantinople, his
encyclical letter, 615.

yei/i/ri^^vTa oti Trotrj^ei/Ta, excursus
on, 4.

Oenuflectentes. [See Kneelers.]

Gibbon, his misrepresentations of
historical facts, 523, 538 n.,
575. •

Oloria in E.rceUis, 135.

God, every j^lace to be reverenced
that is built in God's name,
101 ; mysteriousness of his
nature and person, 175 ; the
Son is one in the Holy Trinity,
189; " Emmanuel is Very
God," 206; the Father Al-
mighty, 254; the relation of
the"F:itlier and the Son, 313.

Godhead, the oneness of, in the
Trinity, 181, 182.

God-parents shall not marry their
goil-children, 390; or the god-
children's widowed parents,
390.

Good Friday, its special observ-
ance, 155, 389 seq.

Gospels, the, to be read on the
Sabbath, 133 ; to be read with
the other Scriptures, 133.

Goths, their conversion, 166.

Grace, as harmonizing with free-
will, 28 : as preventing the
will to act, 81, 81 ; is not to
be sold, 376; the sanctitica-
tion of the Holy Spirit, 376;
as denied bj^ Pelagius, 497 ;
as a help and inspiration, 497 ;
as an essential condition, 498.

Grandmother may live with cleric,
46.

Grapes, presented as thank offer-
ing, 378, 594; shall not be
oJTered and distributed with
the Eucharist, 378; shall be
offered, blessed and distribut-
ed apart, 378, 594.

Gratian, Benedictine monk, his
collections of canon.s, xxxiv,

XXXV.


Grave-desecrator, how penanced,
608, 611.

Great Day, Easter, 66; Prepara-
tion, Good Fridaj', 66 ; Sab-
bath, Ea.ster Eve, 66 ; Week,
Holy Week, 66.

Greece, Synod of, 47.

Greek canonists in error, 12 ;
study of law and jurispru-
dence, xxix.

Gregorv Nazianzen, 14, 34, 131,
162, 177, 180, 206. 273, 277,
286, 545 ; Metrf)politan of Con-
stantinople, 162 ; his transla-
tion to Constantinople was
disputed, 162, 177; disliked
synods and councils, 13 ; his
translations accounted for,
34.

Gregory II., his reputed letters to
the Emperor Leo, 575 ; reasons
for supposing them spurious,
575 ; Gibbon's assertion criti-
cised, 575 ; condemned the
Iconoclasts before any coun-
cil, xiv, n.

Gregory Theologus on the Books of
the Old and New Testament,
612. [See Gregory Naz.]

Gregory of Nj^ssa, story of his
weeping before a picture,
539.

Hadrian, bishop of Rome. [See
Adrian.]

Hair, was shaved off by the Eusta-
thian women, 99 ; long, a
mark of beauty, 99 ; long, a
symbol of subjection, 99; has
been cut off for different
reasons, 99 ; its dressing for-
bidden as a bait to souls,
406, 406 ; its dj'es and wigs,
406.

Harlots, those who procure and
bring up, shall be disciplined,
402 ; marriage to one is a bar
to ordination, 595.

Harmenopulus, Constantine, jurist
and canonist, xxxiii ; account
of him and his work, xxxiii,
xxxiv.

Healing of sickness professed,
129.

Hearers, a grade of discipline, 24,
27, 29^ 31, 31, 64, 80, 153,
602; where they were in the
Church, 26, 602"; degraded by
excommunication, 81 ; are not
to be present at ordinations,
126; were being prepared for
baptism, 153 ; the first grade
of the catechumens, 153.

Heathen feasts, 64, 65, 66; par-
taking in, 64, 65 ; eating their
own food at, 66 ; their feasts
are not to be joined in by
Christians, 151 ; their godless-
ness also to be avoided. 151 ;
churches of God in heathen
nations are to be governed by
ancient custom, 177, 177 ;
mode of receiving the hcathea


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


657


into the Catholic Church, 408;
sons of clergymen are not to
marry heathen wives, 452 ;
cannot accuse the clergy, 504;
discipline for resorting to
heathen customs, 609.

Heb. xi. 21, 528. j

Hecatontarchs, diviners of the fut-
ure, to be avoided, 393.

HecatostiV, 369.

Hegumenos. [See Clergy.]

Heresies anathematized at Con-
stantinople, 381 A.D., 172.

Heresy, a bar to ordination, 23 ;
is' it a bar to marriage ? 397.

Heretical baptism, as held invalid,
128. [See Baptism.]

Heretics, marriages with, are for-
bidden, 149; unless they are
to become Christians, 149,
149 ; their evlogice cannot be '
received, 149; their eulogm
are ratiier aKoylat, 149; where
they stood wlieu under pen-
ance, 26 ; how they are to be
received, 46, 185; when in
heresy they cannot enter
God's house, 127; yet Valens
was allowed, 127 ; when con- '
verted must anathematize their
heresies, 127, 185; mode of
reconciliation on conversion,
127, 185; had their martyrs !
and martyries, 129; Christians
shall not join in their prayers,
149 ; and their martyrs are
aliens from God, 150; they
must not be sought after by
Christians, 150, 23l ; it is not
lawful to feast with them,
151 ; or to receive portions
from their feasts, 151 ; cannot
be received in accusing ortho-
dox l)ishops, 183, 599; their :
character and detiuition, 183;
very closely allied to schis- |
matics, 183; Ijishops and cler-
gy, who learn from them, shall '
be deposed, 231; child may'
not be given in marriage to,
278, 452 ; restrictions on mar-
riage with, 279, 452; how the
term heretic is to be interpret-
ed, 183 ; questions of their be-
ing anathematized after death,
303, 309 ; how they are to be I
received when they return to
orthodoxy, 405, 597, 604;
fine imposed upon the ordainer
and the ordained by Emperor
Theodosius, 489; cannot ac-
cuse the clergy, 504, 599 ;
how they and their adminis-
trations are to be treated by the
clergy, 597 ; their ordination
is invalid and has to be repeat-
ed, 598 ; baptism has to be re-
peated, 598; shall not be wit-
nes.ses against i)i.shops, 599;
quote from Apocryphal writ-
ings, 603 ; repentant on their
death-bed, they shall be re-
ceived, 604.


HERETICS AND HERESIES.

Acacians, 175.

Acacius of Cssarea, 175.

Acephali, 332, 336.

Acetius, a Novatian, 20.

Aerians, 100, 101.

Aetius, 175.

Aldebert, 150.

Anomoeans, 7, 172, 173.

Anthimus, 34.

Apollinarlanism, 169.

Apollinariaus, were anathematized
at Constantinople, 381, a.d.
172, 172. 173 seq., 344, 347,
349, 359; mode of their re-
ception into the Catholic
Church, 185, 405 ; must give
a written renunciation of their
errors, 185, 405 ; and are to
be received with unction, 185,
405 ; their teaching, 213, 312,
332, 336.

Apollinaris (Apollinarius), 173
seq., 341, 347, 355, 572.

Apotactites, heretics, 604; they
rebaptized. 607.

Appolinius, 572.

Arianism, 173.

Arians, 6, 7, 106, 173, 175, 185, 189,
332 ; mode of their reception
into the Catholic Church, 185,
405, 603 ; must give a written
renunciation of their errors,
185, 405; and are to receive
unction, 185, 405; how to be
received back, 47 ; condemned
for heresy, 44, 172.

Aristeri (Cathari), mode of their
reception into the Catholic
church, 185, 405 ; perhaps
properly called Aristi, 186.

Arius, his special doctrines, 53,
332, 347, 359, 360, 572; con-
demned at Nicffa, 53, 344,
347 ; importance of the differ-
ence between him and Athan-
asius, 207.

Basil ides, 6.

Bogomiles, heretics, 100.

Carpocrates, 6.

Cathari, how received back into
the Catholic and Apostolic
Church, 19, 20, 405 ; their or-
dained clergy niaj' continue in
the ministry, 19, 20, 20; their
clergy must, on conformity,
accept the church's dogmas,
19, 20 ; their clergy, on con-
formity, promise to communi-
cate with digamists, 19, 20 ;
their clergy, on conforming,
promise to communicate witli
the disciplined lapsers in per-
secution, 19, 20, 20; same as
Novatians, 20, 615 ; must sub-
mit themselves to the church's
discipline, 19, 20 ; their bishop
must yield to the CatlK)lic bish-
op, 20, 20 ; their clergj^ can-
not be promoted in the Church,
20; their bishops may be re-
tained as chorepi-scopi, 20, 20 ;


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.
their bishops may be retained
as presbyters, 20, 20; their
bishops may be retained as
bishops, 20,20; they refu.sed
pardon to the lapsed, 20 ; the
question of their reordination,
21.

Celestines, followers of Celestius,
239.

Celestius, friend of Nestorius and
heretic, 225, 225 seq., 229,
229 seq. ; his history and teach-
ing, 229 seq. ; was condemned
with Xestorius at Ephesus,
229, 239 ; friend of Pelagius,
496.

Circumcelliones forbidden by the
laws and condemned, 488.

Collyridians, 130.

Cyrus, Bp. of Alexandria, con-
demned as JMonothelite, 344,
347, 349, 353, 360, 550, 572.

Didymus, the blind, was con-
demned at II. Constoutinople,
316, 344, 360, 572; con-
demned at II. jSTicsea, 550,
572.

Dioscorus, was condemned at Chal-
cedon, 248, 259, 260, 261,
344, 359, 360, 549, 572; is to
be anathematized b\' converts
from heresv, 405.

Donatists, 112, '445, 463 seq., 471,
475, 476, 477, 495, 499 ; their
origin, 464 ; tho.se baptized by,
shall be received on conver-
sion, 464, 471, 477; African
church is warned against them
by Pope Anastasius, 475; it
was decided to deal with them
leniently, 475 ; they are to be
received on conversion, 476,
477 ; their orders, 477 ; legation
is sent to them from the Afri-
can Bishops, 477 ; meetings
and conferences held with
them, 487, 488 ; missive of
peace overtures, 487 ; their
violence against the Catholics,
488; commonitory s.iii\\iisi the,
488 seq. ; orders issued for
their expulsion, 490 ; their re-
ception when they return, 492,
493, 499 ; decision as to the
churches now becoming Cath-
olic, 499 ; decision as to the
conforming bishops, 500 ; also
as to the dioceses, 500 ; tribu-
nal .set up for disputed cases,
500, 501 ; zeal in their con-
version, 500, 501, 502.

Dyophysitism, 264.

Encrat'ites, 604, 607 ; to be rebap-
tized, 607 ; would not eat
fiesh, 609.

Enthusiasts. [See Messalians.]

Erastianism met with in the early
church, 114.

Eucheta?. [See Messalians.]

Eudoxians were condemned at
Constantinople, 381 a.d., 172,
175.


C58


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.

Eudoxius, Bp. of Constantinople,
172, 175, 603 ; bis teacliing,
175.

Euuiiniians were anatlieniatized at
Constantinople, 172, 172, 173,
189; l)aptize uilli one ininier-
sion, 185, 405 ; the mode of
their reception into the Cath-
olic church, 185, 405.

Eunomius, his life and teaching,
175.

Eusebians, 105, 106, 416.

Eustathians, 89, 91 ; statement of
their disorders, 91 ; followed
their private opinions, 91 ;
were required at Gangra to re-
pent and forsake their errors,
91 ; summary of their errors,
91 seq. ; canons of Gangra
against their teaching, 93 .seq.;
their spiritual pride, 94, 101;
had probably their own unmar-
ried clergy, 94 ; under pre-
tence of asceticism wore the
periboIcEum, 97 ; despised those
■wearing the berux, 97 ; did not
recommend divorce but conti-
nence, 98 ; forsook and neg-
lected their children, and were
put under anathema, 98 ; plead
they lionor piety more than
parents, 99; rejected and neg-
lected tlie church's fasts, 100 ;
taught in opposition to the
canons of the Apostles, 101 ;
are partisans of Eustathius,


mari-iage,
that none


91; utterly abhor
91, 92, 95; think
in a marriage state lias liope
in God, 91, 96, 101 ; their
married women have forsaken
their husband.s, 91, 98, 99 ;
and fallen thereby into sin,
91; then liusbands have left
their wives, 91, 95 ; and there-
by fallen into sin, 91 ; foment
separation from the hou.ses of
God, 91, 94, 94 ; and from the
Church, 91, 94 ; treat the
church and its members witli
disdain, 91, 94, 95, 96 ; set up
separate meetings and assem-
blies, 91, 94 ; teach doctrines
opposed to the church's, 91,
100; and practices oppo.sed to
the church's, 91, 98, 93, 100 ;
wear strange apparel, 91, 97;
call all their adherents saints,
91 ; squander the church's
first fruits upon their saints,
91, 95 ; induce slaves to leave
their masters, 91, 93 ; and in
strange dre.ss to be insolent to
their masters, 91, 93 ; women
wear men's clotlies, 91, 97 ;
men wear women's clothes,
91, 97 ; on pretext of piety
women cut their hair, 91, 99;
fast on tlie Lord's day, despis-
ing the free day, 91, 99; eat
on the church's fast.s. 91, 99;
abhor the eating of Hesh, 91,


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.
92 ; abhor prayers made in
houses of the married, 91 ;
refuse the oblation offered in
houses of married, 91 ; con-
temn married presbyters, 91,
93 ; and refuse to touch their
ministrations, 91, 93 ; con-
demn the rich who do not
alienate everything, 91 ; for-
sake the canon of the church,
91, 101.

(Eustathians) condemn the services
in honor of the martyrs, 91,
100.

Eustathius, Bp. of Sebaste, his
pride and ambition, 100, 506.

Eutyches 246, 248, 254, 258,264,
347, 549, 572; condemned at
Chalcedon, 260, 264, 300, 312,
344, 359, 360.

Eutychianism, 18, 300, 312.

Eutychians, 270, 302, 396.

Euzoiu.s, Arian leader, 603.

Evagrius, deacon, condemned at
Constantinople II., 344, 360,
549, 572.

Gaianitte, 332.

Galatiaus, as closely related to her-
etics, 185, 405.

Gnostics, their baptism considered
invalid, 405.

Heresies anathematized at Constan-
tinople, 381 A.D., 172, 185, 186;
difference of reading as to her-
etics or heresies, 172.

Honorius, Bp. of Rome, anathema-
tized asMonothelite, 342,343,
344, 347, 349, 351, 352, 353,
360, 572 ; excursus on his
condemnation, 351 seq. ; col-
lection of proofs of his con-
demnation, 351 seq.

Hydropara-statae. 380, 380, 604;
used water instead of wine in
the Eucharist, 380.

Macarius, Bp. of Antioch, was con-
demned as Monothelite, 344,
347, 349, 353, 360, 550;
called also Themi.stius, 349.

Macedonians, 172 seq.; mode of
their acceptance into the Cath-
olic church, 185, 405 ; must
give certificates, anathematize
their heresy and be anointed,
405.

Macedonius, 173, 549, 572; con-
demned at Constantinople I.,
172, 173, 359, 360.

Manichteans, 92, 405, 604; the
mode of their reception into
the church, 405; received on
their deathbed, if penitent,
611.

MarccUians, were anathematized at
Constantiiioiile, 381 a.d., 172,
172, 176, 240; were called also
Eucheta\ and Enthusiasts,
240.

Marcellus of Ancyra, 163, 172, 176.

Marcionites. how they are to be re-
ceived into the church, 405,
604.


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.

Maximilla, supporter of Montanus,
186.

Maximinian, Bp. of Vagai, 476;
was forced to vacate his see,
485, 485; formed a party
among the Donatists, 476.

Maximiiiianists, 476, 477.

Meletian schism, 162, 186.

Meletians, 24.

Messalians, Massalians, Euchetce
or Enthusiasts were con-
demned at Ejihesus, 240 seq. ;
were spoken of as Euchites and
Corentes, 24 ; their history-,
opinions and practices, 241 ;
were ^SlanicluTean, 241.

Monophysites, 400.

Monoph3'sitism, 264.

jMonothelite lieresy, 234, 327 seq.,
331 seq., 342, 344 seq., 353,
360; was considered by the
sixth ecumenical council, 327,
331 seq., 342, 353, 360; was
allied with many heresies,
332.

Monothelites were anathematized,
342, 344, 353, 360, 550.

Montanism, 28, 128.

Montanists, their baptism declared
invalid, 128 ; suspected of
here.sy regarding the Trinity,
128 ; the question as to their
position was long open, 128 ;
Hefele's statement of the facts,
128 ; their doctrine and prac-
tices, 128, 186; had doubtful
teacliing as to baptism, 128 ;
had their martyrs, 129; their
martyrs, 150 ; are to be re-
ceived as heathens, 185, 405;
are tlie same as the Plirygians,
405 ; the mode of their recep-
tion into the chiirch, 405.

Montanus, 128, 186; was identi-
fied with the Holy Ghost, 128,
186.

Ne.storian bishops lost their official
jurisdiction, 228.

Nestoriani.sm, 18, 206 seq., 300,
396 ; the reality of its false
teaching, 207 seq.

Nestorians, 302, 396 ; allowed the
marriage of the clergy, 365.

Nestorius, bishop of Constantino-
ple, 19, 192 seq., 207, 210 .seq.,
228 seq., 303, 549; his teach-
ing condemned by Pope Celes-
tine, xiii, 192 ; refused the
Theotokos, 192, 207 ; used all
his influence in favour of his
position and teaching, 192 seq.,
359, 360; was condemned for
his teaching by the Council of
Ephesus, i94 seq., 199, 206,
223 seq., 238, 308, 344, 358,
360; Cyril's letter to, 197-9,
199. 308; Ne.storius was
anathematized, 199, 206, 218,
223 seq., 238, 261, 299, 344;
the issue of his controversy
with Cyril, 207, 308; his
teaching set out in his anathe-


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Go9


Heretics and Hi^resies— Continued.
mas against Cvril, 206, 210,
311, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216,
217, 264 ; his teaching met by
ilhislrations from the Holy
Communion, 217; sentence of
deposition, 218, 223 seq.,
238, 308; all his followers
did not accept his teaching,
226, 228; clergy maintaining
his doctrines are to be deposed,
229, 231 ; anathematized by
Iljas. 299, 303 ; condemned at
Ephesus, 308 seq.; con-
demned at Constantinople,
307 seq.; his teaching as con-
demned, in 5.5.3 A.D., 312 ; con-
demned also at Chalcedon,
451 A.D., 359, 360; con-
demned at Nicfea H., 572.

Noetus, 175.

Novatian, his life and teaching,
2U; was consecrated bishop
irregnhirlv, 20 ; lapsed into
heresy, 20.

Novatianissm, 25.

Novatians or Cathari, 20, 72, 185,
405 ; their history and opin-
ions, 20; rei)ai)tized converts
from the Catholic church, 20 ;
refused pardon to the lapsed,
20 ; rejected all second mar-
riages. 20 ; how they are to be
received back, 47, 'l27, 185,
405 ; in favour of clerical
marriages, 52 ; when converted
they must anathematize their
heresies, 127, 185, 405 ; and
if communicants, must be
anointed before communion,
127, 405; and must have
learned the sj'mbols of the
faith, 127; their baptism was
accepted as valid, 128 ; a
branch of the Marcionists,
607; make God the author of
evil, 607 ; count wine a
deliled creature, 607 ; doubt
entertained as to their exact
position, 607.

Origeu, condemned at Constanti-
nople n., 314, 344, 360, 361 ;
condemned by seventh ecu-
menical council, 549, 572.

Paul, Bp. of Constantinople, con-
demned as Monothelite, 344,
347, 349, 353.

Paul. Bp. of Samosata, 4, 40, 46,
510 ; has given name to the
Paulianists, 40, 46 ; Anti-
Trinitarian and deposed for
heresy, 40.

Paulianists, on reconciliation to the
church, must be rebaptized,
40, 405 ; if ordained, they
must be rebaptized and re-
ordained, 40; if they are
found unworthy the clergy are
to be deposed, 4Q'; their dea-
conesses reckoned among the
laity, 40, 40 ; how Paulianists
are to be received, 46, 405.

Pelagianisra, excursus on, 229 seq.


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.

Pelagians, followers of Pelagius,
239.

Pelagius, monk and heretic, 229,
230, 239 ; his doctrines were
condemned in Africa, 496 seq. ;
his friend Celestius, 229, 239;
bibliographical table, 229,
239.

Pepuzenes, heretics mentioned by
Dionysius. 602.

Peter, Bp. of Constantinople, con-
demned as Monothelite, 344,
347, 349, 353, 360.

Photinians, how they are to be re-
ceived on conversion, 127, 176 ;
on reception into the church,
they must anathematize every
heresy, 127 ; if communi-
cants, they must be anointed
before communion, 127; and
have learned the .sj'mbols of
the faith, 127 ; were anathe-
matized at Constantinople,
381 A.D., 172, 172.

Photinus, 124, 176 ; his dates, 124,
176.

Phrygians, though clergymen, are
to be instructed and baptized,
128, 185, 405 ; to be instruct-
ed and received by bishops
and presbyters of the church,
128 ; had their martyrs, 129 ;
are to be received as heathens,
185, 405; were jMontanists,
405.

Pneumatomachi were condemned,
172, 172 seq., 189, 549; their
teaching, 189.

Polvchronius, Monothelite, 347,
"349, 353, 360.

Praxeas, 175.

Priscillianists, lfi6.

Puritans, the, 604.

Pyrrhus, Bp. of Constantinople
and Monothelite. 327, 336,
343, 347, 353, 360, 550, 572.

Quartodecinnms. to be dealt with
as i eretics, 127, 185 ; on con-
version must anathematize
their heresies, 127, 185, 405;
must be anointed before they
communicate, 127, 185, 405 ;
their bajitism was accepted as
valid, 127, 128, 405; were
called Tetradites, 185, 405 ;
their principles, 186.

Snbbatians, mode of their recep-
tion into the Catholic church,
185.

Sabbatius, presbj'ter and Xovatian,
185

Sabellians, 4. 172, 172, 175, 185,
189 ; were anathematized at
Constantinople, 381 a.d., 172;
their teaching, 175, 185, 189,
405.

Sabellians, are to be received as
heathens, 185, 405 ; the mode
of their reception into catho-
licitv, 405.


Saccophorians,
tized, 607.


607 ; to be rebap-


Heretics and Heresies — Continued.

Samosatenes perverted the baptis-
mal formula, 40 ; their teach-
ing, 176.

Saturninus, 6, 604.

Schism of East and West, 169.

Semi-arians or Pneumatomachi,
6, 172, 172 seq.

Sergius, Bp. of Constantinople,
iMonothelite. 342, 344, 347,
349, 3eO, 550, 572.

Severus (Monothelite), 336, 344,
347, 349, 549; is to be anath-
ematized by converts from
heresy, 405.

Simeon. Abp. of Thessalonica, 34.

Simon Magus, 6.

Stephen, a^Monothelite, 344, 347,
349, 353, 360.

Tessareskaidecatit£e, how received
back into catholicity, 405.

Tetradites or Quarto-decimans.

[See QCARTO-DECIMANS.]

Themistius (Macarius), Monothe-
lite, 344, 349.

Theodore of Mopsuestia, con-
demned at Constantinople II.,
302, 344, 360.

Theodoret, condemned at Constan-
tinople II., 302, 303, 344,
360.

Theodorus, Bp. of Pharan, con-
demned al Constantinople III.,
344, 347, 353, 360.

Theodosians, 332.

Theodosius of Alexandria, 336.

Theopaschites, 401.

Timothean.s, 332.

Valeutinians, 0, 604.

Zois, received back into commun-
ion, 604.


Hiemantes, penitents, 70.

Hierax, clergyman, accused of
offences, 614.

Highwaymen are to be penanced
as murderers, 611.

Hippo, decrees of s}Miod at Hippo
are confirmed, 459.

Historia acephala, discovered by
Maffei at Verona, 413.

Holy Ghost, identitied with !Mon-
tanus, 128 ; gloritied the Son,
204, 214 ; gave the Son power
to work miracles, etc., 214;
His relation to the Son and
His works, 215 seq., 254.

Holy Oblation, 136.

Holy Scripture and the Apostoli-
cal traditions, 101.

Holy Trinity, Photinians heretical
on the, "127.

Homicide, involuntary, its pen-
ance, 74.

Homoiisios, excursus on, 1, 3;
value of the word against the
Arians, 8, 4 ; its Trinitarian
force, 4 ; the histor}' of the
usage of the word, 4 ; had
an appearance of heresy. 4 ;
how different from Sijnousios,
4.


GGO


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Honev and milk should not be
offered on the altar, 392, 594 ;
may be offered on the altar
but with a separate benedic-
tion, 460.

Honor, external, due to the holy
canon and God's priesthood,
108.

Honorius, Bp. of Rome, Mono-
thelite, 327,328, 342, 343;
wrote regarding? the will or
wills of Christ, xiv n.

Horologion, The (u>po\6ytov rh fi(ya),

133 n.

Horse-races shall not be made at
Easter, 395.

Hosea, xiii. 14, 205 n.

Hosius, Bp. of Cordova, 51, 415,
416, 417; his opinion upon the
translation of l^ishops, 415;
moves the canons at Sardica,
415 seq. ; probabl}' presided at
Nice, xiii.

Hospital for the Sick, voaoKofiuov,
373.

Hospital to be .set in every citj',
50; description of several
given, 273 ; not to be inter-
fered with by foreign clergy,
275.

Hostel, ^evoSoxf'^a., pagan and
Christian, 275 seq. ; allied to
the 7rTa>x«<oj', yet diilered, 275.
[See Hospit.Vl.J

Hours of Prayer, the Jewish,

134 ; the Christian, 134 ; theo-
ries as to the origin of the
Christian, 134.

Houses, Oblation offered in, 91;
oblation must not be offered in
private, 158.

Hunts, their exhibition is forbid-
den l)y canon, 388 ; those
frequenting them are liable to
penalties, 388.

Husbands forsaking their wives
and abliorring marriage, 91,
96; have thereby fallen into
sin, 91, 96.

Hybernantes, penitents, 70.

Hymn, Easter, at the lighting of
the lamps, 135.

Hymns, were composed and u.sed
by heretics, 158 ; were for-
bidden, 158 : yet hymns were
composed and used in the
church. 158, l.")9 ; some writ-
ers of, 158.

Hyposta.ses in the one Christ, 211,
211, 212.

Hypostatic union, 211.

Ibas, bishop of Edessa, 281, 286,
299 seq., 306 .seq. ; drew back
from Ne-storianism, 281 ; re-
turned to friendship with St.
Cyril of Alexandria, 281 ;
history of his persecution, 281,
286, 299 seq., 309 seq.; the
character of his letter to .Maris,
heretical or orthodox. 299 seq.,
303, 309 seq.; hini.self and
letter approved by Pope Vi-


gilius, 300 ; but condemned by
the tiftli general council, 300,
306 seq., 309 seq.; question
of his letters having been re-
ceived at Chalcedou, 303,
309 seq. ; had been accused
by bishops and cast out of his
see, 310; was compelled to
anathematize Nestorius, his
writing.s, etc., 310; his re-
puted letter to Mari.s, was con-
demned at Constantinople,
315, 344.

Iberia, honour granted to its
bishop, 177.

Iconoclasts, 533 seq., 540 seq.,
564, 571 ; were orthodox in
their faith and practice, 533 u. ;
as were also their ojjponents,
533 n. ; Avere anathematized
with their tenets by Basil of
Ancyra, 533 ; their teaching is
the " worst of all heresies,"
535 ; their Conciliabulum, 541
seq.; their anathemas issued
by the Conciliabulum, 545
seq.: their zeal and persecuting
fervour, 540 seq., 556, 564,
571 seq. ; their policy reversed
on the death of Capronymus,
548 ; the es.sential weakness of
principle in tlie party, 548 ;
the natural efl'ect of their per-
secuting, 556, 564, 571; their
books are to be given up to
the Ejyiscopitim at Constantino-
ple, 561 ; any hiding their
books are to be punished. 561 ;
their sacrilege to churches,
monasteries, etc., 564, 571;
their extravagance and fop-
pery in dress and perfumes,
566, 566; charges made
against them to tlie emperor
and empress, 571 seq.; repre-
sented a court and armj^ move-
ment, 575 seq. ; its later history
and decline, 575 seq. ; tlie Eng-
lish share in the movement,
576 seq.

Icons of the lamb to be replaced
l)y figures of the true laml),
401 ; how they are venerated,
533, 572 seq.

Idol, heathen feasts to, 64; not
partaken in by true Christians,
64; a form of lapsing, 64;
flesh offered to, 92 ; (piestion
abdut the removal of some,
470, 472, 482; tlie emperor
will be petitioned to put tlie
remains awaj', 482; their
relation to images, 553, 554.

Idolaters, how they are to be pen-
anced, 604; received on their
death-bed if penitent, 611.

Idolatry, a bar to ordination, 23 ;
invocation of angels is a covert
idolatry, 150.

Ignorance, punishable iir the
clergy, 377.

Images, the sacred, are to l)e vene-
rated, 533, 541, 551, r)r>2.


553 seq., 572 seq. ; as regarded
by Christians according to
Basil of Ancyra, 533; they are
not regarded as idols, 535,
541, 550, 551 seq., 572 seq.,
583; and pictures are com-
pared with the tablets of the
emperors, 535 ; their adora-
tion and worshii> is anathema-
tized, 534, 535, 550,551 seq. ;
their emotional influence, 539,
540, 583 ; their value for the
ignorant and simple, 539,
551 seq., 583 ; miracles con-
nected with, 540; helps to
realize the incarnation, 540;
their use denounced at the
Conciliabulum, 540 seq., 583 ;
their use defended by the.
seventh ecumenical council,
549, 550, 572 seq.; the teach-
ing on the subject in the west-
ern churcli, 551 seq., 579 seq. ;
and in the eastern, 553 seq. ;
question of their worship, 523,
526 .seq., 584 ; destroyed, 529.

Imperial authority, the w^eiglit of,
230, 283.

Impropriations, 284 ; vow of King
Charles I., for restoration of,
284 n.

Incantation in the name of Christ,
353.

Incense, offering it by the lapsed,
64 ; may be Dresented at the
altar, 594.

Incest, how penanced, 47, 608,
609.

Indictions, calculation of dates by,
357.

Individual responsibility, 82.

Indulgence, to the lapsed, 24, 63,
64. 65, 66; to the generally
penitent, 29, 63, 79, SO ; in
the l)ishop's power, 63, 65, 66,
280; to the ilying, 29, 46, 65,
74, 79 ; the present Roman
practice, 80 ; plenary, 80 n. ;
a dangerous expedient, 84 ;
to virgins and monks to get
married, 2C0 ; its nature and
effect. 280.

Infamous persons (legally) cannot
accuse the clergy, 504.

Infants, unknown, are to be bap-
tized, 402, 478 ; need the
sanctificalion of such a ])uriti-
cation, 402; baptized by Dona-
tists shall be received on their
conversion, 464; many were
rescued from the Moors, 478 ;
are to be baptized for the re-
mission of sins, 496; ^onie
nnddle place for 'Ve unbap-
tized, 497.

Infidels received on i-heir death-
bed if penitect, 611.

Insane not to >:e ordained, 46.

Intercession of saints, how asked
and expected, 533, 534, 541,
547, 562, 553.

Interdict, early traces of it, 558.

Interest on church property, 69.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


661


Irrei^ulurilies in ordination, 23, 23,

'2i, 46.
Isaiah xxv. 8 [amended], 205 u.
Isidore Mercator, liis collections,

xxxiv.

Jacob, reader, a case of discipline,
614.

Jerusalem, the honor and position
of its bishop, 17, 46, 47, 382 ;
is ^Elia in the 7th Nicene
canon, 17 ; excursus on the
rise of its patriarchate, 1, 18,
19 ; history of the city and
see, 17, 18 ; was ^lia Capito-
lina, 17; ecclesiastically under
Caesarea, 46 ; its relation to
Autioch, 19, 266, 382; juris-
diction of its bishop is defined
at Chalcedon, 266 ; its see
ranked as the tifth, 382.

Jerusalem, excursus on the rise
of the patriarchate, 18.

Jesus C'hrist, our Lord, the Son of
God, 150, 173, 175, 176.
[Christ, and Word of God.]

Jews, their Easter reckoning to be
avoided, 54 seq., 108, 594;
it is not lawful to feast with
them, 151, 370 ; or to receive
portions from their feasts,
151, 598; or to receive
unleavened bread from them,
151, 370, 598; or to be par-
takers of their impiety, 151 ;
or to give a child in marriage
to, 278 ; or to have any
friendly or other intercourse,
370 ; cannot accuse the clergy,
504 ; their pretences to con-
version to Christianity, 561 ;
must become real Christians or
remain Jews, 561 ; shall not
purchase or possess a slave,
561 ; if Christians, they must
keep aloof from Jews, 561 ;
good picture of the Jews hos-
tile to the faith, 561 ; and of
the Jews who sincerely em-
brace Christianity, 5G1, 561 ;
those who turn Jews may be
received on their death-bed if
penitent, 611.

John Baptist, legend of, 601 n.

John, Bp. of Antioch, his con-
ciliabulum, 226 seq. ; friend
of Nestorius, 226; he and his
followers were barely hereti-
cal, 226.

John of Antioch, Scholasticus,
collector of canons, xxx.

Josh. xxiv. 14, 527.

Judaizers, 133.

Judaizing forbidden on pain of
anathema from Christ, 148.

Judges, credit to be given to their
honesty. 449.

Judgment must be impartial even
against l)isliops, 183, 449 ;
drigenistic ideas of the final
judgment, 319 ; how it was
sometimes obtained, 449; " all
matters should be settled in


the places where they arise,"
510.

Julian, Bp. of Vazarita, ordained
irregularly, 468 ; was cen-
sured, and had a canon made
against the irregularity, 468.

Julius, Bp. of Rome, why an
appeal allowed to him, 417 ;
petitions should be examined
and sent to court through him,
423; letter to, from the
Council of Sardica, but doubt-
ful, 484.

Jurisdiction, Rome's, over suburbi-
can churches, 1, 16 seq. ; of
Roman bishop has occasioned
much controversy, 16 ; of
Alexandria over Egypt,
Libya and Pentapolis, 15, 15,
16 ; frequent questions as be-
tween dioceses, etc., 280.

Jurisprudence as studied by the
Greeks and Romans, xxix.

Justinian, his time, 43; called the
Fifth general council, 299,
302 ; prescribed some orders
of procedure, 300, 302-303;
invited Pope Vigilius to the
council, 300, 303; his con-
fession of faith, 303, 314;
ordered Vigilius's name to be
erased from the diptychs,
305 ; his legal code, xxix, xxx.

Justinianopolis on the Hellesi)ont,
383 ; succeeds to the jurisdic-
tion of Constantinople in
Hellespont, 383, 383; placed
above Cyzicus, 383.

Juvenal, Bp. of Jerusalem, 18, 19,
192, 219, 223, 266 ; his juris-
diction is defined, 266.

Kenosis in Christ's Incarnation,
211, 212, 252.

Kenoticism, 174 n., 212.

3 Kings xviii. 45, 54 ; xxi. 5, 6,
395.

King, no one shall insult king or
ruler, 599; under penalties to
cleric or la3'man, 599.

" Kingdom (whose) shall have no
end," history of the clause,
163.

Kiss of peace, 136 ; to the bishop,
136; to the laity, to each
other, 136.

Kneelers, a class of penitents, 26,
29 ; may be degraded to be
hearers, 81 ; a class preparing
for baptism, 153.

Kneeling in prayer, 42, 47,403;
forbidden at certain seasons,
42, 403 ; different practices at
these seasons, 42 ; forbidden
upon the Sabbath, 133 ; iu
honour of the Lord's resur-
rection, it is not allowed on
Sundays, 403 ; the time fixed
for its ceasing and recom-
mencing, 403.

Knowledge of crime and conceal-
ing it make one guilty of it
all, 608.


Kyradium, woman, case of disci-
pline, 614.

Labourers (KoirtaTai), 144 ; history
of their office, 144.

Laity, must be heard when the)-
ask to have a bishop, 420 j
may not choose their parish
priest, 50, 131 ; may appeal
to the synod when excom-
municated, 111; carry com-
mendatory letters, 112, 152 ;
their place and share in
church music, 132, 133 ; may
not be stirred up by slander-
ous accusations of persons,
183.

Lamb of God is to be represented
by truly human figures, 401 j
the change is for the sake of
greater reality, 401 ; the true
object of the pictorial symbols
and figures, 401, 401.

Laodicea in Phrygia Pacaliana,
synod at, 122 seq. ; the locality
fixed and distinguished, 124 ;
its date doubtful between 343
A.D. and 381 a.d., 124.

Lapsed in persecution, 19,47,62,
63, 598, 611 ; Calhari refused
to accept them on repentance,
19, 20; church dealt with
them in charit}-, 19, 598, 611 ;
forbidden to be ordained, 24;
to be deposed if irregularly
ordained, 24; those who fell
in the time of Licinius are to
be mercifully dealt with, 24,
28 ; tho.se who fell without
necessity to be mercifully
dealt with, 24, 64; the penal-
ties upon the lapsed, 24, 28,
63, 64, 65 ; how lapsed cate-
chumens are to be disciplined,
31 ; how generally to be dealt
with, 47, 64; through lust,
50; recently discovered libelli
of the lapsed, 62 ; presbyters
and deacons, 63, 598; those
by evident violence, 64; those
owing to threats aloue, 65 ;
indulgence to present repent-
ance, 65 ; by eating at idol
feasts, 64, 65 ; by sacrificing
in honour of gods, 64 ; to be
received if penitent on their
death-bed, 611.

Latrocinium at Ephesus, 247 ; its
acts were read at Chalcedon,
247, 288.

Law% Roman civil, xxix ; canon,
xxix ; excursus on the history
of the Roman, and its relation
to the canon, xxix seq. ;
Theodosian Code, xxx ; pan-
dects, xxx ; digest, xxx,
xxxi; fifty decisions, xxx;
Institutes, xxx, xxxi ; novels,
xxx, xxxi ; carpets juris
civilis, xxx ; cm'pus juris
canonici, xxx ; basilica,
xxxi seq. ; epanagoge, xxxi ;
prochiron, xxxi.


662


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Laws, the ecclesiastical, 109; con-
trary to the laws of the
church, 276; students of civil
laws must not adopt the cus-
toms of the gentiles, 397 ; or
be induced to go to the
theatre, 397 ; or to keep
cylestras, 397, 397 ; or to
wear unusual clothing, 397.

Layman, not disciplined for usurj-,
38 ; thougli a usurer, he may be
ordained, 38; lapsed tlirough
violence may be ordained, 64;
who has adulterous wife can-
not be ordained, 82 ; must
observe the Nicajan Easter on
pain of excommunication,
108, 108 ; ciuestion of his part
in episcopal elections, 131 ;
must not bathe with women,
149, 399 ; must not club to-
gether for drinking entertain-
ments, 157; one setting aside
the decrees of Ephesus shall
be excommunicated, 230;
holding or teaching contrary
to theNicene faith sliall be
anathematized, 231 ; may be
founder or benefactor of any
institution, 274 ; sliall have his
character investigated if he
bring a charge against the
clergy. 283; excommunicated,
if he has had intercoiu-se with
a nun, 364; guilty of death
for ravishing a nun, 364 ; shall
have no dealings with Jews
on pain of excommunication,
370; the rank of a deposed
and unrepenting cleric, 375 ;
may not communicate himself
in the presence of bishop,
presbyter or deacon, 392;
penalty for doing it, "cut off
for one week," etc., 392;
shall not assume the duty of
teaching which is clerical,
394; question in how far this
is limited, 394 ; is not per-
mitted to enter the sanctuary,
396; by tradition the emperor
may enter to present his gifts,
396 ; absence from church
brings him under penance,
400, 425 ; if excommunicated
cannot be received in another
cit\% 594; unless he have
letters commendatory, 594 ;
for self-mutilation will be ex-
communicated for three years,
565; for putting away his
wife and marrying, shall be
excommunicated, 597 ; for
marrying one divorced from
another "man shall be excom-
municated, 597 ; convicted of
fornication, adultery or any
forbidden action shall not be
ordained, 598 ; shall not cat
flesh with the ])loo(l, or man-
gled, or naturally died, 598;
shall not enter a Jewish syna-
gogue to pray, 598 ; or a


heretical meeting to pray,
598; if in a contest he kills
one with one blow, let him be
excommunicated, 598 ; shall
observe the fasts, unless hin-
dered by infirmity, 598 ; can
only be excommunicated,
604.

Lector. [See Reader.]

Lent, the Quadrigesimal fast of
Easter, 598; preparatory to
Easter, 13, 598; the ancient
discii)line of, 25, 155, 156 ; the
time for instructing the cate-
chumens, 153 ; celebrations to
be only upon Saturday and
Sunday in Lent, 155 ; its fast
must not be broken on 3Iaundy
Thursday, 155, 378 ; is not
the time for martyr nativities,
156 ; is unsuitable for saints'
days, 156 ; times in, for the
liturgy of the presanctified,
389 ; the fast of, 389 ; its
motive and spirit, 156 ; mar-
riages and birthday feasts are
forbidden in, 156 ; its ob.serv-
auces, 389, 391 ; some curi-
ous customs in Armenia for-
bidden, 391.

Leo, tome of Pope, 2, 244, 254
seq., 345; in the Easter (pies-
tion, 56 ; the tome is exam-
ined and approved, 244, 245,
249 ; later questions upon the
authority and purpose of the
tome, 245, 246 ; text of the
tome, 254 seq ; tome was re-
ceived again and approved,
254 seq., 259 ; passed sentence
of degradation on Dioscorus,
259, 260 ; his action was con-
firmed by the synod, 260 ;
tome approved at IIL Con-
stantinople, 345.

Leo in. Pope, resisted the inser-
tion of i\\cfiUoqii£, 166, 167.

Leontius, forced into the episco-
pate, 8 n. ; self-mutilated, 8 n.

Lepers, xenon for, 276.

Lessons were read to relieve the
psalmody, 133, 138.

Letters canonical, 112, 152 ; in the
West were ciiWail for make, 112,
453.

Letters commendatory, 112, 152,
276, 276. 278, 453, 453, 594,
596; with what s3'nil)ol
marked, 112 ; why not given
to the travelling poor, 276;
necessary for foreign bishops
and clergy, 596.

Letters of communion, 112, 152.

Letters dimissory, 112, 374, 453,
453.

Letters pacifical. 111, 112, 276,
276, 453 ; given to the poor
when travelling, 276.

Letters, pragmatic, 277, 383.

Letters, false and surreptitiously
obtained, 596.

Levites, their age for ordination,
84.


Lex talionis upon bishops, 558.

LibeUi of the lap.sed, 62.

Libya, its ancient custom to pre-
vail, 14; interpretation of the
canonical grant, 14 ; had its
own metropolitan, 16 ; its
bishops caused scandal, 370.

Licinius, his tyranny, 24 ; as rep-
resentative of heathenism, 28 ;
his contest with Coustantine,
28 ; compelled his soldiers to
apostatize, 28.

Lictores, 145.

Literoi forinatm, 112, 152, 453, 495,
495. [See Letters Cv^on-

ICAL.]

Liturgy of S. JNIark, 279.

Living thing shall not be offered
on the Altar, 594.

Logos, his relation to the Father. 4.

Logos and the incarnation. [See
Word of God.]

London, the see second to Canter-
burv, 18.

S. Luke xviii. 29, 366 n.

Lord's Day, standing in prayer,
42; Eustathians fasted on it,
91, 100; a free day, 91; fast-
ing on it forbidden by canon
at Gangra, 99, 100 ; a day of
joy and thanks, 100 ; feast of
our Lord's resurrection, 100 ;
Christians rest on it as Chris-
tians, 148, 149, 389, 391 ; rest
on the day, if they can, 148,
149 ; not a day for fasting;,
598.

Lorenzo, St., his church in Rome,
25.

Lust iirevented in act by God's
grace, 81.

Lustrations, 74.

Luther opposed Calvin's views on
usury, 37 , on marriage, 92 n.

Lutheran teaching on the Euchar-
ist, 39.

Maffei, his discovery of manu-
scripts, 413, 434.

Magic a bar to ordination, 23.

Magician, the definition of, 151 ;
presbvters and clergy shall not
be, 151.

fj.aKp6(rTiKo<!, Eusebian formula, 414.

Mai. i. 7, 13, 94.

Man, may not sleep in a monastery
of women, 387 ; shall not
dress as a woman, or a woman
as a man, 393 ; his safety and
comfort come before canon
law, 403 ; who has corrupted
a woman, shall keep her, but
be under penance, 606 ; tak-
ing a man's wife and marrying
another, is adulterer with the
first, 607 ; abusing himself
with mankind or a beast, how
penanced, 608.

Man shall not marry his mother-in-
law, or his sister, 609.

March, full assembly on the first
of, is to be discontinued, 393,
394.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


663


Mark, St., x. 29, 266 n.

Marriage, incestuous, 47 ; with in-
fidels forbidden, 49, 50; sec-
ond, or third, excursus on,
72 seq. , 83, 135 ; successive
marriages hiwful, 72, 125 ; un-
lawful, 75, 362, 363; of a
priest, how disciplined, 79,
51 seq., 362, 363, 364; ques-
tion of prohibited degrees, 79,
80, 606 ; with deceased wife's
sister, 79, 80 ; many marriages
or polygamy, 80; of clergy
allowed in eastern church,
83, 93, 120, 362, 363, 363,

364 seq. ; abhorrence of, by
heretics, 91, 92, 93, 95 ; if it
leaves no hope of salvation,
91;oughtnot to be condemned,
92, 92, 95; feeling upon the
question in the early church,
92, 365 ; scripture teaching on
marriage misapprehended, 92 ;
secret, or fornication, 125 ;
with heretics forbidden, 129,
149 ; is not to be celebrated in
Lent, 156 ; Christians must not
join in the wanton dances,
156 ; may have modest dinner
or breakfast, 156 ; no bar to
ordination, 365 ; clergy must
leave when the games begin,
378 ; those in second marriage
must separate before a date,
362 ; some are bars to ordina-
tion or advancement, 362,
363, 363, 595; excursus on
the marriage of the clergy,

365 seq. ; of the clergy allowed
by the Nestorians and the Eng-
lish church, 365; questions
about the nullity of clerical
marriages, 367 ; illegitimate
must be dissolved, 377 ; list of
prohibited degrees, 390, 391,
608, 609; penalty due to such
acts, 391 ; penalty, separation
and seven years' penance, 391 ;
not to be between the ortliodox
and heretical, 397, 397 ; if it has
already taken place it is null,
397; of unbelievers need not
be dissolved if one be convert-
ed and the other not, 397 ;
the rights of soldier long ab-
sent and finds his wife mar-
ried, 404, 606; the question
defined in such cases of igno-
rance, 404, 606 ; refused to
those who put ;iway wife or
husband, 493, 494; these who
refuse to comply with this are
put under penance, 493 ; but
it is best that they be recon-
ciled to each other, 493 ; mar-
riage to two sisters is a bar to
ordination, 595 ; also to a
niece is a bar, 595 ; those who
have made two or three are
under penance, 604; forbid-
den to a man with two sisters,
606, 608, 609; and to a
woman with two brothers,


606 ; and to a man with his
brother's wife, 606 ; many
nice questions as to marriage
relation, 604 seq. ; marriage
is not to be abhorred, 597 ; a
third is better than fornica-
tion, 607 ; forbidden to marry
a son's wife, 609.

Married man is guilty of fornica-
tion and so penanced, 606 ;
woman is guilty of adultery
and so penanced, 606.

Martyrs, services in honor of, 91,
100, 129 ; services condemned
by the Eustathians, 91, 100,
100 ; commemoration of the,
100 ; heretical pseudo-martyrs,
129 ; some truly such though
in heresy, 129 ; of Christ and
false martyrs, 150, 482 ; false
are not to be gone after on pain
of anathemfi, 150, 482; of
the Montanist in Phrygia, 150 ;
the cultus of, 151 ; their nativ-
ities are not to be celebrated in-
Lent, 156; their commemora-
tions are to be made on Satur-
days and Sundays, 156 ; pub-
lic readings upon in church,
394; false accounts of them
are to be burned, 394, 482 ;
those who use or accept them
as true are anathematized,
393 ; passions read on the
commemoration day, 463 ;
celebration of their natal daj's,
473.

Martyrv, or Martyrs' chapel, 100,
129, 272, 273, 275.

Masks of no kind shall be worn,
393.

Mathematician, definition of, 151 ;
priesthood or clergy shall not
be a, 151.

Mathematics is not forbidden to
the clergv, 151.

Matt., St., iV. 10, 527; v. 9, 530 ;
XV. 4-6, 99 ; xix. 12, 92 ; xix.
29, 366 n.

Mattins, 134.

Maundy Thursday, a fast day in
lent, 155, 389, 389 seq., 461,
598 ; made by some a partial
break in the lenten fast, 156,
461 ; associated with holy
communion, 461 ; the prepar-
ation, 598.

Maximus, bishop of Antioch, his
jurisdiction is defined, 19, 248,
266.

Maximus the Cynic, Bp. of Con-
stantinople,"177, 179, 180, 186 ;
is declared to be no bishop,
179, 180 , all his acts are de-
clared void and invalid, 179;
those ordained by him are de-
clared to be in no order of the
clergy, 179.

Maximus, a case of discipline, 614.

Meat is forbidden to be cooked in
the sanctuar}^ 407.

Melancthon opposed Calvin on the
question of usury, 37.


Meletius, Bp. of Antioch, 12, 34,
162, 177, 181, 182 ; presided at
the council of Constantinople,
162; when president, he was
not in cc)mmunion with Rome,
162 ; died while the council was
in session, 162 ; was canonized
by the pope, 162, 162 n. ; ac-
cepted a western tome, 182.

Meletius, Bp. of Lycopolis, 53 ;
condemned at Nfcaea, 53, 54.

Memnon, Bp. of Ephesus, an ob-
ject of attack by the Nesto-
rians, 226-8, 238, 239.

Memorials of martyrs set up, 482*;
should be inquired into as to
their true character, 482.

Men, on pretence of ascetism, as-
sume female attire, 91, 97, 98.

Mennas, question of his letter to
Pope Vigilius, 301.

Menstruous women, restrictions
upon, 600.

Metropolis in Africa, 502.

Milk is not to be used in the eu-
charist, 594.

Miracles, how they were worked
by Christ, 215 secj.

Miscarriage, causing, 73.

Missa CatecJmmeiwrum, 32, 145.

MIssa Fiddiiim, 32, 145.

Missa Prmsanctificatorum, 155, 156,
389 seq. ; was on ordinary days
in Lent, 155, 389; suitable tor
days of penitence and mourn-
ing, 155, 156.

Monasteries, how visited, 49; may
not elect their abbot, 50; for
sisters, widows, and deacon-
esses, 50, 130 ; widows held
office in, 130, 388 ; once con-
secrated cannot be secularized,
284, 284 seq., 388; conse-
crated with the consent of the
bi.shop, 284, 388 ; desecration
exposes the agents to ecclesias-
tical penalties, 284; all their
goods and possessions shall
remain theirs, 388 ; alienation
of their property is null, 388 ;
cannot be given to seculars,
388 ; shall not have their su-
perior from a foreign mon-
astery, 481 ; were polluted and
destroyed under Copron\-mus,
547.

Monastic life is one of penitence,
381 ; may be entered by any
one, 386; must be accepted
siucereh', 386 ; may not be
forbidden to any sincere per-
son, 386 ; an escape from the
troublous surgings of life,
386.

Monasticism, its rise, 134; intro-
duced into Antioch c. 350 A.D.,
134.

Mother, maj' live with her son a
clergyman, 46; neglecting her
child is a murderer, 606 ; yet
there may be extenuations,
608.

Mourners, their place, 602.


664


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Murderer, liis penance, 74, 608,
611; guilty in ditTerent ways
and nieusures, 605, 606, 608 ;
from udminislerinu: a pMltniin,
605 ; penanced for involuntary
murder, 605, 611 ; question
if a soldier in war is, 605 ; the
giving a fatal blow makes the
murderer, 607.

Musoeus, his ordinations are to be
recognized, 431; may not be
accounted bishop, 432 , may
be received in laj^ communion,
432.

Mutilation as a bar to the ministr}',
8. [See Castration.]

Karthex, tlie place of the hearers,
24, 29 ; its position in the
church building, 2G.

Nave, part of the chundi, 26.

Neale, J. M., his argument against
thesecoud Nicene council, 524.

Necessity as above canon law,
403.

Nectarius Patriarcli of Constanti-
nople, 27, 126, 186, 189, 286,
512, 513; his action regarding
the public penitentiaiy, 27, 27
n. ; president of the second
ecumenical synod, 126 ; pres-
ident of the council, 394 a.d. ,
511 seq.

Neoctesarea, its council, 78 seq.; its
canons, 79 seq.

Neophyte must be deliberately in-
structed, 10, 46 ; examples of
short probation, 10 ; must
have Scripture knowledge be-
fore ordination, 46 ; if convict-
ed, is to be deiioseil, 46.

Nice I. the tirst ecumenical
Council, 325 a.d., xii n.,
Iseq., 78, 124; its acts are
lost, 2, 2 u.; its canons, 8 seq.;
calls itself "the great synod,"
10, 11; calls itself " the great
and holy synod," 19, 31, 32,
36, 38,53 ; its reasons for for-
bidding translations, 32, 33 ;
teaching deduced from canon,
xviii, 39 ; doul)tful reading
in canon xix, 40 ; the synodal
letter, 53 se(|. ; 'lie synod's
objects and resolutions, 53 seq.,
359 seq.; its dec'rees contirmed
at Antioch, 108; one chief
topic was Easter, 108 ; deci-
sion on commendatory letters,
112; called the "Three hun-
dred and eighteen Fathers as-
sembled at Nice," 172, 231,
244, 249, 344, 359; decrees
confirmed, 231, 244, 441 ; its
canons, excursus on tiieir
number, 1, 43 .seq. ; nuinl)er
only twenty, 43 seq. ; many
attributed, 43 seq. ; direct the
privileges of the diocese of An-
tioch, 176; its canons con-
firmed at Constantinople, 176,
177, 244 ; its faith confirmed
at Ephesus, 231, 231, 232,


244 ; one holding or teaching
another faith is to be deposed
or anathematized, 231, 231,
232 ; canons confirmed at
quinisext council, 361; the
decrees are in doubt at coun-
cil in Carthage, 442, 443,
507 ; orders were given to ex-
amine the original decrees and
report. 442, 443, 507, 508,
509 ; confirmation given at
Carthage to the Nicene de-
crees, 443, 444, 509; true
copy of the proceedings was
sent by Cyril of Alexandria,
508; true copy of the Canons
was sent by Atticus of Con-
stantinople, 508, 509 ; the
authority that summoned it,
xii n.
Nice II. The Seventh Ecumeni-
cal Council, 787 a.d., 521 seq. ;
the second ecumenical council
of, 523 seq. ; its ecumenicity,
524 seq. ; Gibbon's erroneous
statement regarding it, 523 ;
presided over by Tarasius, 523 ;
council was truly ecumenical,
523, 524 seq., 531, 575 seq. ;
called by the Roman rulers,
Constaniine and Irene, 523
540, 549; had the patriarchates
represented in it, 523 ; had its
decrees unanimously adopted
by the 350 bishops present,
523 ; decrees were at once re-
ceived in the four eastern
patriarchates, 524 ; and at once
accepted at Rome, 524 ; have
been almost universally re-
ceived since, 524 ; it has ])een
accepted by some Engli.sh
teachers, 524 ; but is usually
rejected in the Anglican
schools of theologj% 524 seq. ;
Neale's opinion criticized, 524,
525; Palmer's opinion criti-
cized, 525, 520; what the coun-
cil decreed, 526 seq. ; venera-
tion {irpocTKvvTiais) l)ut not
Xarpeia to images, 526 ; argu-
ment upon the ideas in wor-
ship, 527, 528 ; the divine
Sacra, 529; the imperial sa-
cra, 530 seq.; the question of
Images, pictures, and paint-
ings discussed, 536 seq. ; evi-
dence from the fathers in fa-
vour of pictures, 539 seq.;
confession of their faith, 541 ;
excursus on the conciliabu-
lum, 546 seq. ; spirit of the 7tli
ecumenical council is excellent
and reforming, 555; the seventh
ecumenical council is most
valuable, 548, 555 ; it reversed
the decrees of the conciliabu-
lum, 548 ; decree of the coun-
cil, 549 seq. ; excursus on the
present teachinsr in East and
West on tlie subject, 551 ; the
Canons of the seventh ecu-
menical council, 555-70; let-


ter of the synod to the emper-
or and empress, 571 ; excursus
on the reception of the .sev-
enth council, 575 seq. ; its ecu-
menicity denied in the Caroline
Books, 582 ; the question of
its being condemned by coun-
cil of Frankfort, 583-6 ; it
was accepted as ecumenical by
the eighth and following coun-
cils, 586 seq. ; also by the
council of Lyons, 587 ; and
by the council of Florence,
587 ; its relation to the Roman
see, xiv.

Nicene Creed, 1, 3, 172 ; given by
Cyril, 202 seq. ; given by Pope
Agatho, 340 ; read at Car-
thage, 443, 509.

Nicene Faith of Nice I. is con-
firmed at Constantinople, 381
A.D., 172; statement of tlie-
ological points at issue, 173 ;
confirmed at Ephesus, 431
A.D., 231; those offering a
different faith are to be de-
posed or anathematized, 231;
contains sufficient, 251, 253;
confirmed at Chalcedon, 251,
253, 261, 262,263 ; contirmed
at 111. Constantinople, 344;
confirmed at the quinisext,
359.

Nocturns, 134.

Nones, service at, 134; their ori-
gin, 134.

Numidia, its archives and matric-
ula to be kept at Constantina,
484.

Oath, those taking heathen, are to
be excommunicated, 405 ; that
a man will not receive ordina-
tion, 605 ; cases of rash oaths,
605, 606.

(Eeonomufi. [See Steward.]

Offices said in church, 49; choir,
excursus on, 134, 135.

Oil for the lamps may be presented
at the altar, 594 ; stolen from
the holy church shall be re-
stored with a fifth more, 593.

Old woman maj' live with clergy,
46.

Oiuopliorioii, 143.

Only Begotten, is Jesus alone, 213,
214.

Orarium or stole, forbidden to the
subdeacon, 140, 140, 142 ; was
Avorn bj^ deacon and jiresbj'-
ter, 142 seq. ; its origin and
use, 142 ; how worn by differ-
ent orders, 143 ; its use forbid-
den to the readers and singers,
143.

Oratories, why they are not conse-
crated, 560 ; they have avnafv-
aia or superaltars, 560 ; cler-
gy from another diocese shall
not find refuge in them, 562;
not be begun without the
monej' to finish them, 566 ;
the building to be forbidden


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


665


by the bishop, if there are no
means, 566; often commenced
in a fever of discontent, 566.

Order, ecclesiastical, some wish to
confuse and overturn, 183.

Ordines, 143, 144 seq.

Oriens, civil province of, 16 ; ec-
clesiastical province had its
metropolitan, 16.

Origen, was condemned by the
fifth general council, 314,
359, 361 ; question as to this
condemnation considered, 314;
question decided affirmatively,
314; excursus on the fifteen
anathemas against him, 316
seq. ; the anathemas fifteen
against Origen, 318 seq. ; the
anathematismsof the Emperor
Justinian against him, 320.

Orthodox party at Antioch, 181,
181, 182.

Pacifical letters. 111, 112.

Pagan committing lewdness with
a deaconess, 607 ; if he pro-
fessed the faith, and then draws
back, 607 ; assuming the name
and reproaching Christ, 607.

Paintings of a lascivious nature are
forbidden, 407.

Pallium of wool for the bishop,
142, 143.

Pandects, the Roman, xxx.

Panuph, deacon, a case of disci-
pline, 614.

Papal authority, if council of
Gangra under, 90.

Papal claims to jurisdiction, 15,
16 ; decisions preceding coun-
cils, ,xiv.

Paphnutius, his address on celi-
bacy of the clergy, 51, 52.

Paris convention sunposed to have
been held, 825 a. d., 586; the
whole question is doubtful,
586.

Parish, the ancient name for
diocese, 35 ; right of the
parish (diocese), 35, 42 ; uni-
formity in worship in, 42 ; to
be cared for by its bishop,
112, 113 ; shall remain sub-
ject to its bishop, 377 j if it
has been ministered by him for
thirty years, 377 ; ecclesiasti-
cal shall follow the political
and municipal example in new
cities, 280; frequent questions
as to jurisdictions, 280 ; vil-
lage or rural, shall be subject
to its present bishop, 280, 280 ;
shall continue subject if there
has been a peaceable and con-
tinuous governoring of thirty
years, 2iB0, 280 ; may appeal
to the synod of the province
if the period be less than thirtj^
years, 280, 280 ; may hence
appeal to the exarch of the
diocese, 280, 280 ; or finally
to the throne of Constantino-
ple, 280, 280.


Parish, county (aypoiKiKas) or in
the province {iyxt^piovs) a law
for, 377.

Paschal question. [See Easter.]

Paschal fast, when it should be
broken, 600.

Paschasinus, Bp. of Lilybseum,
56 ; on the Easter question, 56.

Passion, the salutatory, and how
it is to be observed, 403.

Paulionist, 176.

Pelagius, monk and heretic, 225,
230, 239.

Penalties, by canon : 1. Cease from
his ministry, 8, 10, 97. 2.
Become a penitent, 24, 27, 64,
65, 66, 70, 73, 74, 75, 79,81,
108, 110, 362, 402. 3. Com-
municate in prayer only, 29,
31, 65, 66. 4. Be deposed,
24, 36, 38, 50, 71, 108, 109,
110, 115, 228, 229, 230, 231,
268, 281, 362, 364, 368, 369,
370, 371, 376, 379, 387, 388,

391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396,

397, 398, 399, 406, 561, 564,

594, 595, 596, 597 seq. 5.
His proceedings be utterly
void, 32. 6. His ordination
void, 35, 271. 7. Be corrected,
as a seditious person by the
civil power, 110. 8. \Vhat-
ever the full synod of the
province shall determine, 117.
9. Ordination shall be void
and himself punished by the
synod, 119. 10. Subject to
correction, the holy synod de-
termining what is right, 121.
11. Time of penance in propor-
tion to the nature of the
offence, 125. 12. That the
bishop himself submit to an
investigation by the synod of
the province, 121. 13. Ex-
communicated or cut off. 35,
108, 109, 116, 129, 151, 270,
273, 280, 282, 364, 370, 391,

392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397,

398, 399, 400, 402, 405, 406,
407, 456, 559, 561, 564, 594,

595, 596, 597 seq. 14. Be
anathema, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96,
97, 98, 99, 100, 148, 150, 172,
206, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214,
215, 216, 217, 230, 231, 268,
272, 279, 284, 287, 312-16,
318 seq., 320, 360, 394, 404,
448, 496, 497. 15. Acts de-
clared invalid, 179. 16. Be de-
graded from their rank. 71,
225, 228, 231, 275, 277, 283,
287. 17. Brotherlv admoni-
tion, 282, 369. 18. Absolutely
prohibited from officiating,
278. 19. 3e subjected to
canonical censure, 273, 362.
20. Be subjected to canonical
penalties, 274, 388, 560. 21.
Be subjected to ecclesiastical
penalties, 269, 284, 285. 22.
Be incapable of advancement,
362, 363. 23. Ejected from


his peculiar rank, and made
the last in his own rank, 368.
24. Cease from his episcopate,
but discharge the office of
a presbyter, 375, 375. 25.
Abstain from all sacerdotal
work, 377. 26. "Neither
bless nor give to others the
Body of Christ," 377. 27.
" Be cut off for one week,"
377. 28. " Subjected to suit-
able punishment," 387. 29.
"Subjected to the penalties
of fornication," 390. 30.
" Fall under the canon of seven
years, provided tliey openly
separate from their unlawful
union," 390. 31. "Cut off
for one week and thence-
forth let him learn not to
think of himself more highly
than he ought to think," 392.
32. "Subjected to the afflic-
tions and hardships " of real
exorcism, 392, 33. "Sub-
jected to the canon of six
years," 393. 34. " Such books
be given to the flames," 394.
35. " Deprived of his priestly
dignity," 400. 36. "Cutoff
and deposed," 402. 37. "Lose
their rank," 404. 38. Bishop
unworthy of even lay com-
miuiion in extremis, 416, 416.
39. Bishop, "must present
himself before an assembly of
bishops and give an account,"
427. 40. Be deprived of com-
munion, 426, 428. 41. Bishop
"must give account and de-
fend himself on this charge,
and lose the dignity and hon-
our of the episcopate, " 432. 42.
Cast forth from the congrega-
tion of the church, 447. 43.
Shall be punished, 447. 44.
Relieved from office, 454. 45.
"Brings damnation on him-
self," 456. 46. " Increase the
penalty of his contumacv,"
468. 47. Be content with the
communion of their church,
480. 48. Bishop, "shall be
anathematized even after Ids
death, "481. 49. His name shall
not be read from the diptychs,
487. 50. "Forced to do pen-
ance," 494. 51. "Be cast out
of the clergy," 494. 52. "Be
subjected to the same punish-
ment he devised for others,"

558. 58. " Shall be in danger
of losing his degree," 559.
54. "Shall derive no advan-
tage from the ordination or
promotion thus negotiated,"

559. 55. " Let him remain a
stranger to the dignity and
responsibility which he at-
tained by means of money,"
559. 56. " Removed from his
degree," 559. 57. " Deposed
as a transgressor of the ecclcsi-


666


IXDEX OF SUBJECTS


asticul tnuiitiou, 560. 58.
" Bishop turned out from his
bishoprick," 563. 59. " Hegu-
menos turuetl out from his
monastery," 563. 60. Abbess
" be sent away from her
monastery and placed in an-
other in a subordinate posi-
tion," 567. (Jl. " No longer
perform divine service," 594.

62. " Sliall cease from his
function," 608.

Penance, rehxxatious in, 28, 63,
73, 74, 79, 80; money com-
mutation of, 28 ; shuts off
from communion, 47 ; on a
presbyter, 63 ; on a deacon,
63 ; fruits of, 108 ; given in
proportion to the nature of tlie
offence, 125 ; on woman who
married two brotliers, 79 ; how
loosed from, 80 ; why ended
by admission to communion,
80 ; can be shortened, 80, 80 ;
prayer for those umler, 136 ;
canons regarding those wlio
fell away in persecution, 601 ;
diCfereut, cases considered and
dealt with, 601, 604, 605,
606, 607, 608; the public for
sin, 25, 27, 28, 602, 604; list
for dilferent mortal sins, 25, 28,

63, 73, 602 ; taken by Alexis
Comnenus, 27 ; decline of the
public, 27 ; the sacrament of,
27 ; must be adapted to each
case, 27, 28, 2U, 65, 66 seq.,
125, 609 J for bestial sins, 70,
608.

Penitent, shall not be reconciled by
a presbyter, 446, 462 ; the
viaticum is not to be given
witliout consulting the bisliop,
446, 462 ; if tlie offence was
public he is to be received with
imposition of hands, 462 ; can-
not be received without the
bishop's leave, 462 ; indul-
gence to llie tndy penitent,
608, 603.

Penitentiary, his office abolished
by Nectarius, 27 ; in the
ciiurcb canon, 9.

Penitents, in four classes, 25, 26,
31, 32, 80, 109, 147, 602, 604,
608; each case to be cf)nsid-
ered very carefully, 27, 29,
65 seq., 446, 462 ; must give
evidence of their penitence,
27,29, 65, 66, 67, 125; those
who are indifferent must en-
dure the full time of penance,
27, 29, 64, 79; indulged with
tlie viaticum, 29, 30, 46, 65,
79, 446 ; prayer for, 136, 138.

Pentapolis, its ancient custom to
prevail, 15 ; interiiretation of
the canon regarding, 15, 16;
had its own metropolitan, 16.

Pentecost, tlie standing at prayer,
42 ; as a season, 118.

People, to be taught by clergy
preaching, 374, 375, 375.


Peribolseum, rough mantle ■worn
by philosophers, 97 ; worn by
the Eustathians under pretence
of asceticism, 97.

Perjurer, how penanced, 608; if
forced to become such, 609.

Persecution, account of, 188,
282-283, 540 seq., 556; pict-
ure of it in the canons on pen-
ance, 601.

Persia and its bishops, 47.

Peter, Abp. of Alexandria, bis
canons, 601 ; martyrdom,
601 n.

Peter, bishop, bis complaint is re-
ferred to St. Cyril of Alexan-
dria, 615.

Peter Fullo. his addition to the
Trisagion, 401 ; was deposed,
401.

Peter, the apostle, as bead of the
papacy, 48, 558.

Phiala in a church, 25.

Philippopiilis, tiie Eusebians left
Sardica and met at, 435.

Photius, bishop of Constantinople,
his collection of canons, xxxi,
xxxii.

Photius. bishop of Tyre, his case
at Clialcedon, 277', 290, 291.

Pictures and icons of Christ the
Lamb of God, 401 ; question
of worship, 523 seq., 525 seq.,
531.

■k'kttiv €T€pai/, excursus on the words,
232 seq.

Pius VIII. approved the new views
on usury, 37.

Players, are called thymelici, 157;
are forbidden by canon, 388 ;
those frequenting them are un-
der penalty, 388 ; on conver-
sion are not to be denied, 463 ;
no one is to draw them back
to their playing, 474; cannot
accuse the clergy, 504.

Plays, at weddings must not be
witnessed bv i^riests or clergy,
157, 375, "375 ; at bancpiets
must not be witnessed by either
of these, 157 ; their character,
376.

Plotting and conspiring and band-
ing together are forbidden by
all laws, 281 ; and especially
among the clergy and monks,
281 ; 'instances'^of, 281.

Poison for superstitious purpose,
74.

Polvgamv, 80 ; how treated by the
lathers, 609.

Pontic bishops, administer only
Pontic matters, 176, 177; are
to be ordained by the patri-
arch of Constantinople, 177,
287.

Poor, procurator for the, 50; their
funds managed liy the bishop,
121 ; shall travel with letters
merely paciflcal from the
church, 276; reason for their
not having letters commenda-
torv, 276.


Poor-house, or alms-bouse, is un-
der the bishop, 273, 273;
Trrwxf^ov or basiliad near Ca-.^a-
rea, 273 ; not to be interfered
with by foreign clergy, 275.

Possessed, ma}' not be ordained or
pray with the faithful, 599;
when exorcised, sliall be re-
ceived to communion and may
be ordained, 599.

Possidius, African bishop, 496 ;
received legation against the
donalists, 496.

Praefecture, the great, of Italy,
its extent, 16.

Pra;sidius, African bishop, 496 ;
received legation against the
donatists, 496.

Pragmatic, letters, sanction, etc.,
277; history and application
of the term, 277 ; effect of
pragmatics is restricted, 277,
278.

Prayer, as a sacrificial act, 14, 158;
standing at, orilered,42 ; kneel-
ing at, 42 ; without oblation,
74; the mystic, 85 ; not allowed
in married persons' houses,
91 ; in private houses instead
of church forbidden, 109 ;
with those who refuse to go to
church forbidden, 109 ; may
be said anywhere, 158.

Prayers, same service to be at
nones and vespers, 134 ; for
catechumens, those under pen-
ance, 136 ; of the faithful, the
three, 136 ; aloud, or in silence,
136; Christians may not join
with heretics or schismatics in,
149 ; must first be approved in
sj'nod, 494; and used by all,
494, 494; but those contrary
to the faith are not to be used
at all, 494 ; standing at certain
seasons, 610.

Preaching. [See Clergy.]

Prescri])tive title, its limit of years,
377.

Prime, its origin, 134.

Primitive church discipline, 25
seq.

Princes ought not to swear to
wrong their subjects, 606.

Prifica, Latin version of the Nicene
canons, 17, 20, 45.

Private judgment as against the
faith, 108.

TToospepuv. excursus on, 13.

Prosphoneticus, 326 ; bis report to
the Emperor Constantine Pog-
onalus, 347.

Prosterius, Bp. of Alexandria, 56;
in tiie Easter question, 56.

Prostrati, prostrators, a class of
discipline, 24. 26, 27, 64, 65,
66, 67, 70, 74, 602; their
)ilace in church, 25.

Protestant, the, teaching on the eu-
charist, 39.

Protbe.sisin a church, 26.

Proverbs, the liook is properly only
Solomonic, 591.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


667


Provinces, ecclesiastical, have their
privileges contirmed at Nice,
15; civil and ecclesiastical
distinct, 16, 277; privileges
are changed at Constantinople,
381 A.D., 176, 177; their rela-
tion to dioceses, 184 ; their posi-
tion when civil and ecclesias-
tical are in collision, 277;
decreed in Africa that each
should be visited annually in
a synod, 466, 4G7 ; probable
nature of the visitation, 467.

Ps. Ixvii. 35. 554 ; Ixxiv. 3, 540n. ;
c. 9, 349 ; cxxxv, 15, 553.

Psalmody, ecclesiastical, 133.

Psalms, the reading is to be con-
gregational, 133, 138; inter-
spersed with reading a lesson,
133, 138; those composed by
private individuals may not be
read in church, 158 ; their
recitation, 557; not all by
King David, 591.

Psalter, must be committed to
memory by bishops, 556 ; its
general use and recital among
clergy and lait}', 557; why
called Davidic, 591.

Public discipline, excursus on the,
25.

Public spectacles sludl not be
made at Easter, 395.

Pullarii, 145.

Punishment shall be only once for
the same offence, 595.

Quadrigesimal fast, 32, 598.

Quartodecimans, 56. [See Here-
tics.]

Questions and replies on practical
difficulties, 612; on particular
cases, 614.

Quintin, John, professor of canon
law in Paris, xxxii; his collec-
tions, xxxiii.

Quodvultdeus, bishop of Centuria,
484 ; accused before a synod
of bishops, 484.

Ravishers of women, their punish-
ment, 287, 404; say they act
with view to marriage, 287 ;
their aiders or abettors to be
punished, 287 ; whether cler-
gymen or laymen, 287,404;
aiders and abettors, how pun-
isheii, 404.

Reader, 133 ; may not wear the
orai'ium, 143.

Relics, are to be venerated, 533,
534, 535, 550, 551, 552; de-
posited in the clnu'ch at conse-
cration, 560; a bishop's neglect
of this is against ecclesiastical
traditions, 560.

Renunciation of the world accom-
panied with lowliness of mind,
101.

Resurrection, received from Christ,
208; origenistic ideas of, 319.

Retaliation and the lex talionis, 184.

Rev. xiv. 4, 92.


Rich, condemned by the Eusta-
thians, 91, 101 ; enjoying
their riches with uprightness
and beneficence, 101.

Ring, the episcopal, 285.

Robbery, put uuiler penance, 611.

Roman Correctors, 79, 92, 98,111,
115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 131,
141, 147, 152, 564.

Romans, their study of law and
jurisprudence, xxix seq.

Rome, excursus on extent of her
jurisdiction oversuburbicarian
churches, 1, 16 seq. ; its extent
considered, 15, 16, 17 ; if hav-
ing patriarchal jurisdiction
over the whole church, 16, 17,
48, 184 ; its ecclesiastical
primacy, 48, 113, 192 seq.,
246, 287 ; Irena'us' appeal to
its "more potent principal-
ity," 113 ; its relation to Con-
stantinople, 178, 180, 184,
287, 287 seq. ; appeal to it was
not regarded in the eastern
church, 184, 456 ; as the
Apostolic See, 192 seq., 239,
246 ; Cyril of Alexandria's
appeal to it, 192 ; as patriarch
of the west, 274, 275, 328;
privileges granted by the
fathers to the throne of Old
Rome, 287, 287 seq. ; privi-
leges granted because it was
the royal city, 287 ; ranks
next before Constantinople,
287, 287 seq. ; her contention
against Constantinople dis-
cussed and settled, 292 seq.,
293 seq. ; the pope's letters
were examined and approved
by the sixth council, 328 ; a
lenten u.5age in, is forbidden,
391 ; appe.d to Julius bishop,
in worthy dispute, 417,
417 seq. ; whole question of
appeals to, 417 seq., 441, 456,
507 ; to hear an appeal the
pope can send presbyter a
latere, 419, 441 ; appeal from
deposed bishop .shall be heard
benignantly, 441 ; African
church was opposed to the
appeal "across the water,"
456, 456, 506 ; proposals of
peace between the churches of
Rome and Alexandria, 493 ;
aiithority of the church as
read in the Caroline Books,
580 ; relation of the see to the
several ecumenical councils,
xii seq. ; relation to the first
ecumenical council,
the second council,
the third council,
the fourth council,
the fifth council, xiv
sixth council, xiv ; to the sev-
enth council, xiv.

Rome, ancient, 345 ; new, 178 seq.,
344, 382; old, 178 seq., 248,
287 seq., .%2. 317, 327, 342,
343, 353, 382, 538, 583.


xii ;

to

xii ;

to

xn ;

to

xni

; to

; to

the

Russian literature upon eastern
synods, xxiii.

Sabbath (Saturday), readings to
be made on, 133; observances
upon the, 133, 148, 155, 389 ;
observed along-side Sund:iy,
133, 155, 389, 391 ; observed
as a feast, 133, 155, 389, 391,
598; Christians must work
on, and not judaize, 148 ;
unites with Sunday in having
Holy Eucharist in Lent, 155,
389, 391.

Sacraineidum CatecTiumenoriim, 32.

Sacrarium or sanctuar}' in a
church, 26.

Sacred vessels, 140 ; called " the
Lord's vessels," 140; solemnly
carried to the altar, 140.

Sacrifice, offering, a proof of
apostacy, 63, 67, 68; re-
peated acts of, and relapses,
66; less sin in a catechumen,
68; to perform the morning
or evening, 110.

Sacrilege, in a]>proprlating church
property, 95, 611; in degrad-
ing a bishop to the ranksof a
presbyter, 290; its guilt and
penance, 611.

S. Michael, an oratory of, 150.

Saints, have neglected their duty
to their children, 98; Eusta-
thians were such ko.t e^ox'fiv,
101 ; by the prayers of, 170;
their mediation and interces-
sion, 533, 534, 541, 549, 554,

Salmon, Dr., shown to be at fault
regarding papal decisions, xiv.

2 Sam. vi. 13, 554.

Sanctuary, was reserved for the
clergy, 396 ; according to
ancient custom the emperor
entered and made his offering,
396 ; later kings and magis-
trates had privileges in it. 396.

Sardica, the council of 343 or
344 A.D., 411 seq. ; argument
upon the date, 413 seq. ; note
on the text of the canons,
414 ; the canons, 415 seq. ; pre-
sided over b}' Hosiu,s, bishop
of Corduba, 415 seq. ; Pope
Julius was represented by two
legates, 415 ; discussion upon
the appeal to Jidiu.s, bishop
of Rome, 417 seq. ; excursus
on the other acts of the coun-
cil. 433 seq. ; account of the
encyclical letter, 434 ; also of
two written to the diocese of
Alexandria and Pope Julius,
434; excursus as to whether
the Sardican council was
ecumenical, 435 seq. ; why
it was not ecumenical, 435.

Scliism, setting up private assem-
blies is forbidden, 94; per-
forming separate ecclesiastical
acts is forbidden, 94 ; refusing
the consent of presbyter and
bishop, 94; by presbyter or


608


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


deacon, despising his bishop
and raising an altar, 110;
what il is, 110; of east and
west, xxxiv, 169 ; when made
by a presbyter against his
bishop, 595 ; when made
witliout religion or justice,
595; met by excommunica-
tion of all concerned, 595 ;
how caused, 604.

Schismatics, where they stood
when under penance, 26 ; how
to be received back, 47 ;
Christians may not join in
prayer with, 149, 149, 150.

Scripture language insufficient
against heresy, 3, 4.

Scriptures, holy, and the apos-
tolical traditions, 101 ; read in
churcii, 1U8, 133, 453, 454;
read for popular edification
and instruction, 133 ; the
source and subject of preach-
ing, 374, 375 ; to be inter-
preted by tradition and the
doctors, 374, 375 ; called the
canonical, 453; nothing else
should be read in church, 454.

" Seal of the gift of the Holy
Ghost" in unction, 185.

Sebaste in Armenia, the see of, 89.

Secular power, none is to interfere
with the ancient patriarchates,
2S8 ; courts are not to be
resorted to by ecclesiastics,
449 ; power is invoked by the
Catholic Church, 476; elec-
tion of bishop by, is null and
void, 557; office or work
shall not be held by the clergy,
562 ; shall not obtain church
lands and ]5roperty, 563; or
the possessions of the monas-
teries, 563.

Secularization of monasteries for-
bidden, 284 ; forbidden under
penalties upon those allowing
it, 284, 284 ; on seculariza-
tion, alienation and sacrilege,
284 seq.

Secundas of Ptolemais condemned
for heresy, 53.

Seditious person corrected by the
civil power, 110.

aeui5a\7v, none are to cook, in honor
of Mnvj'a 2Jtierpeiw, 399.

Sergius, Bishop of Rome, refused
to sign the TruUan decrees,
357.

Sermon, preached in church, 26,
136; of the bishop, its place
in the liturgy, 136, 138.

Servant-maid, marriage with, is a
bar to ordination, 59.").

Service, its order in church, 403.

Severus, bishop of Masada. had a
complication in ordaining,
605 ; his complication was
stniightened out by St. Basil,
605.

Sexes and their dress nnxod by the
Eustathians, 91, 97, 98.

Sext, its origin, 134.


She-bears, led about, are to be
avoided, 393, 393.

Shields, two silver, at Rome, had
the Creed without the Filio-
que, 167.

Shows, theatricah [See Specta-
cles.]

Sick, communion of the, excursus
on, 1 , 30 ; healing of, professed
by heretics, 129 ; to be baptized
if their servants show they had
desired it, 463.

Simony, is forbidden under pen-
alties on all parties, 268, 376,
558,567,595,610; isthe.sell
inu- a <rrace which cannot he
sold, 2'68, 376, 558, 559, 610;
may be in ordination or in j>ro-
curing office, 268, 558, 559 ;
penalties for it are descriljed,
268, 376, 595 ; one promoting
simony is liable to the penal-
ties, 268 ; prevailed in the
Asian diocese, 2()8 ; entails de-
position upon both bishop and
cleric, 376, 558, 595 ; may be
in giving the conuiiunion,
376; in the alienation of
clnirch lands and property,
563,564; for reception among
the clerg}' or into a monastery,
567.

Sin, penances for, 25; mortal, 25;
dealt with privately before ex-
communication, 50, 408; its
stages and conditions, 81, 408 ;
is it put awaj' at ordination ?
83; the dealing with sin and
the sinner with a view to a
cure, 408.

Singers, the Canonical, sing in
church, 132; go up into the
ambo, 132; sing from a book,
132; may not wear the ora-
rium, 143.

Singing, is not to be done with
shouting in the churches, 398 ;
is psalmody to God, 398; the
modes u.sed in, 398, 398 ; in
church music, 398.

Sinners, confessed, penanced and
converted, may have commun-
ion, 125, 126.'

Sins, mortal, in detail, 25.

Sister may live with clergy, 46.

Slaves, set against their masters,
91, 93 ; forbidden to forsake
their master, 93 ; others for-
bidden to induce them to
leave, 93 ; the evil done under
pretence of religion, 93 ; can-
not be monks without their
master's leave, 270, 599 ; man-
umitted before three witnesses
are free, 402 ; or I)efore two
witnesses are free, 402 ; are
set out as players, 474; pub-
lication of the manumissions
is made in church, 474, 483 ;
leave is asked from the em-
peror for this publication, 483 ;
cannot accu.se the clergy, 504 ;
cannot be purchased or held


by Jews, 561 ; if freed and
approved they may be or-
dained, 599 ; were sent by
their masters to offer incense,
601 ; in fornication unknown
to their master, 607 ; marrying
without their master's consent,
are in fornication, 607 ; forced
by their nuister are innocent,
607 ; widowed, perhaps guilty
of no great crime in pretend-
ing, 608.

Sodomy, its penances, 604, 608.

Soldiers, how they are to be dealt
with in the public penance,

27 ; their different actions un-
der temptation, 27 ; as Chris-
tians witlidrew from the mili-
tary service, 27, 28; sought,
though Christians, readmission
into the service, 28, 27; were
compelled to apostatize, 28 ;
were required by Licinius to
sacrifice, 28; their difficulties

.as Christians, 28 ; their official
position was not unchristian,

28 ; might receive baptism,
28 ; thei'r belt the badge of of-
fice, 28 ; should not bear arms
against the enemy at their own
cost, 597 ; question how far
one is murderer, 605.

Son, His relation to the Father,
4 seq., 175, 176, 203 ; as
yevvTjThs and ay e vvtitos , 4 seq. ;
as yevrjThs and ayei'rjTOi, 4 seq. ;
Cj'ril's teaching upon the nat-
ure and relations, 201 seq.,
251 seq.; the incarnation as
stated by Cyril, 202 seq.,
251 seq.; made himself an
offering for our salvation, 204 ;
the "Incarnation of the Only
Begotten Son of God," 231,
251 seq.

Soothsayers, to be avoided under
penalty, 393.

Sorcery, 74.

Soul, its pre-existence and restora-
tion, 318, 319, 320.

"Spectacles" are forbidden by
canon, 388 ; those attending
them are under penalties,
388; it is petitioned that they
be not allowed on the Lord's
day, 473; especially not upon
Low Sunday and other feast
days, 473 ; are not to be fre-
quented by bishops' sous, 444;
the character of these shows or
spectacles, 449.

Spiritual union, a dangerous pre-
tence, 11 ; brothers and sisters,
47.

Sponsors in baptism, 47; what
bars, 47.

Sponsors shall not marrv their
godchildren, 390, 390 ; the
]iennlties due to such actions,
390 ; some reasons assigned
for the proliibition, 390.

Standing at prayer, its symbolism,
42.


1


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


6G9


Steward. [See Clergy.]

Stewardsliip of benefactions, 95 ;
fidelity or anathema, 95.

Strangers must liave letters paciti-
cal, 111; none to be received
■without such letters, 111.

Strangled, flesh of animals so
killed, 92 ; under the apostolic
decision, 92, 93; forbidden by
Pope Gregory III., 98.

Subiiitroducta, 8 n., 11 ; forbidden
to ail the clergy on any plea,
11, 46, 364; what she was,
11.

Suburbicarian churches and
Rome's jurisdiction, 15 seq.

Suffering can be spoken of con-
cerning the Word, 211.

Suicide, 75.

<rwa|is, (Twayooyvfj explained, 101.

Sunday, its observance along-side
the Sabbath, 183, 155; had
the Gospel read, 133; we must
rest on, as Christians, 148 ; the
Lord's Day. 148, 155, 374,
601 ; has celebrations of Holy
Eucharist in Lent, 155 ; the
most important day for
preaching, 374; canon for-
bids kneeling on, 403, 601 ;
a day of joy, because our Lord
rose on it, 601.

Surety, clergymen becoming, for
anyone is liable to deposition,
595.

Swine's flesh, not necessary to ab-
stain from it, 606.

Sjmesius, a married bishop, 52.

Synod (ecumenical), the canons in
force, 59 ; those accepting one
must avoid apostate bishops,
228.

Sj'nod (the great), must be obeyed,
10, 11 ; must have its canons
obeyed, 15 ; disobedience to it
brings forfeiture of office and
excommunication, 230.

Synod (the provincial), meets twice
a year, 13, 46, 48, 118, 282,
369, 451, 596 ; adnnnisters its
own provincial affairs, 176,
177; to enquire into cases of
discipline, 13, 46, 118, 282,
369, 596 ; composed of the
bishops in the province, 13,
118, 183, 282, 596; may revise
und reduce excommunications,
^3,46 ; to be held before Lent
f>nd about autumn, 13, 118,
369, 596 ; to tlioroughly ex-
amine cases, 13, 596; Trullan
fixed clerical celibacy, 52 ; let-
ter to the church of Alexandria
from Nic;«n, 53 seq.; the holy
and great, 53, 197 ; receive ap-
peals affainst bisliops' judg-
ments, 111,112,113, 118,183;
receives appeal of presbyter
against his bishop, 111; pres-
byters, deacons, or laymen
may appeal. 111; metropoli-
tan invites by letter to the
synod, 117, 479; consists of


the metropolitan and other
bishops of the province, 113,
118, 182, 183; decided the
causes of bishops, 116, 183 ;
the greater synod of bishops,
an appellate court, 114, 115,
448; their decision on appeal
is final, 114; on a doubtful
decision, appeal lies to extra
provincial bishops, 115; met-
ropolitan calls in the foreign
bishops, 115 ; metropolitan in-
vites by letter to a provincial
synod, 117 ; is to be attended
by every bishop when he is
called, 152, 282; is not to be
avoided in contempt, 152,
282, 479; meetings were not
held and business was neg-
lected, 282 ; two meetings a
year at places a]iproved by
the metropolitan, 282; at least
one meeting to be held, 369,
559; disordered by the incur-
sions of barbarians, 369, 559;
place of meeting is to be fixed
by the metropolitan, 369; to
be attended by ;ill the bishops
of the province, 369; Tripoli
is to be represented by one
legate, 449 ; powers delegated
to committees of three from
each African province, 503,
504 ; careless absentee bishops
are to be fraternally reproved,
369 ; one each year became
the custom, 369, 451, 478,
559; attended by delegates
from absent metropolitans,
451, 451, 479 ; at Hippo Regio
in Africa, 458 ; to l)e held
10 Kalendas Septembris, 478,
479 ; the primates give notice
to all their provincial bishops,
479; as courts of appeal for
the bishops and clergy, 183,
448 ; under the guidance of
the Spirit of Truth, 220;
form of procedure when sj'n-
od is closed, 448 ; those declin-
ing to attend, and trusting to
a crowd, shall be deprived,
467, 468.

Synod (provincial or local), once a
year, 559 ; a prince hindering
its meeting is to be excommu-
nicated, 559; work for the
bishops in synod, 596.

Synod (diocesan), difticulty in hav-
ing regular attendance, 13 ;
even ceased to be held, 13 ;
not popular, 13.

Synod, Provincial of Anc}n-a,
63 seq. ; of Neo-Cfesarea,
78 seq.; at Rome, 504 a.d. ,
90 ; of Gangra, 325-381 a.d.,
81 seq. ; of Antioch in Encse-
niis, 841 a.d., 102 seq.

Synod of archbishops, twice a
j'ear, 48.

Synodal letter from Nicaea, 53 seq. ;
from Constantinople, 382 a.d.,
188 seq.


Synodical letter on the keeping of
Easter, 1, 53.

Tabellarii, 145, 146.

Tarasius, presided at the second
Nicene ecumenical council,
523, 525, 531 ; received certain
bishops back from Iconoclasts,
533 seq.; was called universal
by the emperors, 537; con-
firms the holding of the .sixth
ecumenical council, 540 ; in-
augurated a new era in the
Eastern church, 548; was mis-
quoted bv the Caroline Books,
581.

Tavern, none of the clerical order
ought to enter a, 144, 461,
597; may be used by the
clergy when they are travel-
ling, 461, 597; or when they
are under necessity, 597.

Te Beum, 135.

Temples and their officers, 145 ;
and their under-officials, 145;
Christian shall not bring oil to
heathen, 598.

Terce, its oriain, 134.

Tertullian as^a Montanist, 128, 186.

Testaments, the Old and New,
396; are not to be destroyed,
unless they are useless, 396.

Thank offeriuiis, joined with the
eucharist, 378, 378 ; llie offer-
ing was separated, 378, 378 ;
the blessing of fruits offered
was in ancient rituals, 378.

Thearistus, 40, 44 ; translator of
the Nica?an canons, 40.

Theasius, African bishop, 480,
509 ; put to death by the pa-
gans, 495.

Theatrical dances are forbidden by
canon, 388; those frequent-
in i; them are under penalties,
38^8.

Thebais had its own metropolitan,
IG.

Theodore Ascides, Bp. of Ca?sarea
in Cappadocia, 314 ; a strong
Oricenist, 314.

Theodore of IMopsuestia, 211, 230,
231, 234, 299, 302, c03,
306 seq., 512 ; his creed de-
nounced, 234; his teaching,
302, 303, 306 seq., 312, 315,
322; defended by the Ne.sto-
riau party, 303 ; condemned
by Justinian, 304; condemned
by the synod of 553 a.d.,
306 seq., 315; condemned by
Vigilius, 322 seq.

Theodore, Bp. of Myra, received
back to Catholicism, 534.

Theodoret, Bp. of Cyprus, 225,
299, 302.

Theodoret, was condemned 553
A.D., 200, 300, 315 ; misunder-
stood Cyril of Alexandria, 206 ;
his statement on the relation
between Christ and the Holy
Ghost, 215 seq.; his letters
and statements, 302.


670


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


Theodosius, the emperor, 43, 55,
130, 161, 170, 1«0, 181, 188,
281,287, 310; convened the
tirst council of Constantinople,
170, 188. 287.

Theodosius II. convened the coun-
cil of Ephesus, 19(5, 458, 486,
495, 496, 503,509, 510.

Theodosius the younger in the
sanctuary, 390 ; his legal code,
xxix.

Theological controversy, its value
and meaning, 20G seq. ; has a
truth at issue, 207.

Theonas of Marmorica was con-
demned for heresy, 53.

Theopliilus, Bp. of Alexandria, 55;
his Easter tables, 55 ; his
Prosphonesus, 613 ; his com-
monitory to Ammon, 614.

6eoTo'/cos, excursus on, 206 seq.;
theological value of the term,
207 seq. : the history of the
word, 208 n. ; the meaning of
the word, 209 seq. ; why best
translated " 31other of God,"
209 seq.

Thessnlonica, importance of .the
city, 430.

The Three Chapters, the point of
dispute, 553 .\.d., 299, 302;
were anathematized by Pojie
Vigilius, xiv n., 302, 304, 322
seq.; history of the question,
304 seq., 306 seq.; Vigilius
pro])osed to write on them to
Justinian, 304; were discussed
at the ti fth general council, 307;
discu.s.sed bj' Vigilius in his
letter to Eutyohius, 321 seq.

Thief, how penanced, 598, 608, 611.

Thrace, its bishops are to be or-
dained by the Patriarch of
Constantinople, 177, 287.

Thundering Legion, tale of, 28.

Thursday in Holy Week, the time
for the Catechumens repeat-
ing the Creed, 134.

TiUcines, 145.

Timothy, Bp. of Alexandria, his
replies to (piestions, 612.

1 Tini.iii. 3, 12,306 n.; vi. 1,93.

2 Tim. ii. 4. 375.

Tit. i. 6, 306 n. ; ii. 9, 10, 93.

Titvlus, said to be a small church,
4.-)S.

Tome of the Western Bishops, iSl;
belongs to the synod hehl in
Constantinople, 382 \.t>., 181 ;
its identitication, 181, 182.

Tractory, its significations, 480,
486".

Trading. [See Clergy.]

Tradition, ancient, authoritative,
17, 177, 374, 375, 464; ac-
cording to tlie traditions of
the church, 101, 177; the
Holy Scriptures and the Apos-
tolical traditions, 101; the
trnilition of the fathers, 177,
273; the apostolic and ]iatris-
tic tradition shall be followed,
378; list of unwritten tradi-
tions, 610.


Translation of bishops. [See

Cleugy.]
Trial, courts of, bishops, priests,

and deacons, 448, 451, 452.
Tribonian, Roman jurist, engaged

upon the Theodosian Code,

XXX.

Trigjuiiy, 80.

Trinity, tlie doctrine defined, 189,
3i2, 332 seq., 359, 444, 533 ;
defined and defended at the
Council of Nice, 359, 444;
one of the, suil'ered, 401, 549.

Tripoli, to be represented at synod
by only one legate, 449 ; im-
portant church centre, 449,
466, 486, 487 ; in a condition
of unrest, 486, 487.

Trisagion, its interpolation pro-
hibited, 400.

Tunicle, 143.

Turrianus, editor, 43, 45.

Tyre, and its metropolitical posi-
tion, 277.

Unction, is to be applied to con-
verted heretics, 185; form of
applying it, 185 ; used at the
reconciliation of penitents,
445, 446; used at baptism,
440.

Uniformity in parishes, 42, 42.

Union, sought between Jew and
Gentile, 93 ; in Chrisi is hypo-
static, 217.

United States, ages for ordination
in, 372 n.

Universal, a title objected to at
Nice II. as given to Tarasius,
537.

Unleavened bread of the Jews is
not to be received by Chris-
tians, 151.

Urban, African bishop, 507 ; his
case taken up by the bishops,
507; must reform himself, be
excommunicated, or be sum-
moned to Rome, 508.

Usurer, if he may be ordained, and
how, 605.

Usury, excursus on, 1, 36, 38 ; en-
tirelv forbidden to the clergy,
36, 46, 49, 126, 445, 597;
severest discipline upon cleri-
cal usurers, 36, 46, 445, 597 ;
forms of, 36, 38; its deceit
and fraud, 36; defined, 36;
tricks of the system, 36; rea-
sons for its being prohibited,
36-8 ; history of the prohibi-
tion of, 36 seq. ; councils con-
demning it, 36-8 ; Calvin is au-
thor of its modern moral code,
37 ; ancient and modern views
compared, 37, 38 ; entailed no
penalty upon the laity, 38,
445; not a bar to a deacon's
ordination, 38; rates, 38, 369.

Vegetable diet, 69.

Vegetables shall not be offered on

"the altar, 594.
Vespers, service at, 134; iXmlucer-
II avium, 134.


Vestments of the early church,
excursus on, 141-3 ; autliori-
ties on, 141 ; general, univer-
sal and catholic use, 141.

Viaticum for the dying, 29; causes
a condition of discipline in a
pers(ni who recovers, 29 ;
given under episcopal author-
ity, 29; titles of honor given
to it, 29 ; has a meaning wider
than last comnumion, 29 ;
given to those under diseii)line,
29, 29, 30, 46, 65, 74, 79.

Viotimarii, 145.

Victor of Aquitaine, 56; in the
Easter question, 56.

Vigil service in the early church,
134.

Vigilius the Pope, declined to at-
tend the Fifth General Coun-
cil, 300, 303, 304 seq.; Lssued
his "■' Ju(Hc(itii')n^' and with-
drew it, 300, 302 ; issued his
" Constitutiim,'' 300, 302, 323 ;
was exconununicated by the
African bishops, 300 ; ap-
proved Ibas and his letter, 300,
301 ; his memory differently re-
garded, 301, 304; the question
of his letter to Justinian and
Theodora. 301, 304; anathe-
matized the Three Chapters,
302, 304, 322 seq. ; went to
Constantiiio]ile, 302,323 ; con-
demned Ibas's letter, 304; his
letter confirming the Fifth
Ecumenical Synod, 321 seq. ;
proposed writing to the em-
peror, 304 seq. ; his name
was era.sed from the diptychs
by Justinian's orders, 305;
this imperial order was con-
firmed by the council, 305,
317 ; his letter to patriarch Eu-
tychius, 321 seq. ; confirms the
four synods, 321 ; discusses
the question of the Three
Chapters, 321 seq., xiv, x ;
his death and successors, 323.

Villieus, bnililT of the church
farms, 269.

Virgin INIary, is mother of God
' idfOTSKos), 192, 198, 205, 206,
207, 208. 251, 254, 204, 302,
311, 312, 313, 315, 340, 345,
347, 359, 399, 541, 546; was
not merely 0eo(p6f]os, 207, 212,
313; her virgiinty in His
birth, 254, 399, 400 ; Origen-
istic ideas upon, 320; her in-
tercession sought, 533, 534,
541, 554 ; " our spotless Lady
the Holy Mother of God," 533,
541, 549 ; the ground of her
influence for being intercessor,
534, 541.

Virginity, extolled in the early
church, 92 ; its natural beauty,
95, 96, 384; not to be pre-
served in abhorrence of matri-
mony, 95, 96, 597 ; accom-
panied by humility, 101;
Virgin Christ, Virgin ^lary.
367 ; the age for entering the


INDEX OF SUBJECTS


671


profession, 384, 503, 605;

many causes may excuse an
earlier reception, 503.

Virgins, questions regarding, 68,
"71,92; betrotlied, 68; must not
live with men as sisters, 71 ; in
the church canon, 9 ; Eusta-
thian, remain such in ablior-
rence of marriage, 91, 95 ; for-
bidden to arrogantly treat the
married, 96; must remain in
meekness and charity, 90 ; for-
bidden to marry, 280; unless
under the bishop's indulgence,
280; liable to excommunica-
tion for disobedience, 280 ; are
not to be consecrated by pres-
byters, 446 ; when of age for
reception, are given to the bish-
op, 462, 503 ; or in the bishop's
absence to a presbyter, 462;
and to a woman of graver age
for training. 462 ; those leav-
ing their father f(jr virginity
are to be commended, 463;
punishment for carrying off
by force, 558, 598, 606; "shall
be retained by those who
carry them off by violence,
598, 606 ; question of their
marrying, 605,606; shall be
penanced as adulterers, 608.

Vows, their character and effect,
280.

Wales, church of, 56 ; its easter
tradition, 56.

Wax stolen from the holy church
shall be restored with a fifth
more, 598.

Weddings should be sober and
modest as for Christians, 156,
157 ; plays at, should not be
witnessed by priests or clergy, •
157.

Wednesday with its vigil, 134.

Weepers, a class of penitents, 25.

West, its teaching upon the divine
procession, 167 ; agrees with
the east upon the theological
question, 167, 168.

Widow is at her own discretion,
606; may marry whom she
may wish, 607.

Widower may marry, 606.

*' Widows" spoken of bj' S. Paul,
41 ; called presbytides, or fe-
male presidents, 130 ; honour
and office given them, 130 ; age
for reception, 384, 606; they
and orphans ought to be cared
for, 421, 422 ; widows and or-
phans should be cared for by
bishop, 422, 614; same as
deaconesses, 606.

Wife of a bishop shall be removed
to a distant mona.stery, 388 ;
shall be supjiorted by the
bishop, 388 ; may become a
deaconess, 388 ; must leave
her hu.sband by mutual con-
serit, 388 ; of a soldier is more
easily pardoneti for marriage
in his absence, 607.


Wine is not to be abstained from
in abhorrence, 597.

Wisdom xvi. 17, 528.

Witnesses, two or three required
for conviction, 10; cannot be
accusers, or accusers be wit-
nesses, 505 ; not under four-
teen years of age, 505.

Wives were not to be put away
under pretext of religion, 365,
370, 371, 379; Latins direct
candidates for diaconate and
presbyterate to renounce their
wives, 371 ; the Eastern
church confirms the marriage
bond, 371; separation is al-
lowed conditionally in ])arba-
rian churches, 379 ; l)isli()ps,
presbyters and deacons shall
abstain from their own, 478.

Wizards, how to be dealt with,
47, 604.

Woman, marrying two brothers is
disciplined, 79; her\iaticum
given on conditions, 79, 80;
pregnant ought to be baptized,
82 ; ought not to be con-
demned for sleeping with her
husband, 92 ; ma}' not sleep
in a monastery of men, 387 ;
shall not dress as a man, or
man as a woman, 393; " with
the issue of blood," 600 ; shall
be under penance for adultery,
606 ; leaving her husband
should be punished, 606;
marrying a man deserted by
wife, is a fornicator in igno-
rance, 607; dismissed from
her husband, should remain
unmarried, 607 ; married, if
renouncing her marriage, 91,
96, 98 ; liave thereby"^ fallen
into sin, 91, 96 ; dressing as
men, forbidden, 91, 97 ; cut-
ting her hair on pretence of
asceticism forbidden, 91, 99;
on pretence of asceticism, for-
saking her husband forbid-
den, 91, 98; might be in
monasteries and rule there,
130 ; may not teach a general
audience in church, 130; may
not go to the altar, 153; a
reason why she may not, 153 ;
ravishers, with aiders or abet-
tors, are to be punished, 287,
606; may not sleep in a mon-
astery of men, 387, 567 ; is
not permitted to speak in
time of the liturgy, 396;
may not sleep in bishops'
houses, 567 ; may not be on
the suburban estates when the
bishop is there, 567; or on
the monastic estate when the
hegumenos is there, 567; men-
struous, how restricted, 600;
ravished by the barbarians
shall not be held guilty of for-
nication, 602; the}' who steal
women without violence, 606.

Word of God incarnate, 204, 206,
207, 210 seq., 213, 214, 216,


217, 254 seq., 263 seq., 302,
308 seq., 331 seq., 347 j

made Himself an offering for
sin, 204, 216, 254; is united
hyposlaticallv to flesh, 210,
210 seq., 217, 254 seq.,
264 seq., 312; "one only
Christ both God and man at
the same time," 210, 213,
254 seq., 308; the Divine
Logos, 210, 302 ; the union in
Christ is hypostatic, 211, 217,
312 ; results of the kenosis,
211, 212, 254; cannot be the
Goil of Christ, or the Lord
of Christ, 213; has become
our Great High Priest and
Apostle, 216, 216 seq.,
254 seq. ; did not offer sacri-
fice for Himself, 216; being
without sin, He had no need
of offering or sacrifice, 216,
217 ; was born of the hf)ly
Viriiin, 216, 254 seq., 263,
312; His own flesh is life
giving, 217, 254; His life-
giving flesh belongs to Him-
self alone .and truly, 217 ;
suffered in the flesh, died,
became the first begotten of
the dead, 217, 257 seq.; is
the life and gives life, 217 ;
has two nativities, 312; yet
is not two but one Christ, 312;
nature of the union as stated
negatively and positively, 312,
319, 322; Oriiienisiic ideas
upon, 318, 319,'^302, 549.
Word of God, doctrine of the two
wills in Christ, 331 seq.,
347 seq., 550.


LIST OF WORDS AND
PHPtASES.

Worship, relative or absolute,
523, 548 ; question vn, before
the second Nicene Council,
523 seq., 572 seq.. 582; of
images, 525, 526, t'7 2 seq.;
•irpoc!KVV7)(Tis or Aarpfio, 526,
572 seq., 582; how shaded
off from divine adoration, 527,
539 seq. ; of adora ion re-
served to the sujiersutjstantial
and lifegiving Trini'y, 539;
of God in the open air, 611.

Worship of the assumed man with
God the Word, 2] 4; of the
one Person assur.iing and
assumed, 214.

Worship of the earlv church,
excursus on the, 13* -9.

Xantippus, senex, bishop's trac-
tory, 486, 493 ; placed on
committee of inquiry, 493;
believed to be Prin.ate Xan-
tippus, 493.

Xenon for lepers, 275, 216.

Zonarns, John, the maj and his
work, xxxii.
