Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, Vol. 2: Socrates and Sozomenus Ecclesiastical Histories
Philip Schaff & Henry Wace (eds.), various translators (1890)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn02schauoft
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

A SELECT LIBRARY


OF


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


$econtr Series-


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES


UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF


PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D., and HENRY WAGE, D.D.,


Professor of Church History in the Union Theological Sentinary,
Neiv York.


Principal of King' s College,
London.


IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA.


VOLUME II.


SOCRATES, SOZOMENUS


CHURCH HISTORIES.


%-.


( LlBf^ARY J ^,


WM. B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING COMPANY

GRAND RAPIDS 1952 MICHIGAN


PHOTOLITHOPRINTED BY GUSHING - MALLOY, INC.

ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

1952


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.


PAGE

SOCRATES : Church History from a.d. 305-439 i

By a. C. Zenos, D.D., Professor of New Testament Exegesis in the Hartford Theologi-
cal Seminary,

SOZOMENUS : Church History from a.d. 323-425 i79

By Chester D. Hartranft, D.D., Professor of Historical Theology in the Hartford
Theological Seminary.


THE


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


OF


SOCRATES SCHOLASTICUS.

Revised, with Notes, by

THE REV. A. C. ZENOS, D.D.,

PROFESSOR OF NEW TESTAMENT EXEGESIS IN THE THEOLOGICAL
SEMINARY AT HARTFORD, CONN.


B^P


5/56©


PREFATORY NOTE.


The basis of the present edition of Socrates' Ecclesiastical History is the translation in
Bagster's series mentioned in the Introduction, Part IV. The changes introduced, however,
are numerous. The translation was found unnecessarily free ; so far as the needs of the Eng-
lish idiom require freedom no fault could, of course, have been found with the translation ;
but the divergences from the original in multitudes of cases were not warranted by any such
need ; they were more probably induced by the prevailing style of rhetoric common in the
days when the translation was made. The change which has gradually come about in this
respect called for modifications in the present edition. Many more might have been intro-
duced without damage to the work. But it was felt that the scope and purpose of the edition
only called for the most necessary of these changes.

In the preparation of the notes the editions of Hussey and Reading, containing Valesius'
and Reading's annotations, were freely used. Whenever a note was taken bodily from these,
it has been quoted and duly credited. It was thought best, however, usually to condense and
reduce the number and bulk of these notes and introduce sparingly such new notes as were
suggested by more recent study in ecclesiastical history.

The Introduction is almost altogether dependent on the literature quoted in Part I. The
writer claims no original discovery respecting Socrates or his work. The facts had been diU-
gently collected by his predecessors ; he has simply rearranged them and put them into ex-
pression such as, to his mind, suits the requirements of the plan of the series.

A. C. Zenos.


INTRODUCTION.


I. Sources and Literature.'


U. Chevalier in his Repertoire des sources historiques du Moyen Age gives the following list of authorities on
Socrates Scholasticus.

Baronius:* Ann. [1593J 439. 39- Cf. Pagi, Crit. [1689] 9, 11, 427, 15-6.

Bellarmin LABBfe: S. E. [1728] 164.

Brunet: * Matiuel [1864] V. 425.

Cave:* S. E. [1741] I- 427-

Ceillier : * Hist. Aut. Eccl. [1747] XIII. p. 669-88. (2 a VIII. 514-25.)

Darling : * Cyclopedia Bibliograpkica ; Authors.

Du Pin: * Bibl. Aut. Eccl. [1702] III. ii. 183.

Ebed-Jesu: Cat. Scr. Eccl. 29. (Assemani : Bibl. Orient. III. 141.)

Fabricius:* Bibl. Grcrc. [1714] VI. 117-21. (2 a VII. 423-7.)

Graesse:* Tresor [1865] VI. i, 429.

Hoffmann: Lex. Bibl. Gr. [1836] III. 625-6.

HOLZHAUSEN: Commentatio de fontibus quibus Socrates, Sozomenus ac Theodoretus usi sunt, Sac. Gotting. 1825.

JOCHER.

NouvELLE BiOG. Gen. * [1868] XLIV. 127-8.

Nolte:^ Tubing. Quartalschrift {^\^bo\ <^iZ; [1861] 417-51.

Patrologia Gr.-eca * (Mign£) LXVII. 9-26.

Sigebert: Gembl. S. E. 10.

TillemontI: Hist, des Emp. [1738] VI. 119-22.

Trithemius: Scr. Eccl. 137.

Vossius: Hist. Grceca [1651] 259.

Walford: 3 in Balm's Eccl. Libr. VI. 1853.

To these there should be added important notices of Socrates or his Ecclesiastical History as follows :

F. C. Baur: Die Epochen der Kirchlichen Geschichtschreibung. Tiibing. 1852, p. 7-32.
G. Dowling: An Introduction to the Critical Study of Ecclesiastical History.

Ad. Harnack : In Herzog-Plitt's Real Enkyclop. vol. 14, Sokrates und Sozomenos and in Encyclop. Bri-
tannica, Socrates.

K. O. Muller: History of Greek Literature : English translation and continuation by Donaldson, Vol. III.

R5SSLER : Bibliothek der Kirchenvdter.

Jeep: Quellenuntersuchu)igenzu der griech. Kirchenhistorikern. Leipsic, 1884.

Sarrazin : De Theodora Lector e, Tkeophanis Eonte pr<ccipuo, 1 881.

Staudlin : Gesch. und Literatur der Kirchen-geschichte, 1827.

0\EKBECK : Theol. Liter. -Zeitung, 1879. No. 20.

Also articles on Socrates in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (by John
Calrow Means) and Smith & Wage: Dictionary of Christian Biography (William Milligan), as well as passing
notices in standard ecclesiastical histories such as Neander, Hase, Killen, Schaff, ivc, and Introductory no-
tices of Valesius (Hussey), Parker, Bright, &c.


1 All works marked with a star in Chevalier's list were used in
the present edition, and all but two or three of those added to the
list of Chevalier.

- Nolie's article is on the textual emendations needed in the edi-
tion of Socrates. The text of our historian has not been as thor-
oughly and completely examined and corrected as other writings.
Valesius' edition (Hussey) gives an account of a few MSS. exam-


ined by himself; nothing further has been done of any importance.
It is to be hoped that Gebhardt and Harnack may find it convenient
to incorporate a new collation and revision in their Ttxtc uitd Un-
tersuchungen.

- E. Walford, A.M., appears as the translator of Sozomen, not of
Socrates. See IV. of Introduction, note 6.


Vlll


INTRODUCTION.


II. Like of Socrates.


We cannot but regret the fact that the age in which Socrates lived cared little, if at all, about
recording the lives of its literary men. The only sources of information in this respect are the
writings themselves of these literary men and the public records, in case they held the double
character of literary men and political or ecclesiastical officials. As Socrates did not participate
in the public affairs of his day, our information respecting him is confined to the scanty and inci-
dental items we may gather from his history. As he was not very fond of speaking of himself,
these data are few and often of doubtful significance. In fact, the reconstruction of his biog-
raphy from these scattered items is a matter of difficult critical investigation.

All that these inadequate materials yield of his biography may be summed up as follows :

He was born in Constantinople.' He nowhere mentions his parents or ancestry, and no infor-
mation has reached us on this point from any other source. The year of his birth is inferred
from what he says of his education at the hands of the grammarians Helladius and Ammonius.*
These grammarians were originally Egyptian priests living in Alexandria — the former of Jupiter,
and the latter of Pithecus (Simius) ; they fled from their native city in consequence of the dis-
turbances which followed the cleansing of the Mithreum and destruction of the Serapeum by the
bishop Theophilus. It appears that at that time an open conflict took place between the pagans
and Christians, and many of the pagans having taken part in the tumult, laid themselves open to
criminal prosecution, and to avoid this, took refuge in other cities, — a large number of them natu-
rally in Constantinople. The Chronicon of Marcellinus puts this event in the consulship of Tima-
sius and Promotus, i.e. 389 a.d. Now, as Socrates was very young ^ when he came to these
grammarians, and it was the custom to send children to the schools at the age of ten, Valesius
has reasoned that Socrates must have been born in 379 ; others have named 380* as a more prob-
able date for this event. Other data for ascertaining the exact date of Socrates' birth are of very
doubtful significance. He speaks, for instance, of Auxanon,* a Novatian presbyter, from whom
he had received certain information ; but as Auxanon lived till after the accession of Theodosius
the Younger in 408 a.d., it is impossible to draw any conclusion from this fact. So again Socrates
mentions the patriarchate of Chrysostom in Constantinople (398-403) as if he had received his
information at second hand," and thus implies that he was perhaps too young to be an interested
eye-witness of the events of that period. But how young he was we cannot infer from this fact ;
and so cannot take the patriarchate of Chrysostom as a starting-point for our chronology of
Socrates' life. Still another item that might have served as a datum in the case, had it been
definitely associated with a known event in Socrates' career, is his mention of a dispute between
the Eunomians and Macedonians which took place in Constantinople in 394." If he were an
eye-witness of this quarrel, he must have been old enough to take an interest in it, hence about
fourteen or fifteen years of age. But this conclusion, even though it coincides exactly with the
date found previously (379), is not at all certain, as he does not state that he was an eye-witness ;
and if the reasoning is correct, then he was not too young to be interested in the events of Chrj'-
sostom's patriarchate which occurred a little later. Thus, on the whole, while it is extremely prob-
able that Valesius is right in setting the date of Socrates' birth in 379, this event may have taken
place several years later.

Nothing further is known of Socrates' early life and education except that he studied under
Ammonius and Helladius, as already noted. Valesius has conjectured from the mention of Troi-


> So he says in V. 24.

' V. 16. On the destruction of the Serapeum, sec Sozotn. VII.
15; Thcodoret, //. ^. v. 22: Nicephor. XII. 25; Eunap. yff^/M. par.
77; Suidas, SdpaiTK. Helladius, according to Suidas, wrote a Dic-
tionary, besides other works. Cf. s.v. 'EAAuiJiof.

* Valesius' reasoning is based on the assumption that Socrates


was sent to the gramiharians as soon as they arrived at Constanti-
nople. If, however, an interval of several years elapsed before his
going to them, the date of his birth must be put correspondingly
later. The only certainty reached through this datum is that he was
bom not earlier than 379.

' I. 13 and II. 38.

" VI. 3, and •»« ifrflwri. ' V. 24.


INTRODUCTION.


IX


lus, the famous rhetorician,* that Socrates must have received instruction from this teacher also,
but with no sufficient foundation.'

Socrates always remained a resident of Constantinople, and was evidently proud of his native
city, and fond of alluding to its history as well as its actual condition. He relates how the
Emperor Constantine enlarged it and gave it its present name in place of the former heathen
name it bore (Byzantium).'" He speaks of its populousness, and at the same time of its ability
to support its many inhabitants from its abundant resources." He looks on its public structures
very much as the ancient Israelite did on the ' towers and battlements ' of Jerusalem. He men-
tions especially the walls built by Theodosius the Younger, the Forums of Constantine and
Theodosius, the Amphitheatre, the Hippodrome with its Delphic tripods, the baths, especially
that called Zeuxippus,'^ the churches of which he names at different times as many as five ; viz. :
the church of the Apostles, erected by Constantine especially for the burying of the emperors
and priests ; ^^ the church of St. Sophia, which he calls ' the great church ' ; the church of St.
Jrene,^* located in the same enclosure as that of St. Sophia ; the church of St. Acacius, together
with its appendages ; '* and the chapel of ,5"/. John, built seven miles outside the city.'® Besides
these he also mentions circumstantially the porch and shambles and porphyry column near which
Arius was attacked with his sudden and fatal illness,'^ the region called Sycse, and the tomb of
Alexander the Paphlagonian, who was tortured and died in prison during the temporary suprem-
acy of the Arians.'*

Although there is no distinct mention of his ever having left the great city," it is improbable
that, like his great Athenian namesake, he was averse to traveling. In fact, his frequent mention
of the customs of Paphlagonians, Thessalians, Cyprians, and others with minuteness of detail,
rather gives the impression that he had visited these places.

According to the preponderance of evidence Socrates was trained as a pleader or advocate, and
practiced this profession for a time. Hence his cognomen of Scholasticus.^ At the instance of a
certain Theodorus he undertook to write a continuation of the Ecclesiastical History of Euse-
bius, bringing it down to the seventeenth consulate of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger
(439 A.D.)."'

This year is the last definitely mentioned in his work. He must have lived, however, until
some time after that date, as he speaks of a revision of the first two books of the History.^
How much later it is impossible to tell : it was not certainly till after the end of Theodosius'
reign ; for then he would have brought down his history to that event, and thus completed his
seventh book according to the plan, which is evident in his whole work, of assigning one complete
book to each one of the emperors comprised in his period.

Of the character of Socrates as a man we know as little as of the events of his life. Evidently
he was a lover of peace, as he constantly speaks with abhorrence of the atrocities of war, and
deprecates even differences in theological standpoint on account of the strife and ill-feeling which
they engender.


' VII. I and 2. See note on VII. i. Socrates speaks of Troilus
as a native of Side in Pamphilia, and mentions Eusebius and Silva-
nus and Alabius (both the latter bishops) as distinguished pupils of
Troilus, and finally adds that Anthemius, who during the minority
of Theodosius acted as regent, was dependent on the influence of
Troilus; in which connection he further adds that Troilus was not
inferior to Anthemius in political sagacity.

* Professor Milligan, in Smith & Wace's Dictionary of Biog-
raphy, even says that Socrates assisted Troilus, but adduces no
proof for the statement.

" I. 16. 15 II. 38 and VI. 23.

" IV. 16, end; Vll. 37. « vi. 6.

" II. 16. " I. 38.

" I. 40. " II. 38.

" II. 16; I. 37. >» V. 8.

*• The various meanings of this word may be found in Du Cange's


Glossarium Medite et Infima Gmcitates and in Sophocles' Greek
Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods. From its primary
meaning of ' student ' it came to be applied to any one who had
passed through study to the professions, of which the advocate's was
one. From the absence of the cognomen in Photius' account of
Socrates, Bibliotheca Cod. 28, as well as in that of Nicephorus Cal-
listi, H. E.\. I, Hamburger, as quoted by Fabricius, Bibl. Grac.
VII. p. 423, note g, and Ceillier, Auteurs Sacris, XIII. p. 669,
doubt whether the title was rightly applied to him. Valesius argues
from internal grounds, that Socrates was a layman and a lawyer.
Harnack, on the other hand, denies that there is any evidence of
juristic knowledge in Socrates' History, even in such passages as
!• 30. 3'. and V. 18.

" VII. 48.

« II. I.


INTRODUCTION.


Socrates' knowledge of Latin has been inferred from his use of Rufinus,^ but Dodwell ^ con-
jectures that Socrates read Rufinus in a Greek translation, and that such translation had been
made by Gelasius.

Inasmuch as he lived in, and wrote of, an age of controversies, and his testimony must be
weighed according to his theological standpoint, this standpoint has been made the subject of
careful study. There is no doubt left by his explicit declarations about his agreement in the
main with the position of the orthodox or catholic church of his age, as far as these are distin-
guished from those of Arians, Macedonians, Eunomians, and other heretics. But as to his attitude
towards Novatianism there has been considerable difference of opinion. That he was a member
of the Novatian sect has been held after Nicephorus Callisti'" by Baronius, Labbaeus, and others,
and argued from various considerations drawn from his work. Some of these are : that he gives
the succession of the Novatian bishops of Constantinople ; ** that he knows and mentions Nova-
tian bishops of other places, e.g. of Rome," of Scythia,'® of Nicaea;^ that he mentions Novatian
churches as existing in Phrygia and Paphlagonia,* in Lydia,^^ in Cyzicum,^ in Nicaea,^ in Nico-
media and Cotyaeum,^ and in Alexandria;*^ that he knows and describes their church edifices ;^
that he knows their internal troubles and trials,''^ especially their position on the Paschal contro-
versy ; '* that he gives vent to expressions of a sympathetic nature with the rigor practiced by the
Novatian church;*'^ that he records the criticisms of Novatians on Chrysostom and the opinion
that his deposition was a just retribution for his persecution of the Novatians ; ^ that he attributes
miracles to Paul, Novatian bishop of Constantinople,*' takes the testimony of Novatian wit-
nesses,** rejects current charges against them,*^ and finally speaks of the death of Novatian as a
martyrdom.**

On the other hand, Valesius, followed by most of the more recent writers on Socrates, claims
that all these facts are due to the extreme impartiality of the historian, his sense of the justice
due to a sect whose good he appreciated, together with his lack of interest in the differences
between their standpoint and that of the Catholics. Socrates treats other heretical sects with the
same generous consideration, e.g. the Arian Goths, whose death he records as a martyrdom ; **
and yet he has never been suspected of inclining towards Arianism. At the same time he men-
tions the Novatians as distinct from the Catholic Church,** and everywhere implies that the Church
for him is the latter.

To account for the apparently different conclusions to which these two series of considerations
point, some have assumed that Socrates had been a Novatian, but before the writing of his history
had either gradually drifted into the Catholic Church, or for reasons of prudence had severed his
connection with the lesser body and entered the state church, retaining, however, throughout his
whole course a strong sympathy for the communion of his earlier days.*' Others attribute
his favorable attitude towards Novatianism to his general indifference for theological refinements,
others to mere intellectual sympathy for their tenets. In the absence of any definite utterance
of his own on the subject, a combination of the last two motives comes nearest to sufficiently
explaining the position of Socrates, although his rather unappreciative estimate of Chrysostom **
and his severe censure of Cyril of Alexandria*^ are both more easily accounted for on the ground
of a more intimate relation between the historian and the Novatians, as both of the above-named
eminent men were declared enemies of Novatianism. ,

In other respects it cannot be doubted that the creed of Socrates was very simple and primi-


*> I. 12, 19; III. 19; IV. 24, 26.

'* De jure sacetdotali, p. 278. Cf. on translation by Gelasius,
Smith & Wace, Dictionary of Christian Biography, II. p. 621.


" Niccph. H. E. I. I.

» Cf. V. 21 ; VII. 6, 12, 17.

" V. 14: VII. 9, II.

» VII. 46.

» VII. 25.

«> IV. 28.


" VI. 19.

" II. 38: III. 11.

» VII. 12.

" IV. 28.

« VII. 7.

M II. 38; VII. 39.


SI V. 21.

M V. 22.

»» IV. 28; V. 19: VI. 21, 22;

VII. 25.
♦" VI. 19 and 21.


" VII. ,7, 39.

" I. 10, 13; II. 38; IV. a8.

« V. 10.

" IV. 28.

« IV. 33.


« VI. 20, 23: IV. 28; V. 19; VII. 3.

*' So Hamack in Herzog-Plitt, Real-Encykl. and Encyclo^.
Br it an.

*» VI. 3, 4. 5. 15. 18, 19. "• " VII. 15.


INTRODUCTION.


XI


tive. The one essential article in it was the doctrine of the Trinity ; all others were subordinate.
Even as to the Trinity, he would have accepted a much less rigid definition than the one pro-
pounded at Nicaea. As, however, the latter had been generally adopted by the church, he finds him-
self defending it against Arianism as well as against all sorts of compromise. He believed in the
inspiration of the great synods as well as in that of the Scriptures, and was satisfied to receive
without questioning the decisions of the former as he did the teachings of the latter. He was
not, however, particular about the logical consequences of his theological positions, but ready to
break off upon sufficient extra-theological reasons. His warm defense of Origen and arraignment
of Methodius, Eustathius, Apollinaris, and Theophilus,*" for attempting to belittle the great Alex-
andrian, shows how his admiration of a genius came into and modified his estimates. He con-
sidered all disputes on dogmatic statements as unnecessary and injurious, due to misunderstanding ;
and this chieflyi because the parties in the dispute did not take pains to understand one another,
and perhaps did not desire to do so because of personal jealousies or previous and private
hatreds.'^ He is willing to refer such lawful questions on doctrinal points as may come before
him to the clergy for decision, and is never backward about confessing his ignorance and incom-
petency to deal with theological refinements.

He makes a cogent defense of the use of pagan writings by Christians,*^ alleging that some of
the pagan writers were not far from the knowledge of the true God ; that Paul himself had read
and used their works ; that the neglect or refusal to use them could only lead to ignorance and
inability to meet pagans in debate ; that St. Paul's ' prove all things, hold fast that which is good,'*^
and Jesus Christ's ' be ye approved bankers ' " gave distinct support to the study of the whole
field of knowledge ; and that whatever is worth studying in non-Christian literature is capable of
being separated from the rest and known as the truth. Socrates himself was acquainted more or
less extensively with the works of Sophocles, Euripides, Plato, Xenophon, from among the classic
writers, besides those of Porphyry^ Libanius, Julian, and Themistius of a later period, and perhaps
with those of many others.

One more characteristic of Socrates must be mentioned ; viz., his respect for the church and
its institutions. He had a high regard for clergymen in virtue of their ordination. And although,
as already shown, he took occasion to express himself critically of the highest dignitaries, such as
Chrysostom and Cyril of Alexandria, yet the person of a bishop or presbyter is in a certain sense
surrounded by sacredness to him. Monks are models of piety. In his eulogy of Theodosius the
Younger," he compares the emperor's devoutness to that of the monks, making the latter, of
course, the high-water mark in that respect. But even as respects the ordinances of the church,
his regard for them was not slavish or superstitious. He advocates extremely broad views in
regard to the observance of Easter, considering a very precise determination of it too formalistic
to be consistent with the liberty of the New Dispensation. So, likewise, in regard to many other
of the ceremonies of the church, he takes pains to show by a description of the various ways in
which they were performed in different quarters that they were not essential, but of subordinate
importance.*®


III. Socrates' Ecclesiastical History.


Until the beginning of the fourth century historiography remained a pagan science. With
the exception of the Acts of the Apostles and its apocryphal imitations, no sort of attempt had


■» VI. 13, 17; VIL45.

^' I. 23; cf. also II. 40, end: oXA' ottw; firiv ravTa «x"» &c.

52 III. 16.

^ I Thess. V. 21, with which he combines Col. ii. 8. The latter
passage can only be acted upon, according to Socrates, as the ground
of a knowledge of that philosophy which is to be guarded against as
vain.


** rifftrOe SoKifioi Tpaire^rai.. This saying is sometimes at-
tributed to Paul, but more usually to Jesus. It occurs in Clem.
Horn. II. 51; III. 50; XVIII. 20; A/. Const. 36,37; Epiph. f/irr.
44. 2; Orig. (/« yoan.) IV. 283; Clem. Alex. Stro/n. I. 38; Eus.
H. E. VII. 7, 3.

« VII. 22.

M V. 22.


xii INTRODUCTION.


been made to record even the annals of the Christian Church. At the opening of the fourth
century Eusebius conceived the idea of writing a history which should include a complete account
of the Church's life to his own days. Hence he has correctly been called the Father of Church
History. His work was done so satisfactorily to his contemporaries and immediate successors that
none of them undertook to go over the same field again.' They estimated the thoroughness and
accuracy of his work much higher than later ages have done. But this respect, which enhanced
the magnitude of his work in their eyes, at the same time inspired many of them with a desire to
imitate him.

Thus a school of church historians arose, and a number of continuations of Eusebius' History
were undertaken. Of these, six are known to have seen the light : three of these again are either
in part or wholly lost ; viz., those of Philippus Sidetes, of Philastorgius, and of Hesychius. The
first because of internal characteristics which made it difficult to use ; the second because its
author was a heretic (an Arian), and with the wane of the sect to which he belonged, his yvork
lost favor and was gradually ostracized by the orthodox, and thus was lost, with the exception of
an abstract j)reser\ed by Photius ; and the third, for reasons unknown and undiscoverable, met
with the same fate, not leaving even as much as an abstract behind. The remaining three are the
histories of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret. That of Theodoret begins with the rise of Ari-
anism, and ends with Theodore of Mopsuestia (429 a.d.). That of Sozomen was begun with the
purpose of including the history of the years between 323 (date of the overthrow of Licinius
by Constantine) and 439 (the seventeenth consulship of Theodosius the Younger), but for some
reason was closed with the death of the Emperor Honorius (423), and so covers just one hun-
dred years. The work of Socrates, being evidently older than either of the other two, is more
directly a continuation of the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius. The motives which actuated
him to continue the narratives of Eusebius may be gathered from the work to be his love for
history,^ especially that of his own times,^ his respect for Eusebius, and the exhortation of Theo-
dorus, to whom the work is dedicated.* The author opens with a statement of his purpose to
take up the account where Eusebius had left it off, and to review such matters as, according to
his judgment, had not been adequately treated by his predecessor. Accordingly he begins with
the accession of Constantine (306 a.d.), when the persecution begun by Diocletian came to an
end, and stops with the year 439. He mentions the number of years included in his work as 140.
As a matter of fact, only 133 years are recorded ; but the number given by the author is doubtless
not meant to be rather a round than a precise number. The close of his history is the seventeenth
consulship of Theodosius the Younger — the same as the proposed end of Sozomen's work.
Why Socrates did not continue his history later is not known, except perhaps because, as he
alleges, peace and prosperity seemed to be assured to the church, and history is made not in
time of peace, but in the turmoils and disturbances of war and debate. The period covered by
the work is very eventful. It is during this period that three of the most important councils of
the church were held: those of Nicaea (325), of Constantinople (381), and the first council
of Ephesus (431), besides the second of P^phesus, called the ''Robbers' Council" (Xjjo-rpiKj;), and
that of Chalcedon, which were held not much later. It is this period which saw the church
coming to the ascendant. Instead of its being persecuted, or even merely tolerated, it then be-
comes dominant. With its tlay of peace from without comes the day of its internal strife, and so


' That this was not due to a general conviction that one history ; ^ VI. i.
of a period rendered another of the same period unnecessary is cvi- j * Cf. II. i ; VI. Int.; VII. 47. This Thcodorus is simply ad-
dent from the fact that the period immediately succeeding is treated ' dressed as i<p< tou 9eou oitfpuiirt, from which it has been rightly
of by three successive historians, and that the second of these, at j inferred that he was an ordained presbyter. The view that Theodore
least, knows and uses the work of his predecessor. | of Mopsuestia is the person addressed has been proved to be errone-

' Harnack, however, successfully proves that Socrates' ideal of ous from the date of his death, 429 a.d. The Eccli-siasliiral History
history, in spite of his love for it, was far from being the scientific was no doubt completed after that event, and could not have con-
idea which existed among pagan writers even of the age preceding 1 taincd an address to the eminent Theodore,
his own. Cf. Herzog-Plitt. Rcal-Eiuyk. Vol. 14, p. 4>3 sq-


INTRODUCTION.


xm


various sects and heresies spring up and claim attention in church history. Socrates appreciated
the importance which these contentions gave to his worlc^

Geographically Socrates' work is limited to the East. The western branch of the church is
mentioned in it only as it enters into relations with the eastern. The division of the history into
seven books is made on the basis of the succession in the eastern branch of the Roman E^mpire.
The seven books cover the reigns of eight eastern emperors. Two of these reigns — that of
Julian (361-363) and that of Jovian (363-364) — were so brief that they are combined and put
into one book, but otherwise the books are each devoted to the reign of one emperor. The
first book treats of the church under Constantine the Great (306-337) ; the second, of the period
under Constantius II. (337-360) ; the third, of that under Julian and Jovian taken together
(360-364) ; the fourth, of the church under Valens (364-378) ; the fifth, of Theodosius the
Great (379-395) ; the sixth, of Arcadius (395-408) ; and the seventh, to those years of Theodo-
sius the Younger (408-439) which came within the period of Socrates' work.

As the title of the work ('EK/<A.T/(nao-TtKij 'laropta) indicates, the subject is chiefly the vicissi-
tudes and experiences of the Christian Church ; but the author finds various reasons for inter-
weaving with the account of ecclesiastical affairs some record also of the affairs of the state. His
statement^ of these reasons puts first among them the relief his readers would experience by
passing from the accounts of the perpetual wranglings of bishops to something of a different
character ; second, the information which all ought to have on secular as well as ecclesiastical
matters ; and third, the interlacing of these two lines, on account of which the understanding of
the one cannot be full without some knowledge of the other. ' By a sort of sympathy,' says he,
* the church takes part in the disturbances of the state,' and ' since the emperors became Chris-
tians, the affairs of the church have become dependent on them, and the greatest synods have
been held and are held at their bidding.' It cannot be said, however, that Socrates either thor-
oughly realized or attempted any systematic treatment of his subject from the point of view of
the true relations of church and state ; he simply had the consciousness that the two spheres
were not as much dissociated as one might assume.

On the general character of Socrates' History it may be said that, compared with those pro-
duced by his contemporaries, it is a work of real merit, surpassing in some respects even that of
his great predecessor, Eusebius. The latter has confused his account by adopting, under the in-
fluence of his latest informant, differing versions of facts already narrated, without erasing the
previous versions or attempting to harmonize or unify them. Compare with this feature Socrates'
careful and complete revision of his first two books on obtaining new and more trustworthy
information.'

In the collection of his facts Socrates everywhere tried to reach primary sources. A great
portion of his work is drawn from oral tradition, the accounts given by friends and countrymen,
the common, but not wild, rumors of the capital, and the transient literature of the day. When-
ever he depends on such information, Socrates attempts to reach as far as possible the accounts
of eye-witnesses,* and appends any doubts he may have as to the truth of the statements they
make. Of written works he has used for the period where his work and that of Eusebius overlap
the latter's Ecclesiastical History and Life of Constantine ; ^ for other events he follows Rufinus,'"
abandoning him, however, in his second edition, whenever he conflicts with more trustworthy
authorities. He has also made use of Archelaus' Acts^^ of Sabinus' Collection of the Acts of the
Synods, which he criticises for unfairness,''^ Epiphanius' Ancoratus,^^ George of Laodicea,'^ Atha-
nasius' Apolog.^^ de Syn.^'^ and de Deer. Nic.}' Evagrius,'* Palladius,'* Nestorius,^ and Origen.^'


" VII. 47. « V. Int.

' II. I. The new information here referred to is drawn from the
works of Athanasius, which had come into the hands of the author.
Cf. II. 17.

« I. Int.; v. 19; VI. Int.

" I. 8.


'0 I. 12, 19; II. i; III. 19: IV. 24, 26.
•» 1. 22.


" 1. 22.

>•■' I. 8; II. 15, 17,20; III. 10, ;

" v. 24. »« II. 37.

'■ VI. 13
'« III. 7.


25; IV. 12, 22.


" I. 24.

'= II. 28; III. 8.


>» IV. 23.
» VII. 19-34.
" III. 7.


xiv INTRODUCTION.


Christian writers before Origen are known to him and mentioned by him, such as Irenneus, Clem-
ent of Alexandria, ApoUinaris the Elder, Serapion, and others ; but he docs not seem to Have
used their works as sources, probably because they threw no light on the subject at hand, his
period being entirely different from that in which they flourished. Besides these writers, Socrates
has also used public documents, pastoral and episcopal letters, decrees, acts, and other documents
not previously incorporated in written works. Some of these the author has used, but does not
quote /// e'xtfnso, on account of their length.- Of the sources that he might have used, but has
not, may be mentioned Dexippus, Eunapius (xpoviKi) lo-Topia), Olympiodorus (Adyot laropiKoi), and
especially Zosimus, his contemporary {la-Topta via). Whether these were unknown to him, or
whether he deemed it unnecessary to make use of the information given by them, or considered
them untrustworthy, it cannot be ascertained. It is sufficient to say that for the period he covers,
and the geographical limitation he has put on his work, his array of facts is sufficiently large and
to the purpose. The use he makes of these facts also shows sufficiently the historian as thorough
as he could be considering the time and environment in which he flourished. There is an evi-
dent attempt throughout his work at precision. He marks the succession of bishops, the years
in which each event took place by the consulships and Olympiads of Roman and Greek history.
He has made painstaking investigations on various topics, such as the different usages in variousl
localities, respecting the observance of Easter, the performance of the rites of baptism and mar- 1
riage, the manner of fasting, of church assemblies, and other ecclesiastical usages.'^ His accuracy
has been questioned from the time of Photius -* to our own days. It cannot be denied that there are
a number of errors in the History. He confused Maximian and Maximin.^ He ascribes three
* Creeds ' to the first Council of Sirmium, whereas these belonged to other councils. In general
he is confused on the individuals to whom he ascribes the authorship of the Sirmian creeds.*
Similar confusion and lack of trustworthiness is noticed in his version of the sufferings of Paul
of Constantinople and the vicissitudes of the life of Athanasius. He has wrongly given the
number of those who dissented from the decision of the Council of Nicaea as five. The letter
of the Council only mentions two, — Theonas and Secundus. The exile of Eusebius and Theog-
nis is ascribed to a later period and a different cause by Jerome and Philostorgius, and it is
generally conceded that Socrates' information was erroneous on this subject also. He is in-
correct on several particulars in the lives of Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus, as also in assigning
the attack at night on the church of St. Theonas to the usurpation of Gregory, the Arian bishop
of Alexandria.^

The chronology of Socrates is generally accurate to about the beginning of the sixth book, or
the year 398. A number of errors are found in it after that. But even before the date named,
the dates of the Council of Sardica (347) and of the death of Athanasius (373, for which Socrates
gives 371 ) are given wrong. St. Polycarp's martyrdom is also put out of its proper place by about
one hundred years."* Valens' stay at Antioch and persecution of the orthodox is put too early.®
The Olympiads are given wrong.*

Socrates is generally ignorant of the affairs of the Western Church. He gives a cursory
account of Ambrose, but says nothing of the great Augustine, or even of the Donatist controversy,
in spite of all its significance and also of the extreme probability that he knew of it ; as Pelagius
and Celestius, who traveled in the East about this time, could not but have made the Eastern
Church acquainted with its details. In speaking of the Arian council of Antioch in 341, he seems
to think that the Roman bishop had a sort of veto-power over the decisions of Occidental coun-
cils. The only legitimate inference, however, from the language of the bishop's claim is that he
thought he had a right to be invited to attend in common with the other bishops of Italy .^' So,


M II. ,7. 53 V. 22. I » I. 2. " II. II.

•• Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 28. oAAa.icai iv Toi« jdy/iacri ov Mav " II. 30. " V. 22.

oKpi^iJt. Whether in this phrase he meant to accuse .Socrates with " IV. 17.

inaccuracy in the narration of facts or indifference to theological *• On the chronology of Socrates, see Hamack and Jeep,

dogma is not very clear. Probably the former. ** II. 8 and 17.


INTRODUCTION. xv


again, on the duration of the fast preceding Easter among the western churches, he makes the
mistaken statement that it was three weeks, and that Saturdays and Sundays were excepted.

F'inally, the credence which Socrates gives to stories of miracles and portents must be noted
as a blemish in his history. On the other hand, he was certainly not more credulous than his
contemporaries in this respect ; many of them, if we are to judge from Sozomen as an illustration,
were much more so. The age was not accustomed to sifting accounts critically with a view to
the elimination of the untrue. Socrates shows in this respect the historical instinct in the matter
of distinguishing between various degrees of probability and credibility, but does not seem to
exercise this instinct in dealing with accounts of the prodigious.

To offset these faults we must take account, on the other hand, of the persistent and successful
attempt of our historian at impartiality. Of all the Christian writers of his day he is the fairest
towards those who differed from the creed of his church. No one else has done justice to
Julian,''- or to the various heretical sects of the day, as Socrates has. To avoid even the appear-
ance of partiality, he makes a rule for himself not to speak in terms of praise of any living
person ;^ and it must be said that he faithfully observes this rule, making but one exception in
favor of the emperor Theodosius the Younger.'^ Of this prince he gives a eulogistic picture,
altogether different from the representations universally found in the other historians of the age.^
His independence of judgment is more signally manifested in his estimates of ecclesiastics,
especially the more prominent ones,^ bordering at times on unjust severity. ' In short,' says
Harnack, summing up his estimate of Socrates, ' the rule to be applied to Socrates is that his
learning and knowledge can be trusted only a little, but his good will and straightforwardness a
great deal. Considering the circumstances under which he wrote and the miseries of the times,
it can only be matter for congratulation that such a man should have been our informant and
that his work has been preserved to us.'^'

Socrates' style is characterized by simplicity and perspicuity. From the very start he informs
us that he is about to make a new departure in this respect.^ Eusebius' language was not entirely
satisfactory to him, nor that of older writers.''^ Hence his own attempt everywhere at plain,
unadorned expression. The criticism of Photius,^ that Socrates' style ' had nothing remarkable
about it,' although made in the spirit of censure, is true, and according to Socrates' standard
(which is also that of modern times) amounts to a commendation. Socrates, however, was not
lacking in good humor and satire,*^ as well as in appreciation of short and pithy utterances ;
he often quotes proverbs and epigrammatic sayings,*^ and knows the influence of the anecdote
and reminiscence in interesting the reader.

The value of Socrates' History cannot be overestimated. It will always remain a source of
primary importance. Though, as already noted,^its ideal as a history is below that set up by
Thucydides, Tacitus, and others of an earlier age, — below even that of Eusebius, — yet as a collec-
tion of facts and documents in regard to some of the most important events of the church's life
it is invaluable. Its account of the great Arian controversy, its details of the Councils of Nicaea,
Chalcedon, Constantinople, and Ephesus, besides those of the lesser, local conventions, its biograph-
ical items relative to the lives of the emperors, the bishops, and monks — some of whom are of
pivotal importance in the movements of the times, its sketches of Ulphilas and Hypatia, its
record of the manner and time of the conversion of the Saracens, the Goths, the Burgundians,
the Iberians, and the Persians, as well as of the persecution of the Jews, the paschal controversy.


3- III. I, 12, 14, 21, 23. I ^TjTecTO) KOfinov <f)pa<T«u?; and VI. Int., 'lo-di 6e rjna? nr} e<nrovSa-


» VI. Int. 31 VII. 22.

5^ Cf. .Sozomen, IX. 1, and Gibbon, IV. 163.

s" Cf. attitude towards Chrysostom and Cyril of Alexandria,
above alluded to; also his censure of pride and contention among
members of the clergy. See V. Int. 15, 23; VI. 6; VII. 11, 29.

•'" In Ericycl. Britan,


KeVat jrepl ttjv <f>po<rir, where he adds that if he had attempted a
different style, he might have failed of his purpose of writing a
popular history.

»" VI. 22; VII. 27.

<» Biblioth. Cod. 28.

<' III. 16; IV. 22; VI. 13; VII. 21, 34.


38 I. I, oil ^pa.afio': oyKov ifipovTiiovTa ; so in III. i, firjSei? iirt- i *'- II. 8; III. 21 ; V. 15; VII. 29, 31.


XVI


INTRODUCTION.


not to mention a vast number of other details of minor importance, will always be read and used
with the deepest interest by lovers of ecclesiastical history.

IV. History ok Socrates' Work.
A. Uses made before the First Printed Edition of the Greek Text.

Socr.\tes' Ecclesiastical History was used, according to the best authorities, by Sozomen in the
composition of his parallel history.' It was certainly used by Liberatus, the Carthaginian deacon,
in his Breviariutn caussce Nestorianontm et Eutychianorutn, and by Theodorus Anagnostes
(Lector) in his Ecclesiastical History? It was also quoted in the second Council of Nicaea,
under the name of Rufinus, and also under its author's name.^

Epiphanius, surnamed Scholasticus, translated the history of Socrates, together with those of
Sozomen and Theodoret, under the auspices of Cassiodorus, about the beginning of the sixth
century. This translation, under the name of Historian Ecclesiasticce Tripartite^, consists of
twelve books, and was printed at Paris, without date, by Regnault in 8vo ; afterwards also at Bale
in 1523, 1528, 1533, 1539, •'ind 1568. It was revised by Beatus Rhenanus, and published in
Frankfort on the Main in 158S, together with the history of Eusebius, which was translated and
continued by Rufinus. It is also found in the new edition of Cassiodorus printed at Rouen by
Jo. Garetius in 1679 and in Venice, 1729. It served as a basis for a French translation by ..'Egi-
Diijs Gourlinus (Gille Gourlin), published in Paris in 1538" (cited by Cyaneus), and of a German
translation by Caspar Hedio at Strasburg, 1545.

B. Editions.

There are two independent editions of Socrates' Ecclesiastical History, each of which has
served as a basis for reprints, secondary editions, and translations. These are :

1 . EusEBii Pamphili : Hist. Eccl. LL. X. ; ejd. de Vita Constantini LL. V. ; Socratis Hist.
Eccl. LL. VII. ; Theodoreti Episc. Cyrensis Hist. Eccl. LL. V. ; Collectaneum ex hist. eccl.
Theodori Lectoris LL. II. ; Hermle Sozomeni Hist. Eccl. LL. IX. ; Evagrii Hist. Eccl. LL.
VI. Lut. Paris, ex off. Rob. Stephani 1544 pridie Cal. Jul.

a. Upon this edition is based a Latin translation by Wolfgang Musculus, Bale 1544, 1549,
1557, 1594, and one by J. J. Christophorson, bishop of Chichester, Paris 1571, Cologne 1581,
Bale 1570; with notes by Gryn^us and by Henricus Petri 161 i ; incorporated into the Bibli-
otheca Patrum, ed. Cologne 16 18 as Vol. V. and ed. Lyons 1677 as Vol. VII.

b. The Greek text of Stephens and the Laiin translation of Christophorson were published
together in Geneva, 161 2.

c. An English translation of Socrates' Ecclesiastical History was made by Meredith Hanmer,*
and is contained in his Ancient Ecclesiastical Histories of the first six hundred years after Christ,
written in the Greek tongue by three learned Historiographers, Eusebius, Socrates and Eimgrius.
London 1577. [This work also contains Dorotheus' Lives of the Prophets, Apostles, and Seventy
Disciples, reprinted in 1585 and 1650.]

2. The second independent edition of Socrates is that which has been received as standard
and served as a basis for all subsequent uses, viz. :

Historia Ecclesiastica Socratis, Scholastici, Her/nice, Sozomeni, &c., ed. Henricus Valesius.
Paris 1668. Valesius ostensibly revised the text of Stephens, but as a matter of fact he made a
new collation of the MS. used by Stephens, and compared this with MSS. in the Vatican, so that


> So Hamack and Jeep. Cf. also Hartranft in the present vol.,
p. 00.

' Theodnnis' works were two: (i) An epitome of the histories


written previous to his time, and (i) an original history continuing
the narrative to the days of Justinian I.

' Cf. Mansi, Concil. XII. Coll. 1035 and 104a.

• Cf. Woods, Athtna Oxonitnus, Vol. I. p. 326.


INTRODUCTION.


xvu


his edition amounts to an entirely new work. He also made a new Latin translation and appended
numerous notes. This edition was reprinted in Mayence in 1677. Its Latin portion was reprinted
in Paris also in 1677. The reprint of Mayence was reproduced under a new title, as if in Amster-
dam, in 1675.

a. Gui.. Reading appended additional notes, and together with the Latin translation of Vale-
sius, published the work in Cambridge in three vols. 1720. Reading's edition was reprinted at
Turin in 1746. Valesius' original edition was again reprinted in Oxford by Pakkp:r in 1844 and
Cura Buckley in London, also in 1844. It was revised and published in Oxford in 3 vols, by
R. HussEV in 1853, and again in i860 and in 1879. Again it was incorporated into Migne's
Patrologia Grceca as Vol. LXVIL (Petit Montrouge) in 1859, and finally the Greek text alone
was revised and published in a single volume by William Bright in Oxford 1878.

b. The translations based on Valesius' edition exclusive of those in Latin mentioned above
are as follows :

In French by L. Cousin : Histoire de V Eglise ecrite par Eusebe, Socrate, Sozomene, Theodore t,
&c. 4 vols. Paris 1675, '^^^ ^ woh. Amsterdam 1686. [Containing also Photius' abstract of
Philostorgius.]

In English by Shorting * : The History of the Church as written in Greek by Eusebius,
Socrates, and Evagrius [contains also the four books of the Life of Constantine, Constantine's
Oration to the Convention of the Saints, and Eusebius' speech in praise of Constantine], translated
from the edition of Valesius, with a translation also of Valesius' notes and his account of the lives
and writings of those historians. Cambridge 1683, 1692, 1709.

By S. Parker : 77/1? Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret
.... abridged from the originals. London 1707, 3d ed. 1729.

And Anonymously [E. Walford] ^ The Greek Ecclesiastical Historians of the first six centuries
of the Christian Era in 6 vols. [Socrates Scholasticus' History forms Vol. III. of this series].
London, Samuel Bagster and Sons, 1843-46. This translation was reprinted in Bohn's Ecclesi-
astical Library, 4 vols., 185 1 and 1888, and by Bagster in 1868.


' So Crusfe.

^ The volume containing Sozomen in this series bears the name
of Walford. The translation of Socrates is anonymous, but gener-
ally ascribed to Walford also. This cannot be a matter of inference


from the appearance of the two historians in the same series, as
Eusebius, also in the same series, is translated by Crusfe. Those
who attribute the translation to Walford give no reason for doing
so.


THE TABLE OF CONTENTS.


BOOK I.

PAGE

Chap. I. — Introduction to the work i

Chap. II. — By what means the Emperor Constantine became a Christian I

Chap. III. — While Constantine favors the Christians, Licinius, his colleague, persecutes them 2

Chap. IV. — War arises between Constantine and Licinius on account of the Christians 2

Chap. V. — The dispute of Arius with Alexander his bishop 3

Chap. VI. — Division begins in the church from this controversy; and Alexander, bishop of Alexandria,

excommunicates Arius and his adherents 3

Chap. VII. — The Emperor Constantine, being grieved at the disturbance of the churches, sends Hosius, the

Spaniard, to Alexandria, exhorting the bishop and Arius to reconciliation and unity 6

Chap. VIII. — Of the Synod which was held at Nicaea in Bithynia, and the creed there put forth 8

Chap. IX. — The letter of the Synod, relative to its decisions; and the condemnation of Arius, and those

ivho agreed with him 12

Chap. X. — The emperor also summons to the Synod Acesius, bishop of the Novatians 17

Chap. XI. — Of the bishop Paphnutius 18

Chap. XII. — Of Spyridon, bishop of Cypriots. 18

Chap. XIII. — Of Eutychian the monk 19

Chap. XIV. — Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis, bishop of Nicaea, who had been banished for

agreeing in opinion with Arius, having published their recantation, and assentlH to the creed, are

reinstated in their sees 19

Chap. XV. — After the Synod, on the death of Alexander, Athanasius is constituted bishop of Alexandria .... 20

Chap. XVI. — The Emperor Constantine having enlarged the ancient Byzantium, calls it Constantinople 20

Chap. XVII. — The emperor's mother, Helena, having come to Jerusalem, searches for and finds the cross of

Christ and builds a church 21

Chap. XVIII. — The Emperor Constantine abolishes Paganism, and erects many churches in different places, 22
Chap. XIX. — In what manner the nations in the interior of India were Christianized in the times of Con-
stantine 23

Chap. XX. — In what manner the Iberians were converted to Christianity 24

Chap. XXI. — Of Anthony the monk 25

Chap. XXII. — Of Manes, the ringleader of the Manichaean heresy, and on his origin 25

Chap. XXIII. — Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis, bishop of Nicaja, having recovered confidence,

endeavor to subvert the Nicene Creed by plotting against Athanasius 26

Chap. XXIV. — Of the Synod held at Antioch, which deposed Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, on whose

account a sedition broke out and almost ruined the city 27

Chap. XXV. — Of the presbyter who exerted himself for the recall of Arius 28

Chap. XXVI. — Arius, on being recalled, presents a recantation to the emperor, and pretends to accept the

Nicene Creed 28

Chap. XXVII. — Arius having returned to Alexandria with the emperor's consent, and not being received

by Athanasius, the partisans of Eusebius bring many charges against Athanasius before the emperor .... 29
Chap. XXVIII. — On account of the charges against Athanasius, the emperor convokes a Synod of bishops

at Tyre 30

Chap. XXIX. — Of Arsenius, and his hand which was said to have been cut off 30

Chap. XXX. — Athanasius is found innocent of what he is accused; and his accusers take to flight 31

Chap. XXXI. When the bishops will not listen to Athanasius' defense on the second charge, he betakes

himself to the emperor. 31

Chap. XXXII. — On the departure of Athanasius, those who composed the Synod vote his deposition 31


XX ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.

PAGE

Chap. XXXIII. — The members of the Synod proceed from Tyre to Jerusalem, and having celebrated the

dedication of the ' New Jerusalem,' receive Arius and his followers into communion 32

Chap. XXXIV. — The emperor summons the Synod to himself by letter, in order that the charges against

Athanasius might be carefully examined before him 32

Chap. XXXV. — The Synod not having come to the emperor, the partisans of Eusebius accuse Athanasius
of having threatened to divert the corn supplied to Constantinople from Alexandria; the emperor being

exasperated at this, banishes Athanasius into Gaul 33

Chap. XXX VI. — Of Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra, and Asterius the sophist 33

Chap. XXXVII. — After the banishment of .Athanasius, Arius having been sent for by the emperor, raises a

disturbance against .Mexander, bishop of Constantinople 34

Chap. XXXVIII. —The death of Arius 34

Chap. XXXIX. — The emperor falls sick and dies 35

Chap. XL. — The funeral of the Emperor Constantine 35


BOOK II.

Chap. I. — Introduction, containing the reason for the Author's revision of his first and second books 36

Chap. II. — Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and his party, by again endeavoring to introduce the Arian

heresy, create disturbances in the churches 36

Chap. III. — Athanasius, encouraged by the letter of Constantine the younger, returns to Alexandria 37

Chap. IV. — On the death of Eusebius Pamphilus, Acacius succeeds to the bishopric of Caesarea 37

Chap. V. — .The death of Constantine the younger 37

Chap. VI. — Alexander, bishop of Constantinople, when at the point of death, proposes the election either of

Paul or of Macedonius as his successor 38

Chap. VII. — The Emperor Constantius ejects Paul after his elevation to the bishopric, and sending for Euse-
bius of Nic 5media, invests him with the bishopric of Constantinople 38

Chap. VIII. — Eusebius having convened another Synod at Antioch in Syria, causes a new creed to be promul-
gated 38

Chap. IX. — Of Eusebius of Emisa 39

Chap. X. — The bishops assembled at Antioch, on the refusal of Eusebius of Emisa to accept the bishopric of

Alexandria, ordain Gregory, and change the language of the Nicene Creed 39

Chap. XI. — On the arrival of Gregory at Alexandria, attended by a military escort, Athanasius flees 40

Chap. XII. — The people of Constantinople restore Paul to his see after the death of Eusebius, while the

Arians elect Macedonius 41

Chap. XIII. — Paul is again ejected from the Church by Constantius, in consequence of the slaughter of

Hermogenes, his general 41

Chap. XIV. — The Arians remove Gregory from the see of Alexandria, and appoint George in his place 41

Chap. XV. — Athanasius and Paul going to Rome, and having obtained letters from Julius, bishop of Rome,

reco^'er their respective dioceses 42

Chap. XVI. — The Emperor Constantius, through an order to Philip the Praetorian Prefect, seciues the exile

of Paul, and the installation of Macedonius in his see 42

Chap. XVII. — Athanasius, intimidated by the emperor's threats, returns to Rome again 43

Chap. XV^III. — The emperor of the West requests his brother to send to him three persons who could give
an account of the deposition of Athanasius and Paul. Those who are sent publish another form of

the creed 44

Chap. XIX. — Of the creed sent by the Eastern bishops to those in Italy called the Lengthy Creed 44

Chap. XX. — Of the Council at Sardica 46

Chap. XXI. — Defense of Eusebius Pamphili 47

Chap. XXII. — The Council of Sardica restores Paul and Athanasius to their sees; and on the Eastern

emperor's refusal to admit them, the emperor of the West threatens him with war 49

Chap. XXIII. — Constantius being afraid of his brother's threats, recalls Athanasius by letter, and sends him

to Alexandria 49

Chap. XXIV. — Athanasius, passing through Jerusalem on his return to Alexandria, is received into commun-
ion by Maximus : and a Synod of bishops, convened in that city, confirms the Nicene Creed 52

Chap. XXV. — Of the usurpers Magnentius and Vetranio 53

Chap. XXVI. — After the death of Constans, the Western emperor, Paul and .Athanasius are again ejected

from their sees : the former on his way into exile is slain; but the latter escapes by flight 53


TABLE OF CONTENTS. xxi

PACK

Chap. XXVII. — Macedonius having possessed himself of the see of Constantinople, inflicts much injury on

those who differ from him 54

Chap. XXVIII. — Athanasius' account of the deeds of violence committed at Alexandria by George the Arian 54

Chap. XXIX. — Of the Heresiarch Photinus 56

Chap. XXX. — Creeds published at Sirmium, in presence of the Emperor Constantius 56

Chap. XXXI. — Of Ilosius, bishop of Cordova 58

Chap. XXXII. — Overthrow of the usurper Magnentius 59

Chap. XXXIII. — Of the Jews inhabiting Dio-Csesarea in Palestine 59

Chap. XXXIV. —Of Callus C-Esar 59

Chap. XXXV. — Of Aetius the Syrian, teacher of Eunomius 60

Chap. XXXVI. —Of the Synod at Milan 60

Chap. XXXVII. — Of the Synod at Ariminum, and the creed there published 61

Chap. XXXVIII. — Cruelty of Macedonius, and tumults raised by him 65

Chap. XXXIX. — Of the Synod at Seleucia in Isauria 66

Chap. XL. — Acacius, bishop of Csesarea, dictates a new form of creed in the Synod at Seleucia 68

Chap. XLI. — On the emperor's return from the West, the Acacians assemble at Constantinople, and confirm

the creed of Ariminum, after making some additions to it 71

Chap. XLII. — On the deposition of Macedonius, Eudoxius obtains the bishopric of Constantinople 72

Chap. XLIII. — Of Eustathius, bishop of Sebastia 72

Chap. XLIV. — Of Meletius, bishop of Antioch 73

Chap. XLV. — The heresy of Macedonius 73

Chap. XLVI. — Of the Apollinarians, and their heresy 74

Chap. XLVII. — Successes of Julian ; death of the Emperor Constantius 75


BOOK III.

Chap. I. — Of Julian, his lineage and education; his elevation to the throne; his apostasy to Paganism 76

Chap. II. — Of the sedition excited at Alexandria, and how George was slain 78

Chap. III. — The emperor indignant at the murder of George, rebukes the Alexandrians by letter 79

Chap. IV. — On the death of George, Athanasius returns to Alexandria, and takes possession of his see 80

Chap. V. — Of Lucifer and Eusebius 80

Chap. VI. — Lucifer goes to Antioch and consecrates PauHnus 80

Chap. VII. — By the co-operation of Eusebius and Athanasius a Synod is held at Alexandria, wherein the

Trinity is declared to be consubstantial 81

Chap. VIII. — Quotations from Athanasius' ' Defence of his Flight ' 82

Chap. IX. — After the Synod of Alexandria, Eusebius proceeding to Antioch, finds the Catholics at variance
on account of Paulinus' consecration, and having exerted himself in vain to reconcile them, he departs.

Indignation of Lucifer and origin of a sect called after him 83

Chap. X. — Of Hilary, bishop of Poictiers 84

Chap. XI. — The Emperor Julian exacts money from the Christians 84

Chap. XII. — Of Maris, bishop of Chalcedon. Julian forbids Christians from entering literary pursuits 85

Chap. XIII. — Of the outrages committed by the pagans against the Christians , 85

Chap. XIV. — Flight of Athanasius 86

Chap. XV. — Martyrs at Merum in Phrygia under Julia 86

Chap. XVI. — Of the literary labors of the two Apollinares, and the emperor's prohibition of Christians being

instructed in Greek literature 86

Chap. XVII, — The emperor preparing an expedition against the Persians, arrives at Antioch, and being ridi-
culed by the inhabitants, he retorts on them by a satirical publication entitled ' Misop5gon,' or 'The

Beard-hater ' 88

Chap. XVIII. — The emperor consulting an oracle, the demon gives no response, being awed by the nearness

of Babylas the Martyr 88

Chap. XIX. — Wrath of the emperor, and firmness of Theodore the Confessor 89

Chap. XX. — The Jews instigated by the emperor attempt to rebuild their temple and are frustrated in their

attempt by miraculous interposition 89

Chap. XXI. — The emperor's invasion of Persia, and death 90

Chap. XXII. — Jovian is proclaimed emperor 90

Chap. XXIII. — Refutation of what Libanius the Sophist said concerning Julian 91


xxii ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.

TAGS

Chap. XXIV. — The bishops .flock around Jovian, each attempting to draw him to his own creed 94

Chap. XXV. — The Macedonians and Acacians meet at Antioch, and proclaim their assent to the Nicene

Creed 94

Chap. XXVI. — Death of the Emperor Jovian 95


BOOK IV.

Chap. I. — After Jovian's death, Valentinian is proclaimed emperor, and takes his brother Valens as colleague

in the empire; Valentinian hokls the orthodox faith, but Valens is an Arian 96

Chap. II. — Valentinian goes into the West; Valens remains at Constantinople and grants the request of the

Macedonians to hold a Synod, but persecutes the adherents of the homoousion 96

Chap. III. — While Valens persecutes the orthodox Christians in the East, a usurper arises at Constantinople
named Procopius; and at the same time an earthijuake and inundation take place and injure several

cities 97

Chap. IV. — The Macedonians hoKl a Synod at Lampsacus, during a period of both secular and ecclesiastical
agitation; and after conlirming the Antiochian Creed and anathematizing that promulgated at Ariminum,

they again ratify the deposition of Acacius and Eudoxius 97

Chap. V. — Engagement between Valens and Procopius near Nacolia in Phrygia; after which the usurper is

betrayed by his chief officers, and with them put to death 97

Chap. VI. — After the death of Procopius, Valens constrains those who composed the Synod, and all Chris-
tians, to profess Arianism 97

Chap. VII. — Eunomius supersedes Eleusius, the Macedonian, in the see of Cyzicus. His origin, and imi-
tation of Aetius, whose amanuensis he had been 98

Chap. VIII. — Of the oracle found inscribed on a stone, when the walls of Chalcedon were demolished by

order of the emperor Valens 99

Chap. IX. — Valens persecutes the Novatian=, because they accepted the orthodox faith 99

Chap. X. — Birth of Valentinian the Younger 100

Chap. >wI. — Hail of extraordinary size, and earthquakes in Bithynia and the Hellespont 100

Chap. XII. — The Macedonians, pressed by the emperor's violence toward them, send a deputation to Liberius,

bishop of Rome, and subscribe the Nicene Creed 100

Chap. XIII. — Eunomius separates from Eudoxius; a disturbance is raised at Alexandria by Eudoxius, and
Athanasius flees into voluntary exile again, but in consequence of the clamors of the people, the emperor

recalls and re-establishes him in his see 103

Chap. XIV. — The Arians ordain Hemophilus after the death of Eudoxius at Constantinople ; but the orthodox

party constitute Evagrius his successor 103

Chap. XV^ — The emperor banishes Evagrius and Eustathius. The Arians persecute the orthodox 103

Chap. XVI. — Certain presbyters burnt in a ship by order of Valens. Famine in Phrygia 104

Chap. XVII. — The Emperor Valens, while at .\ntioch, again persecutes the adherents of the homoousion. . . 104

Chap. XVIII. — Events at Edessa : constancy of the devout citizens, and courage of a pious woman 104

Chap. XIX. — Slaughter of many persons by Valens on account of their names, in consecjuence of a heathen

prediction 105

Chap. XX. — Death of Athanasius, and elevation of Peter to his see 105

Chap. XXI. — The Arians are allowed by the emperor to imprison Peter and to set Lucius over the see of

Alexandria • 105

Chap. XXII. — .Silence of Sabinus on the misdeeds of the Arians. Flight of Peter to Rome. Massacre of

the Solitaries at the instigation of the Arians 105

Chap. XXIII. — The deeds of some holy persons who devoted themselves to a solitary life 106

Chap. XXIV. — Assault upon the monks, and banishment of their superiors, who exhibit miraculous power. . 109

Chai>. XXV. — Of Didymus, the blind man no

Chap. XXVT. — Of Basil of Casarea, and Cregory of Nazianzus no

C'hap. XXVII. — Of Gregory Thaumaturgus (the wonder-worker) i u

Chap. XXVIII. — Of Novatus and his followers. The Novatians of Phrygia alter the time of keeping Easter,

following Jewish usage "2

Chap. XXIX. — Damasus ordained bishop of Rome. Sedition and loss of life caused by the rivalry of Ursinus \\^
Chap. XXX. — Dissension about a successor to Auxentius, bishop of Milan. Ambrose, governor of the prov-
ince, going to appease the tumult, is by general consent and with the approval of the Emperor Valentin-
ian, elected to the bishopric of the church "3


TABLE OF CONTENTS. xxiii


PACB

Chap. XXXI. — Death of Valentinian "4

Chap. XXXII. — The Emperor Valcns, appeased by the oration of Themistus, the philosopher, abates his

persecution of the Christians .... 1 1 5

Chap. XXXIII. —The Goths, under the reign of Valens, embrace Christianity 1 15

Chap. XXXIV. — Admission of the fugitive Goths into the Roman territories, which caused the emperor's over-
throw, and eventually the ruin of the Roman empire 115

Chap. XXXV. — Abatement of persecution against the Christians because of the war with the Goths 116

Chap. XXXVI. — The Saracens under Mavia, their queen, embrace Christianity; and Moses, a pious monk,

is consecrated their bishop 1 16

Chap. XXXVII. — After the departure of Valens from Antioch, the Alexandrians expel Lucius and restore

Peter, who had come with letters from Damasus, bishop of Rome 1 17

Chap. XXXVIII. — The Emperor Valens is ridiculed by the people on account of the Goths; undertakes an

expedition against them and is slain in an engagement near Adrianople. .'. 117


BOOK V.

Introduction 118

Chap. I. — After the death of Valens, the Goths again attack Constantinople, and are repulsed by the citizens,

aided by some Saracen auxiliaries 118

Chap. II. — The Emperor Gratian recalls the orthodox bishops, and expels the heretics from the churches.

He takes Theodosius as his colleague in the empire 118

Chap. III. — The principal bishops who flourished at that time 119

Chap. IV. — The Macedonians who had subscribed the ' homoousian ' doctrine, return to their former error 119

Chap. V. — Events at Antioch in connection with Paulinus and Meletius 119

Chap. VI. — Gregory of Nazianzus is transferred to the see of Constantinople. The Emperor Theodosius, falling

sick at Thessalonica, after his victory over the barbarians, is there baptized by Ascholius, the bishop. . . . I20
Chap. VII. — Gregory finding some dissatisfaction about his appointment, abdicates the episcopate of Con-
stantinople. The emperor orders Demophilus, the Arian bishop, either to assent to the ' homoousion '

or leave the city ; he chooses the latter .... 1 20

Chap. VIII. — A Synod, consisting of one hundred and fifty bishops, meets at Constantinople. The decrees

passed. Ordination of Nectarius 121

Chap. IX. — The body of Paul, bishop of Constantinople, is honorably transferred from his place of exile.

Death of Meletius I22

Chap. X. — The emperor orders a convention composed of all the various sects. Arcadius is proclaimed Augus-
tus. The Novatians permitted to hold their assemblies in the city of Constantinople, other heretics driven out. 122
Chap. XI. — The Emperor Gratian is slain by the treachery of the usurper Maximus. From fear of him

Justina ceases persecuting Ambrose 124

Chap. XII. — While the Emperor Theodosius is engaged in military preparations against Maximus, his son

Honorius is born. He then proceeds to Milan in order to encounter the usurper 124

Chap. XIII. — The Arians excite a tumult at Constantinople 125

Chap. XIV. — Overthrow and death of the usurper Maximus 125

Chap. XV. — Of Flavian, bishop of Antioch 125

Chap. XVI. — Demolition of the idolatrous temples at Alexandria and the consequent conflict between the

pagans and Christians 1 26

Chap. XVII. — Of the hieroglyphics found in the Temple of Serapis 126

Chap. XVIII. — Reformation of abuses at Rome by the emperor Theodosius 127

Chap. XIX. — Of the office of Penitentiary Presbyters and its abolition 128

Chap. XX. — Divisions among the Arians and other heretics 128

Chap. XXI. — Peculiar schism among the Novatians 129

Chap. XXII. — The Author's views respecting the celebration of Easter, Baptism, Fasting, Marriage, the

Eucharist, and other ecclesiastical rites 130

Chap. XXIII. — Further dissensions among the Arians at Constantinople. The Psathyrians 134

Chap. XXIV. — The Eunomians divide into several factions 134

Chap. XXV. — The usurper Eugenius compasses the death of Valentinian the younger. Theodosius obtains

a victory over him 1 35

Chap. XXVI. — Illness and death of the Emperor Theodosius the elder 136


xxiv ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


BOOK VI.

PAG 8

Introduction 137

Chap. I. — On the death of Theodosius, his two sons divide the empire. Rufinus is slain at the feet of

Arcadius 137

Chap. II. — Death of Nectarius, and ordination of John 138

Chap. III. — Birth and education of John, bishop of Constantinople 138

Chap. IV. — Of Serapion, the deacon, on whose account John becomes odious to his clergy 139

Chap. V. — John draws down upon himself the displeasure of many persons of rank and power. Of the

eunuch Eutropius 140

Chap. VI. — Galnas the Goth attempts to usurp the sovereign power; after filling Constantinople with dis-
order, he is slain 140

Chap. VII. — Dissension between Theophilus, bishop of .\lexandria, and the Monks of the desert. Condem-
nation of Origen's books 142

Chap. VIII. — Two Arians and the supporters of the homoousion hold nocturnal assemblies and sing
antiphonal hymns, a species of composition ascribed to Ignatius, surnamed 'Theophorus.' Conflict

between the two parties 144

Chap. IX. — Dispute between Theophilus and Peter, leading to an attempt on the part of the former to

depose John, bishop of Constantinople 144

Chap. X. — Epiphanius, bishop of Cyprus, convenes a Synod to condemn the books of Origen 145

Chap. XI. — Of Severian and Antiochus : their disagreement from John 145

Chap. XII. — Epiphanius, in order to gratify Theophilus, performs ordinations at Constantinople, without

John's permission 147

Chap. XIII. — The author's defence of Origen 147

Chap. XIV. — Epiphanius is asked to meet John; on refusing, he is admonished concerning his anti-ca-
nonical proceedings; alarmed at this he leaves Constantinople 148

Chap. XV. — John is expelled from his church by a Synod held at Chalcedon on account of his dispraise of

women 148

Chap. X\T. — Sedition on account of John Chrysostom's banishment. He is recalled 149

Chap. X\TI. — Conflict between the Constantinopolitans and Alexandrians on account of Heraclides. Flight

of Theophilus and the bishops of his party 149

Chap. XVIII. — Of Eudoxia's silver statue. On account of it, John is exiled a second time 150

Chap. XIX. — Ordination of .\rsacius as John's successor. Indisposition of Cyrinus, bishop of Chalcedon. . . 151

Chap. XX. — Death of Arsacius, and ordination of Atticus 151

Chap. XXI. — John dies in exile 151

Chap. XXII. — Of Sisinnius, bishop of the Novatians. His readiness at repartee 152

Chap. XXIII. — Death of the Emperor Arcadius 153


BOOK VII.

Chap. I. — Anthemlus, the Pnetorian Prefect, administers the government of the East, in behalf of young

Theodosius 1 54

CitAP. II. — Character and conduct of Atticus, bishop of Constantinople 154

Chap. III. — Of Theodosius and Agapetus, bishops of Synada 154

Chap. IV. — A paralytic Jew healed by Atticus in baptism 155

Chap. V. — The Presbyter Sabbatius, formerly a Jew, separates from the Novatians 155

Chap. VI. — The leaders of Arianism at this time 156

Chap. VII. — Cyril succcerls Theojihilus, bishop of Alexandria 156

Chap. VIII. — Propagation of Christianity among the Persians by Maruthas, bishop of Mesopotamia 156

Chap. IX. — The bishops of .^ntioch and Rome at this time 157

Chap. X. — Rome taken and sacked by Alaric 157

Chap. XL— The bishops of Rome 158

Chap. XII. — Of Chrysanthus, bishop of the Novatians, at Constantinople 158

Chap. XIII. — Conflict between the Christians and Jews at Alexandria; and breach between the bishop

Cyril and the prefect Orestes 159

Chap. XIV. — The monks of Nitria come down and raise a sedition against the prefect of Alexandria 160


TABLE OF CONTENTS. xxv

PACE

Chap. XV. — Of Hypatia, the female philosopher 1 60

Chap. XVI. — The Jews commit another outrage upon the Christians and are punished 161

Chap. XVII. — Miracle performed by Paul, bishop of the Novatians, at the baptism of a Jewish impostor .... 161
Chap. XVIII. — Renewal of hostilities between the Romans and Persians after the death of Isdigerdes, king

of the Persians 161

Chap. XIX. — Of Palladius, the courier 163

Chap. XX. — A second overthrow of the Persians by the Romans 163

Chap. XXI. — Kind treatment of the Persian captives by Acacius, bishop of Amida 164

Chap. XXII. — Virtues of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger 164

Chap. XXIII. — After the death of the Emperor Honorius, John usurps the sovereignty at Rome. He is

destroyed through the prayers of Theodosius the Younger 165

Chap. XXIV. — Valentinian, a son of Constantius and Placidia, aunt of Theodosius, is proclaimed emperor. . 166
Chap. XXV. — Christian benevolence of Atticus, bishop of Constantinople. He registers John's name in the

diptychs. His foreknowledge of his own death 166

Chap. XXVI. — Sisinnius is chosen to succeed Atticus 168

Chap. XXVII. — Voluminous productions of Philip, a presbyter born at Side • 168

Chap. XXVIII. — Proclus ordained bishop of Cyzicus by Sisinnius, but rejected by the people 168

Chap. XXIX. — Nestorius of Antioch promoted to the see of Constantinople. His persecution of the heretics. 169

Chap. XXX. — The Burgundians embrace Christianity under Theodosius the Younger 169

Chap. XXXI. — Nestorius harasses the Macedonians 170

Chap. XXXII. — Of the presbyter Anastasius, by whom the faith of Nestorius was perverted 170

Chap. XXXIII. — Desecration of the altar of the Great Church by runaway slaves 171

Chap. XXXIV. — Synod at Ephesus against Nestorius. His deposition 172

Chap. XXXV. — Maximian elected to the episcopate of Constantinople, though some wished Proclus to take

that place 172

Chap. XXXVI. — The author's opinion of the validity of translations from one see to another 173

Chap. XXXVII. — Miracle performed by Silvanus, bishop of Troas, formerly of Philippopolis 173

Chap. XXXVIII. — Many of the Jews in Crete embrace the Christian faith 174

Chap. XXXIX. — Preservation of the church of the Novatians from fire 175

Chap. XL. — Proclus succeeds Maximian bishop of Constantinople 175

Chap. XLI. — Excellent qualities of Proclus 175

Chap. XLII. — Panegyric of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger 176

Chap. XLIII. — Calamities of the barbarians who had been the usurper John's allies 1 76

Chap. XLIV. — Marriage of the Emperor Valentinian with Eudoxia, the daughter of Theodosius. 177

Chap. XLV. — The body of John Chrysostom transferred to Constantinople and placed in the Church of the

Apostles by the emperor, at the instigation of Proclus 177

Chap. XLVI. — Death of Paul, bishop of the Novatians, and election of Marcian as his successor 177

Chap. XLVII. — The Empress Eudocia goes to Jerusalem, sent there by the Emperor Theodosius 178

Chap. XLVIII. — Thalassius is ordained bishop of Csesarea in Cappadocia 178


THE


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY,


BY


SOCRATES SCHOLASTICUS.


BOOK I.


CHAPTER L

Int7-oduction to the Work.

EuSEBius, surnamed Pamphilus/ writing the
History of the Church ^ in ten books, closed it
with that period of the emperor Constantine,
when the persecution which Diocletian had be-
gun against the Christians came to an end.
Also in writing the life of Constantine, this same
author has but slightly treated of matters regard-
ing Arius, being more intent on the rhetorical
finish of his composition and the praises of the
emperor, than on an accurate statement of facts.
Now, as we propose to write the details of what
has taken place in the churches since his time
to our own day, we begin with the narration of the
particulars which he has left out, and we shall
not be solicitous to display a parade of words,
but to lay before the reader what we have been
able to collect from documents, and what we
have heard from those who were familiar with
the facts as they told them. And since it has
an important bearing on the matter in hand, it
will be proper to enter into a brief account of
Constantine's conversion to Christianity, making
a beginning with this event.


CHAPTER H.

By what Means the Emperor Constantine be-
came a Christian.

When Diocletian and Maximian,^ surnamed
Herculius, had by mutual consent laid aside

1 Eusebius seems to have adopted this name as a token of friend-
ship and respect for Pamphilns, bishop of Caesarea. See McGift'crt,
Prolegomena in Vol. I., Second Series of Post-Nicene Fathers.

' Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History ends with the death of Licin-
ius in 323. His LiYe of Constatttinc is in a sense a continuation of
the History, and yet as it is very well characterized by Socrates, it is
a eulogy, and therefore its style and selection of facts are affected by
its purpose, rendering it too inadequate as a continuation of the Ec-
.clesiastical History; hence Socrates' constraint to review some of
the events which naturally fall in Eusebius' period.

* ' Socrates is here in error; for Maximianus Herculius, who was


the imperial dignity, and retired into private
life, Maximian, surnamed Galerius, who had
been a sharer with them in the government,
came into Italy and appointed two Caesars,
Maximin in the eastern division of the empire,
and Severus in the Italian. In Britain, however,
Constantine was proclaimed emperor, instead
of his father Constantius, who died in the first
year of the two hundred and seventy-first^
Olympiad, on the 25th of July. And at Rome
Maxentius, the son of Maximian Herculius,
was raised by the praetorian soldiers to be
a tyrant rather than an emperor. In this
state of things Herculius, impelled by a desire
to regain the sovereignty, attempted to destroy
his son Maxentius ; but this he was prevented
by the soldiery from effecting, and he soon
afterwards died at Tarsus in Cilicia. At the
same time Severus Csesar being sent to Rome
by Galerius Maximian, in order to seize Maxen-
tius, was slain, his own soldiers having betrayed
him. At length Galerius Maximian, who had
exercised the chief authority,^ also died, having
previously appointed as his successor, his old
friend and companion in arms, Licinius, a Da-
cian by birth. Meanwhile Maxentius sorely
oppressed the Roman people, treating them as
a tyrant rather than as a king, shamelessly violat-
ing the wives of the nobles, putting many inno-
cent persons to death, and perpetrating other
similar atrocities. The emperor Constantine
being informed of this, exerted himself to free
the Romans from the slavery under him (i.e.
Maxentius), and began immediately to con-
sider by what means he might overthrow the
tyrant. Now while his mind was occupied with

otherwise called Maximian the Elder, was, by Constantine's com-
mand, slain in Gallia in 310 a.d. But Maximius Caesar, two years
after, being conquered by Licinius, died at Tarsus.' (Valesius.)
On the confusion of Maximian and Maximin, sec Introd. HI.

2 305 or 306 A.D.

3 Troii'Ta Trepieiroir, not to be taken literally, inasmuch as there
were two other Augusti — Constantine and Maxentius; and hence
though senior Augustus, he was not sole ruler. On the appoint-
ment of the Augusti under Diocletian, and meaning of the title, see
Gibbon, Decline and Fall, chap. xiii.


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 2.


this great subject, he debated as to what divin-
ity's aid he should invoke in the conduct of the
war. He began to realize that Diocletian's
party had not profited at all by the pagan dei-
ties, whom they had sought to propitiate ; but
that his own father Constantius, who had re-
nounced the various religions of the Greeks,
had passed through life far more prosperously.
In this state of uncertainty, as he was marching
at the head of his troops, a preternatural vision,
which transcends all description, appeared to
him. In fact, about that part of the day when
the sun after passing the meridian begins to
decline towards the west, he saw a pillar of
light in the heavens, in the form of a cross, on
which were inscribeil these words, By this con-
quer.* The appearance of this sign struck the
emperor with amazement, and scarcely believing
his own eyes, he asked those around him if they
beheld the same spectacle ; and as they unani-
mously declared that they did, the emperor's
mind was strengthened by this divine and mar-
velous apparition. On the following night in
his slumbers he saw Christ, who directed him
to prepare a standard according to the pattern
of that which had been seen ; and to use it
against his enemies as an assured trophy of vic-
tory. In obedience to this divine oracle, he
caused a standard in the form of a cross to be
prepared, which is preserved in the palace even
to the present time : and proceeding in his
measures with greater earnestness, he attacked
the enemy and vanquished him before the gates
of Rome, near the Mulvian bridge, Maxentius
himself being drowned in the river. This
victory was achieved in the seventh year of
the conqueror's reign.^ After this, while Li-
cinius, who shared the government with him,
and was his brother-in-law, having married his
sister Constantia, was residing in the Kast, the
emperor Constantine, in view of the great bless-
ing he had received, offered grateful thanksgiv-
ings to God as his benefactor ; these consisted
in his relieving the Christians from persecution,
recalling those who were in exile, liberating such
as were imprisoned, and causing the confiscated
property of the proscribed to be restored to
them ; he moreover rebuilt the churches, and
performed all these things with the greatest
ardor. About this time Diocletian, who had
abdicated the imperial authority, died at Salona
in Dalmatia."


* '¥,v TovT<i> viKa. For an extensive and satisfactory Ireafmcnt
of this famous passage in the life of Consianlinc, see Richardson,
ProUgovicua to the Life of Const., Vol. 1., Second Series, Post-
Niccne Fathers.

^ 312 A.D.

• Cf. an account of these events in Sozomcn, I. 3. See also on
the persecution instituted by Diocletian Ncandcr, Hist. 0/ the
Christ. Ch. Vol. I. pp. 143-156; Schaff, Hist, of the Christ. Ch.
Vol. I. pp. 174-177: Euseb. H. E., Books VII I. -X. Lactantius,
de Mortibus persec. c. 7 seq. Diocletian abdicated in 305 a.d.


CHAPTER III.

While Constantine favors the Christians, Lici-
niits, his Co/teagite, persecutes them.

Now Constantine, the emperor, having thus em-
braced Christianity, conducted himself as a Chris-
tian of his profession, rebuilding the churches,
and enriching them with splendid offerings : he
also either closed or destroyed the temples of
the pagans,^ and exposed the images which were
in them to popular contempt. But his colleague
Licinius, hokling his pagan tenets, hated Chris-
tians ; and although from fear of the emperor
Constantine he avoided exciting open persecu-
tion, yet he managed to plot against them cov-
ertly, and at length proceeded to harass them
without disguise. This persecution, however,
was local, extending only to those districts where
Licinius himself was : but as these and other
public outrages did not long remain concealed
from Constantine, finding out that the latter was
indignant at his conduct, Licinius had recourse
to an apology. Having thus propitiated him,
he entered into a feigned league of friendship,
pledging himself by many oaths not to act again
tyrannically. But no sooner did he pledge him-
self than he committed perjury ; for he neither
changed his tyrannical mood nor ceased perse-
cuting Christians. Indeed, he even prohibited
the bishops by law from visiting the unconverted
pagans, lest it should be made a pretext for
proselyting them to the Christian faith. And
the persecution was thus at the same time well
known and secret. It was concealed in name
but manifest in fact ; for those who were exposed
to his persecution suffered most severely both
in their persons and property.

CHAPTER IV.

JVar arises betiueen Constatifine and Licinius
071 Account of the Christians.

By this course he drew upon himself the
emperor Constantine's heaviest displeasure ; and
they became enemies, the pretended treaty of
friendship between them having been violated.
Not long aftersvards they took up arms against
each other as declared enemies. And after
several engagements both by sea and land,
Licinius was at last utterly defeated near Chry-
sopolis in Bithynia, a ])ort of the Chalcedonians,
and surrendered himself to Constantine. Ac-
cordingly he having taken him alive, treated
him with the utmost humanity, and would by no
means put him to death, but ordered him to

' ' Y.\\r\vu>v : the word is used without the sense of nationality.
So also in the New Testament often: Mark vii. 26; G.tI. ii. 3 and
iii. 28, where the Syriac (Peschitto) version renders, more according
to sense than according to the letter, ' an Aramxan.'


I. 6.]


RISE OF THE ARIAN HERESY.


take up his abode and live in tranquillity at
Thessalonica. He having, however, remained
(juiet a short time, managed afterwards to col-
lect some barbarian mercenaries and made an
effort to repair his late disaster by a fresh appeal
to arms. The emperor being made acquainted
with his proceedings, directed that he should be
slain, which was carried into effect. Constan-
tine thus became ])ossessed of the sole dominion,
and was accordingly proclaimed sovereign Auto-
crat,' and again sought to promote the welfare
of Christians. This he did in a variety of ways,
and Christianity enjoyed unbroken peace by
reason of his efforts. But an internal dissension
soon succeeded this state of repose, the nature
and origin of which I shall now endeavor to
describe.

CHAPTER V.

The Dispute o/Arius with Alexander, his Bishop.

After Peter, bishop of Alexandria, had suf-
fered martyrdom under Diocletian, Achillas was
installed in the episcopal office, whom Alexander
succeeded, during the period of peace above
referred to. He, in the fearless exercise of his
functions for the instruction and government of
the Church, attempted one day in the presence
of the presbytery and the rest of his clergy, to
explain, with perhaps too philosophical minute-
ness, that great theological mystery — the Unity
of the Holy Trinity. A certain one of the pres-
byters under his jurisdiction, whose name was
Arius, possessed of no inconsiderable logical
acumen, imagining that the bishop was subtly
teaching the same view of this subject as Sabel-
lius the Libyan,' from love of controversy took
the opposite opinion to that of the Libyan, and
as he thought vigorously responded to what was
said by the bishop. ' If,' said he, ' the Father
begat the Son, he that was begotten had a be-
ginning of existence : and from this it is evident,
that there was a time when the Son was not. It
therefore necessarily follows, that he had his sub-
sistence'- from nothing.'

• After a victory the soldiers greeted their prince with acclama-
tions of ' Emperor! ' 'Augustus!' So also did the citizens on his
triumphal entry into the ciiy. So it appears Constantine was for-
mally greeted on assuming the sole control of affairs.

1 Though Sabellius was the originator of one of the earliest and
most plausible attempts at explanation of the mystery of the Trinity
(for which see life of Sabellius in Smith and Wace, Diet, of Clifis-
tian Biog., and Hodge, System. Theol. Vol. 1. p. 452, 459), noth-
ing is known of him, not even why he is called a Libyan here (also
by other ancient writers, e.g. Philastrius, de Uteres. 26, and Aste-
rius, quoted by Phot. BiMiotk. Cod. 27). Some say that he was a
native and resident of Libya, others that he was an ecclesiastic
appointed to some position there; nnr is it known whether the Libya
meant is the Libyan Pentapolis or the Pentapolitan Ptolemais.

2 i/n-oo-racru'. Through the Arian controversy this word is used
in its metaphysical sense of ' real nature of a thing as underlying
and supporting its outward form and properties ' ; hence it is equiv-
alent to the Latin substantia, Eng. essence and Greek oOo-ia. Cf.
below IIL 7. Later it was applied to the ' special or characteristic
nature of a thing,' and so became the very opposite of oiiaia (the
general nature); hence equivalent io person.


CHAPTER VI.

Division begins in the Church from this Contro-
versy ; and Alexander Bishop of Alexandria
excommunicates Arius and his Adherents.

Having drawn this inference from his novel
train of reasoning, he excited many to a consid-
eration of the question ; and thus from a little
spark a large fire was kindled : for the evil which
began in the Church at Alexandria, ran through-
out all Egypt, Libya, and the upper Thebes, and
at length diffused itself over the rest of the prov-
inces and cities. Many others also adopted the
opinion of Arius ; but Eusebius in particular was
a zealous defender of it : not he of Ccesarea, but
the one who had before been bishop of the
church at Berybus, and was then somehow in
possession of the bishopric of Nicomedia in
Bithvnia. When Alexander became conscious
of these things, both from his own observation
and from report, being exasperated to the high-
est degree, he convened a council of many pre-
lates ; and excommunicated Arius and the abet-
tors of his heresy ; at the same time he wrote as
follows to the bishops constituted in the several
cities : —

The Epistle of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria.

To our beloved and most honored fellow-
Ministers of the Catholic Church everywhere,
Alexander sends greeting in the Lord.

Inasmuch as the Catholic Church is one
body, and we are commanded in the holy Scrip-
tures to maintain ' the bond of unity and peace,' ^
it becomes us to write, and mutually acquaint
one another with the condition of things among
each of us, in order that ' if one member suffers
or rejoices, we may either sympathize with each
other, or rejoice together.'^ Know therefore
that there have recently arisen in our diocese
lawless and anti-christian men, teaching apostasy
such as one may justly consider and denominate
the forerunner of Antichrist. I wished indeed
to consign this disorder to silence, that if possi-
ble the evil might be confined to the apostates
alone, and not go forth into other districts and
contaminate the ears of some of the simple.
But since Eusebius, now in Nicomedia, thinks
that the affairs of the Church are under his con-
trol because, forsooth, he deserted his charge at
Berytus and assumed authority over the church at
Nicomedia with impunity, and has put himself at
the head of these apostates, daring even to send
commendatory letters in all directions concern
ing them, if by any means he might inveigle
some of the ignorant into this most impious and
anti-christian heresy, I felt imperatively called


^ Eph. iv. 3.


' I Cor. xii. 26.


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.6.


on to be silent no longer, knowing what is
written in the law, but to inform you of all c f
these things, that ye might understand both wF o
the apostates are, and also the contemptil ie
character of their heresy, and pay no attention to
anything that P^usebius should write to you. For
now wishing to renew his former malev.lence,
which seemed to have been buried :n oblivion
by time, he affects to write in their behalf;
while the fact itself plainly shows that he does
this for the promotion of his own purposes.
These then are those who have become apos-
tates : Arius, Achillas, Aithales, and Carpones,
another Arius, Sarrnates, EuzoTus, Lucius, Julian,
Menas, Helladius, and Gaius ; with these also
must be reckoned Secundus and Theonas, who
once were called bishops. The dogmas they
have invented and assert, contrary to the Scrip-
tures, are these : That Ciod was not always the
Father, but that there was a period when he
was not the Father ; that the Word of God was
not from eternity, but was made out of nothing ;•'
for that the ever-existing God {' the I AM ' —
the eternal One) made him who did not pre-
viously exist, out of nothing ; wherefore there
was a time when he did not exist, inasmuch as
the Son is a creature and a work. That he is
neither like the Father as it regards his essence,
nor is by nature either the Father's true Word,
or true Wisdom, but indeed one of his works
and creatures, being erroneously called Word
and Wisdom, since he was himself made by
God's own Word and the Wisdom which is in
God, whereby God both made all things and
him also. Wherefore he is as to his nature mu-
table and susceptible of change, as all other
rational creatures are : hence the Word is alien
to and other than the essence of God ; and the
Father is inexi)licable by the Son, and invisible
to him, for neither does the Word perfectly and
accurately know the Father, neither can he dis-
tinctly see him. The Son knows not the nature
of his own essence : for he was made on our ac-
count, in order that God might create us by him,
as by an instrument ; nor would he ever have
existed, unless (iod had wished to create us.

Some one accordingly asked them whether
the Word of God could be changed, as the devil
has been ? and they feared not to say, ' Yes, he
could ; for being begotten, he is susceptible of
change.' We then, with the bishops of Fgypt
and Libya, being assembled together to the
number of nearly a hundred, have anathematized
Arius for his shameless avowal of these heresies,
together with all such as have countenanced
them. Yet the partisans of Eusebius have re-
ceived them ; endeavoring to blend falsehood
with truth, and that which is impious with what

' (f ou<c ovrojv yiyovty, lit. ' came into existence from nothing.'


is sacred. But they shall not prevail, for the
truth must triumph ; and ' light has no fellow-
ship with darkness, nor has Christ any con-
cord with Belial.'^ Who ever heard such blas-
phemies? or what man of any piety is there now
hearing them that is not horror-struck, and stops
his ears, lest the filth of these expressions should
pollute his sense of hearing? Who that hears
John saying, ' In the beginning was the Word,' ^
does not condemn those that say, ' There was a
period when the Word was not ' ? or who, hear-
ing in the Gospel of ' the only-begotten Son,' and
that ' all things were made by him,' will not ab-
hor those that pronounce the Son to be one of
the things made? How can he be one of the
things which were made by himself? Or how
can he be the only-begotten, if he is reckoned
among created things? And how could he
have had his existence from nonentities, since
the Father has said, ' My heart has indited a
good matter ' ; ^ and ' I begat thee out of my
bosom before the dawn '?^ Or how is he unlike
the Father's essence, who is ' his perfect image,' *
and ' the brightness of his glory ' ^ and says :
' He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father ' ?
Again, how if the Son is the Word and Wisdom
of God, was there a period when he did not
exist ? for that is equivalent to their saying that
God was once destitute both of Word and Wis-
dom. How can he be mutable and susceptible
of change, who says of himself, ' I am in the
Father, and the Father in me ' ; '° and ' I and
the Father are one ' ; " and again by the
Prophet,'- ' Behold me because I am, and have
not changed ' ? But if any one may also apply
the expression to the Father himself, yet would
it now be even more fitly said of the Word ; be-
cause he was not changed by having become
man, but as the Apostle says,''' 'Jesus Christ, the
same yesterday, to-day, and forever.' But what
could persuade them to say that he was made
on our account, when Paul has expressly de-
clared '^ that ' all things are for him, and by
him ' ? One need not wonder indeed at their
blasphemous assertion that the Son does not
perfectly know the Father ; for having once
determined to fight against Christ, they reject
even the words of the Lord himself, when he
says,"^ ' As the Father knows me, even so know
I the Father.' If therefore the Father but par-
tially knows the Son, it is manifest that the Son
also knows the Father but in part. But if it
would be improper to affirm this, and it be
admitted that the Father perfectly knows the

* 2 Cor. vi. 14. s John i. 1-3, 18.

' Ps. xliv. I, according to the LXX.

' ' ¥M<T(t>6pov, the morning-star ; taken from Ps. cix. 3. Cf. the
LXX, quoted from Ps. Ixxii.

» Col. i. 15. >5 Mai. iii. 6.

» Heb. i. 3. " Heb. xiii. 8.

*" John xiv. 10. '* Heb. ii. 10.

" John x. 30. w John x. 15.


1.6.]


ALEXANDER'S LETTER ON THE HERESY OF ARIUS.


Son, it is evident that as the Father knows his
own Word, so also does the Word know his own
Father, whose Word he is. And we, by stating
these things, and unfolding the divine Scriptures,
have often confuted them : but again as chame-
leons they were changed, striving to apply to
themselves that which is written, * When the
ungodly has reached the depths of iniquity, he
becomes contemptuous.' '" Many heresies have
arisen before these, which exceeding all bounds
in daring, have lapsed into complete infatuation :
but these persons, by attempting in all their
discourses to subvert the Divinity of the Word,
as having made a nearer approach to Antichrist,
have comparatively lessened the odium of for-
mer ones. Wherefore they have been publicly
repudiated by the Church, and anathematized.
We are indeed grieved on account of the perdi-
tion of these persons, and especially so because,
after having been previously instructed in the
doctrines of the Church, they have now aposta-
tized from them. Nevertheless we are not
greatly surprised at this, for Hymenaeus and
Philetus '^ fell in like manner ; and before them
Judas, who had been a follower of the Saviour,
but afterwards deserted him and became his
betrayer. Nor were we without forewarning
respecting these very persons : for the Lord
himself said : ' Take heed that no man deceive
you : for many shall come in my name, saying,
I am Christ : and shall deceive many ' ; ^^ and
' the time is at hand ; Go ye not therefore after
them.' ^^ And Paul, having learned these things
from the Saviour, wrote, 'That in the latter
times some should apostatize from the faith,
giving heed to deceiving spirits, and doctrines
of devils,' ^ who pervert the truth. Seeing then
that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ has him-
self enjoined this, and has also by the apostle
given us intimation respecting such men, we
having ourselves heard their impiety, have in
consequence anathematized them, as we before
said, and declared them to be alienated from
the Catholic Church and faith. Moreover we
have intimated this to your piety, beloved and
most honored fellow-ministers, in order that ye
might neither receive any of them, if they should
presume to come to you, nor be induced to put
confidence in Eusebius, or any other who may
write to you about them. For it is incumbent
on us who are Christians, to turn away from all
those who speak or entertain a thought against
Christ, as from those who are resisting God, and
are destroyers of the souls of men : neither does
it become us even ' to salute such men,' -^ as the
blessed John has prohibited, ' lest we should at


^" Prov. xviii. 3, according to the LXX.

" 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18.

^' Matt. xxiv. 4. -" I Tim. iv. i ; Tit. i. 14.

^^ Luke xxi. 8, -'2 John 10, 11.


any time be made partakers of their sins.'
Greet the brethren which are with you ; those
who are with me salute you.

Upon Alexander's thus addressing the bishops
in every city, the evil only became worse, inas-
much as those to whom he made this communi-
cation were thereby excited to contention. And
some indeed fully concurred in and subscribed
to the sentiments expressed in this letter, while
others did the reverse. But Eusebius, bishop
of Nicomedia, was beyond all others moved to
controversy, inasmuch as Alexander in his letter
had made a personal and censorious allusion to
him. Now at this juncture Eusebius possessed
great influence, because the emperor resided at
Nicomedia. For in fact Diocletian had a short
time previously built a palace there. On this
account therefore many of the bishops paid their
court to Eusebius. And he repeatedly wTote
both to Alexander, that he might set aside the
discussion which had been excited, and again
receive Arius and his adherents into commun-
ion ; and also to the bishops in each city, that
they might not concur in the proceedings of
Alexander. By these means confusion every-
where prevailed : for one saw not only the prel-
ates of the churches engaged in disputing, but
the people also divided, some siding with one
party, and some with the other. To so disgrace-
ful an extent was this affair carried, that Chris-
tianity became a subject of popular ridicule,
even in the very theatres. Those who were at
Alexandria sharply disputed about the highest
points of doctrine, and sent deputations to the
bishops of the several dioceses ; while those who
were of the opposite faction created a similar
disturbance.

With the Arians the Melitians mingled them-
selves, who a little while before had been separa-
ted from the Church : but who these [Melitians]
are must now be stated.

By Peter, bishop of Alexandria, who in the
reign of Diocletian suffered martyrdom, a cer-
tain Melitius, bishop of one of the cities in
Egypt, in consequence of many other charges,
and more especially because during the perse-
cution he had denied the faith and sacrificed,
was deposed. This person, being stripped of
his dignity, and having nevertheless many fol-
lowers, became the leader of the heresy of those
who are to this day called from him Melitians
throughout Egypt. And as he had no rational
excuse for his separation from the Church, he
pretended that he had simply been wronged
and loaded Peter with calumnious reproaches.
Now Peter died the death of a martyr during
the persecution, and so Melitius transferred his
abuse first to Achillas, who succeeded Peter in
the bishopric, and afterwards again to Alexan-


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.6.


der, the successor of .\chillas. In this state of
things among them, the discussion in relation to
Arius arose ; and Melitius with his adherents
took part with Arius," entering into a conspiracy
with him against the bishop. But as many as
regarded the opinion of Arius as untenable,
justified Alexander's decision against him, and
thought that those who favored his views were
justly condemned. Meanwhile Eusebius of Ni-
comedia and his partisans, with such as favored
the sentiments of Arius, demanded by letter
that the sentence of excommunication which
had been pronounced against him should be
rescinded ; and that those who had been ex-
cluded should be readmitted into the Church,
as they held no unsound doctrine. Thus letters
from the opposite parties were sent to the bish-
op of Ale.xandria ; and Arius made a collection
of those which were favorable to himself, while
Alexander did the same with those which were
adverse. This therefore afforded a plausible
opportunity of defense to the sects, which are
now prevalent, of the Arians, Eunomians, and
such as receive their name from Macedonius ;
for these severally make use of these epistles in
vindication of their heresies.


CHAPTER VIL

The Emperor Constantine being grieved at the
Disturbance of the Churches, sends Hosius
the Spaniard to Alexandria, exhorting the
Bishop and Arius to Reconciliation and Unity.

When the emperor was made acquainted with
these disorders, he was very deeply grieved ;
and regarding the matter as a personal mis-
fortune, immediately exerted himself to extin-
guish the conflagration which had been kindled,
and sent a letter to Alexander and Arius by a
trustworthy person named Hosius, who was
bishop of Cordova, in Spain. The emperor
greatly loved this man and held him in the
highest estimation. It will not be out of place
to introduce here a portion of this letter, the
whole of which is given in the life of Constan-
tine by Eusebius.'

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus to
Alexander and Arius.

I am informed that your present controversy
originated thus. When you, Alexander, inquired
of your presbyters what each thought on a cer-

** Valesius makes the assertion that Socrates is mistaken here,
that the Melitians joined themselves to the Arians after the council
of Nicxa, and were induced by Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, to
cast slanderous aspersion upon Athanasius, as he himself testifies in
his second apoloey against the Arians. It appears unHkely that the
Fathers of the Nicene Council would have treated the Melitians as
leniently as they did had they sided with Arius before the council.

' Euseb. Life of Const. II. 64-72.


tain inexplicable passage of the written Word, '
rather on a subject improper for discussion ; and
you, Arius, rashly gave expression to a view of
the matter such as ought either never to have
been conceived, or when suggested to your
mind, it became you to bury it in silence. This
dispute having thus been excited among you,
communion - has been denied ; and the most
holy people being rent into two factions, have
departed from the harmony of the common
body. Wherefore let each one of you, showing
consideration for the other, listen to the impar-
tial exhortation of your fellow-servant. And
what counsel does he offer? It was neither
prudent at first to agitate such a question, nor
to reply to such a question when proposed : for
the claim of no law demands the investigation
of such subjects, but the idle useless talk of
leisure occasions them. And even if they should
exist for the sake of exercising our natural facul-
ties, yet we ought to confine them to our own
consideration, and not incautiously bring them
forth in public assemblies, nor thoughtlessly con-
fide them to the ears of everybody. Indeed
how few are capable either of adequately ex-
pounding, or even accurately understanding the
import of matters so vast and profound 1

And even if any one should be considered able
to satisfactorily accomplish this, how large a
portion of the people would he succeed in con-
vincing? Or who can grapple with the subtil-
ties of such investigations without danger of
lapsing into error? It becomes us therefore on
such topics to check loquacity, lest either on
account of the weakness of our nature we
should be incompetent to explain the subject
proposed ; or the dull understanding of the
audience should make them unable to appre-
hend clearly what is attempted to be taught :
and in the case of one or the other of these
failures, the people must be necessarily involved
either in blasphemy or schism. Wherefore let
an unguarded question, and an inconsiderate
answer, on the part of each of you, procure
equal forgiveness from one another. No cause
of difference has been started by you bearing
on any important precept contained in the Law ;
nor has any new heresy been introduced by you
in connection with the worship of God ; but ye
both hold one and the same judgment on these
points, which is the Creed.^ Moreover, while
you thus pertinaciously contend with one another
about matters of small or scarcely the least im-
portance, it is unsuitable for you to have charge
of so many people of God, because you are
divided in opinion : * and not only is it unbe-


' (TiifoJo?; lit., ' coming together.'

s Koii'tudaf (rOF9i)fia= a\))t.(ioKov T^t iricrTtwt. Cf. Eus. Life of
Const II /o.

* For the textual variation at this place, see Valesius, note.


1. 7.J CONSTANTINE'S LETTl-LR TO ALEXANDER AND ARIUS.


coming, but it is also believed to be altogether
unlawful.

In order to remind you of your duty by an
example of an inferior kind, I may say : you
are well aware that even the philosophers them-
selves are united under one sect. Yet they
often differ from each other on some parts of
their theories : but although they may differ on
the very highest branches of science, in order
to maintain the unity of their body, they still
agree to coalesce. Now, if this is done amongst
them, how much more equitable will it be for
you, who have been constituted ministers of the
Most High God, to become unanimous with
one another in such a religious profession. IJut
let us examine with closer consideration, and
deeper attention, what has been already stated.
Is it right on account of insignificant and vain
J contentions between you about words, that
brethren should be set in opposition against
brethren ; and that the honorable communion
should be distracted by unhallowed dissension,
through our striving with one another respect-
ing things so unimportant, and by no means
essential? These quarrels are vulgar and rather
consistent with puerile thoughUessness, than
suitable to the intelligence of priests and pru-
dent men. We should spontaneously turn aside
from the temptations of the devil. The great
God and Saviour of us all has extended to all
the common light. Under his providence, allow
me, his servant, to bring this effort of mine to a
successful issue ; that by my exhortation, min-
istry, and earnest admonition, I may lead you,
his people, back to unity of communion.'^ For
since, as I have said, there is but one faith
among you, and one sentiment respecting re-
ligion," and since the precept of the law,'' in
all its parts, combines all in one purpose of
soul, let not this diversity of opinion, which
has excited dissension among you, by any
means cause discord and schism, inasmuch
as it does not affect the force of the law as a
whole. Now, I say these things, not as com-
pelling you all to see exactly alike on this very
insignificant subject of controversy, whatever it
may be j since the dignity'^ of the communion
may be preserved unaffected, and the same
fellowship with all be retained, even though
there should exist among you some dissimilarity
i/ of sentiment on unimportant matters. For, of
course, we do not all desire the same thing in
every respect ; nor is there one unvarying
nature, or standard of judgment in us. There-


pecreio? o-i)>'ecri<; : lit. 'understanding of heresy.' On the
i uses of the word aipto-i?, see Sophocles, Creek Lex. of the


tjvvohov KOLVUJviav.
alp

various uo^j> ui ...^ ..^.^ — ,. — ,, ^>-^ .^v^,,. ..-.,.., ^ ^ .-,

Rom. and Byz. Periods. Here it evidently means the common
creed of the whole Church looked at as a sect.

' rofxoc, used in analogy to the law of the Old Testament. The
Jaw here is the ethical system of Christianity.
' Tifiiov, ' honor.'


fore, in regard to divine providence, let there
be one faith, one sentiment, and one covenant
of the Godhead : " but those minute investiga-
tions which ye enter into among yourselves with
so much nicety, even if ye should not concur
in one judgment in regard to them, should re-
main within the sphere of your own reflection,
kept in the secret recesses of the mind. Let
then an ineffable and select bond of general
friendship, with faith in the truth, reverence for
God, and a devout observance of his law, re-
main unshaken among you. Resume mutual
friendship and grace ; restore to the whole
people their accustomed familiar embraces ; and
do ye yourselves, on the strength of having
purified your own souls, again recognize one
another. For friendship often becomes sweeter
after the removal of animosity. Thus restore
to me tranquil days, and nights free from care ;
that to me also some pleasure in the pure light
may be preserved, and a cheerful serenity dur-
ing the rest of my life : otherwise, I must neces-
sarily groan, and be wholly suffused with tears ;
neither will the remaining period of my earthly
existence be peacefully sustained. For while
the people of God (I speak of my fellow-ser-
vants) are severed from one another by so un-
worthy and injurious a contest, how is it pos-
sible for me to maintain my usual equanimity ?
But in order that you may have some idea of
my excessive grief on account of this unhappy
difference, listen to what I am about to state.
On my recent arrival at the city of Nicomedia,
it was my intention immediately after to pro-
ceed into the East : but while I was hastening
toward you, and had advanced a considerable
distance on my way, intelligence of this affair
altogether reversed my purpose, lest I should
be obliged to see with my own eyes a condition
of things such as I could scarcely bear the
report of. Open to me therefore by your rec-
onciliation henceforth, the way into the East,
which ye have obstructed by your contentions
against one another : and permit me speedily to
behold both you and all the rest of the people
rejoicing together ; and to express my due
thanks to the Divine Being, because of the gen-
eral harmony and liberty of all parties, accom-
panied by the cordial utterance of your praise. ^^


" ToO (cpftTToi'o?: for this use of the word, see Eus. Life of
Const. II. 24 ei aL; Greg. Naz. III. iioi B; Jul. 398 A; Clem.
Horn. v. 5.

'" Socrates' lack of theological training can be inferred from his
admiration for this rather superficial letter of Constnntine's; so also
the rudimentary character of Constaiitine's views of Gospel truth and
his want of appreciation for the vital nature of the question in the
Arian controversy. It may be noted, however, that the statesmanship
shown in the tone and recommendations of the letter is just as far-
sighted as the theology of it is superficial. Constantine had sought
to unite the empire through the church, and now that very church
threatened to di-.rupt the empire; and this, at the very time, when
by his final victory over Licinius and the foundation of his new
c.ipital, he seemed to have realized the ideal of a reunited em-
pire.


8


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 8.


CHAPITER VIIL

Of the Synod which was held at Niccca in
Bithynia, and the Creed there^ put forth.

Such admirable and wise counsel did the em-
peror's letter contain. But the evil had become
too strong both for the exhortations of the
emperor, and the authority of him who was
the bearer of his letter : for neither was Alex-
ander nor Arius softened by this appeal ; and
moreover there was incessant strife and tumult
among the people. Moreover another local
source of disquietude had pre-existed there,
which ser\'ed to trouble the churches, — the dis-
pute namely in regard to the Passover, which
was carried on in the regions of the East only.-
This arose from some desiring to keep the Feast
more in accordance with the custom of the
Jews ; while others preferred its mode of cele-
bration by Christians in general throughout the
world. This difference, however, did not inter-
fere with their communion, although their mu-
tual joy was necessarily hindered. When,
therefore, the emperor beheld the Church agi-
tated on account of both of these causes, he
convoked a General Council,^ summoning all
the bishops by letter to meet him at Nicaea in
Bithynia. Accordingly the bishops assembled
out of the various provinces and cities ; respect-
ing whom Eusebius Pamphilus thus writes, word
for word, in his third book of the life of Con-
stantino : ■•

' Wherefore the most eminent of the ministers
of God in all the churches which have filled
Europe, Africa, and Asia, were convened. And
one sacred edifice, dilated as it were by God,
contained within it on the same occasion both
Syrians and Cilicians, Phoenicians, Arabs and
Palestinians, and in addition to these, Egyptians,
Thebans, Libyans, and those who came from
Mesopotamia. At this synod a Persian bishop
was also present, neither was the Scythian absent
from this assemblage. Pontus also and Galatia,
Pamphylia, Cappadocia, Asia and Phrygia, sup-
plied those who were most distinguished among
them. Besides, there met there Thracians and
Macedonians, Achaians and Epirots, and even
those who dwelt still further away than these,
and the most celebrated of the Spaniards him-
self took his seat among the rest. The prel-
ate* of the imperial city was absent on account

1 Cf. the parallel account in Snzom. I. 17.

* In a single sentence this controversy was as to whether the
Easter should be observed on a fixed day in everj' year or on the
14th of the lunar month Nisan of the Jews, on whatever d.-w of
tiie week that might happen to fall. For a fuller discussion of'^the
controversy, see Smith's Diet, of the Bible, and the literature there
referred to.

^ o'.KOvti.iviK-riv. hence this is called the first Ecumenical Council.

* Euseb. Life pf Const. HI. 7-0.

* Hosius mentioned before in cnap. 7.

* According to Valesius, who follows Musculus, the prelate here


of age ; but some of his presbyters were present
and filled his place. Such a crown, composed
as a bond of peace, the emperor Constantine
alone has ever dedicated to Christ his Saviour,
as a thank-offering worthy of God for victory
over his enemies, having appointed this convo-
cation among us in imitation of the Apostolic
Assembly.' For among them it is said were
convened " devout men of every nation under
heaven ; Parthians, Medes and Elamites, and
tho.se who dwelt in Mesopotamia, Judaea and
Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pam-
phylia, Egypt and the part of Libya which is
toward Cyrene, strangers from Rome also, both
Jews and proselytes, with Cretans and Arabs."
That congregation, however, was inferior in this
respect, that all present were not ministers of
God : whereas in this assembly the number of
bishops exceeded three hundred ; * while the
number of the presbyters, deacons, and acolyths*
and others who attended them was almost incal-
culable. Some of these ministers of God were
eminent for their wisdom, some for the strict-
ness of their life, and patient endurance [of per-
secution], and others united in themselves all
these distinguished characteristics : some were
venerable from their advanced age, others were
conspicuous for their youth and vigor of mind,
and others had but recently entered on their
ministerial career. '° For all these the emperor
appointed an abundant supply of daily food to
be provided.'

Such is Eusebius' account of those who met
on this occasion. The emperor having com-
pleted the festal solemnization of his triumph
over Licinius, came also in person to Nice.

There were among the bishops two of ex-
traordinary celebrity, Paphnutius, bishop of
Upper Thebes, and Spyridon, bishop of Cyprus :
why I have so particularly referred to these two
individuals, I shall state hereafter. Many of the
laity were also present, who were practiced in
the art of reasoning," and each eager to advo-
cate the cause of his own party. Eusebius,
bishop of Nicomedia, as was before said, sup-


meant was the bishop of Rome. The reason alleged is that at the
time of the meeting of the council, Constantinople had not yet been
m.ide the ' imperial city." But considering the general indifference
oi" Socrates to the affairs of the Western Church, and the fact that
when he wrote, the imperial city was actually Constantinople, it is
very probable that it is the bishop of that city he means to name
here, and not the bishop of Rome.

' Acts ii. 5-11.

' The exact number is variously given as 2>;o by Eusebius {Life
of Const. III. 8); 270 by Eustathius; 318 by Evagrius (//. E. III.
31); Athanasius (£>. to the African bishops); Hilarius {Contra
Coiistnntiiiin): Jerome {CItronicoti), and Rufinus.

" Young priests; lit. ' followers,' from oic.oAoi'flot.

t" Toi /nf (Tu) Tpojru) : besides the meaning given to these words
here they may be taken (t) as describing the temperate and genial
character of the men so characterized, on the assumption that
(ij<To« = fi^rpio^ as often elsewhere, or (2) as applicable to those
who occupied the mi<ldle ground in the controversy; of these, (2)
is not admissible, as nothing has been said in the immediate context
about the controversy, and as age is the main basis of classification in
the passage; (i) also is less probable than the rendering given above.

t' Dialectics.


I. 8.]


THE COUNCIL OF NIC/EA.


ported the opinion of Arius, together with The-
ognis and Maris ; of these the former was bishop
of Nicaea, and Maris of Chalcedon in Bithynia.
These were powerfully opposed by Athanasius,
a deacon of the Alexandrian church, who was
highly esteemed by Alexander, his bishop, and
on that account was much envied, as will be
seen hereafter. Now a short time previous to
the general assembling of the bishops, the dis-
putants engaged in preparatory logical contests
before the multitudes ; and when many were
attracted by the interest of their discourse, one
of the laity, a confessor^' who was a man of
unsophisticated understanding, reproved these
reasoners, telling them that Christ and his apos-
tles did not teach us dialectics, art, nor vain
subtilties, but simple-mindedness, which is pre-
served by faith and good works. As he said
this, all present admired the speaker, and as-
sented to the justice of his remarks ; and the
disputants themselves, after hearing his plain
statement of the truth, exercised a greater de-
gree of moderation : thus then was the disturb-
ance caused by these logical debates suppressed
at this time.

On the following day all the bishops were as-
sembled together in one place ; the emperor
arrived soon after, and on his entrance stood in
their midst, and would not take his place, until
the bishops by bowing intimated their desire
that he should be seated : such was the respect
and reverence which the emperor entertained
for these men. When a silence suitable to the
occasion had been observed, the emperor from
his seat began to address them words of exhor-
tation to harmony and unity, and entreated each
to lay aside all private pique. For several of
them had brought accusations against one
another, and many had even presented petitions
to the emperor the day before. But he, direct-
ing their attention to the matter before them,
and on account of which they were assembled,
ordered these petitions to be burnt ; merely ob-
serving that ' Christ enjoins him who is anx-
ious to obtain forgiveness, to forgive his brother.'
When therefore he had strongly insisted on the
maintenance of harmony and peace, he sanc-
tioned again their purpose of more closely in-
vestigating the questions at issue. But it may
be well to hear what Euseoius says on this sub-
ject, in his third book of the Life of Constan-


tme


13


His words are these :


' A variety of topics having been introduced
by each party, and much controversy being ex-
cited from the very commencement, the emperor
listened to all with patient attention, deliberately

'* els r!av OfioAoyTjTtoi': the term o^oAoyTjTi)? was applied to those
who during the persecutions had refused to sacrifice to idols, per-
sisting in his profession of Christinnity in spite of suffering. Cf.
Clem. Strom. IV. 12; P'-tr. Alex. Epist. Can. 14.

'' Euseb. Life of Const. III. 13.


and impartially considering whatever was ad-
vanced. He in part suy^ported the statements
which were made on either side, and gradually
softened the asperity of tho.se who contentiously
opposed each other, conciliating each by his
mildness and affability. And as he addressed
them in the Greek language, for he was not un-
acquainted with it, he was at once interesting
and persuasive, and wrought conviction on the
minds of some, and prevailed on others by
entreaty, those who spoke well he applauded,
.^nd inciting all to unanimity at length he suc-
ceeded in bringing them into similarity of judg-
ment, and conformity of opinion on all the
controverted points : so that there was not only
unity in the confession of faith, but also a gen-
eral agreement as to the time for the celebration
of the feast of Salvation." Moreover the doc-
trines which had thus the common consent, were
confirmed by the signature of each individual.'

Such in his own words is the testimony re-
specting these things which Eusebius has left
us in writing ; and we not unfitly have used it,
but treating what he has said as an authority,
have introduced it here for the fidelity of this
history. With this end also in view, that if any
one should condemn as erroneous the faith pro- ,
fessed at this council of Nicsea, we might be un- —J
affected by it, and put no confidence in Sabinus
the Macedonian,'^ who calls all those who were
convened there ignoramuses and simpletons. For
this Sabinus, who was bishop of the Macedonians
at Heraclea in Thrace, having made a collection
of the decrees published by various Synods of
bishops, has treated those who composed the
Nicene Council in particular with contempt and
derision ; not perceiving that he thereby charges
Lusebius himself with ignorance, who made a
like confession after the closest scrutiny. And
in fact some things he has willfully passed over,
others he has perverted, and on all he has put
a construction favorable to his own views. Yet
he commends Eusebius Pamphilus as a trust-
worthy witness, and praises the emperor as
capable in stating Christian doctrines : but he
still brands the faith which was declared at
Nicsea, as having been set forth by ignorant per-
sons, and such as had no intelligence in the
matter. And thus he voluntarily contemns the
words of a man whom he himself pronounces a
wise and true witness : for Eusebius declares,
that of the ministers of God who were present
at the Nicene Synod, some were eminent for
the word of wisdom, others for the strictness of
their life ; and that the emperor himself being

" The Passover, or Easter.

'5 Macedonian = follower of Macedonius, not a native resident of
Macedonia. Sabinus was the author of a collection of the acts of
the Synod used by Socrates quite freely (cf. I. 9; II. 15, 17 ct it/.).
Socrates, however, criticises him for prejudice against the orthodox.
Sabinus was bishop of the church of the Macedonians in Heraclea,
a city in Thrace.


TO


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.8.


present, leading all into unanimity, established
unity of judgment, and agreement of opinion
among them. Of Sabinus, however, we shall
make t'urther mention as occasion may require.
But the agreement of faith, assented to with loud
( acclamation at the great council of Nicaea is this :

* We believe in one God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visible and invisible : — and
in one'" Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
the only-begotten of the Father, that is of the
substance of the Father ; God of God and
Light of light ; true God of true God ; begotten,
not made, consubstantiaP' with the Father: by
whom all things were made, both which are in
heaven and on earth : who for the sake of us
men, and on account of our salvation, descended,
became incarnate, and was made man ; suf-
fered, arose again the third day, and ascended
into the heavens, and will come again to judge the
living and the dead. [We] also [believe] in the
Holy Spirit. But the holy Catholic and Apos-
tolic church anathematizes those who say " There
was a time when he was not," and " He was not
before he was begotten," and " He was made
from that which did not exist," and those who
assert that he is of other substance or essence
than the Father, or that he was created, or is
susceptible of change."*

This creed was recognized and acquiesced in
by three hundred and eighteen [bishops] ; and
being, as Eusebius says, unanimous in expression
and sentiment, they subscribed it. Five only
would not receive it, objecting to the term
hotnoousios, ' of the same essence,' or consiibstan-
tial : these were Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia,
Theognis of Nice, Maris of Chalcedon, Theonas
of Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptolemais.
' For,' said they, ' since that is consubstduiial
which is from another either by partition, der-
ivation or germination ; by germination, as a
shoot from the roots ; by derivation, as children
from their parents ; by division, as two or three
vessels of gold from a mass, and the Son is from
the Father by none of these modes : therefore
they declared themselves unable to assent to
this creed.' Thus having scoffed at the word
consubstantial, they would not subscribe to the
deposition of Arius. Upon this the Synod anath-
ematized Arius, and all who adhered to his opin-


'" This is according to the reading of Valesius, Hussey, and
Bright. The reading, ' o«r Lord,' &c., of the English translations
in Bagster and Bohn's series is probably a typographical error,
though strangely perpetuated down to the reprint of 1888.

" oaooi'irior, 'of the same essence'; the word has become a
historic landmark in theological debate, and one of the stock words
of theological terminology.

" This creed is found twelve times in eleven ancient sources,
two versions being given in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon.
The second version of the Council of Chalcedon contains certain
additions from the creed of Constantinople; all the rest substantially
agree. Cf. Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, Vol. I. p. 24, and Vol.
II. p. 5o, 91; Walch, Anltqiiitntes Syinbolicct (1772), p. 87 seq.:
Hahn, Bibliothrk der Symbole, p. 40-107, and other literature
referred to in ScbafTs Creeds, &c.


ions, prohibiting him at the same time from en-
tering into Alexandria. At the same time an
edict of the emperor sent Arius himself into
exile, together with Eusebius and Theognis and
their followers ; Eusebius and Theognis, how-
ever, a short time after their banishment, ten-
dered a written declaration of their change of
sentiment, and concurrence in the faith of the
consubstaritiality of the Son with the Father, as
we shall show as we proceed.

At this time during the session of the Synod,
Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, bishop of Caesa-
rea in Palestine, who had held aloof for a short
time, after mature consideration whether he
ought to receive this definition of the faith, at
length acquiesced in it, and subscribed it with
all the rest : he also sent to the people under
his charge a copy of the Creed, with an explana-
tion of the word honioousios, that no one might
impugn his motives on account of his previous
hesitation. Now what was written by Eusebius
was as follows in his own words :

' You have probably had some intimation,
beloved, of the transactions of the great council
convened at Nicaea, in relation to the faith of the
Church, inasmuch as rumor generally outruns
true account of that which has really taken
place. But lest from such report alone you
might form an incorrect estimate of the matter,
we have deemed it necessary to submit to you,
in the first place, an exposition of the faith pro-
posed by us in written form ; and then a second
which has been promulgated, consisting of ours
with certain additions to its expression. The
declaration of faith set forth by us, which when
read in the presence of our most pious emperor,
seemed to meet with universal approbation, was
thus expressed :

' " According as we received from the bishops
who preceded us, both in our instruction '' [in
the knowledge of the truth], and when we were
ba])tized ; as also we have ourselves learned
from the sacred Scriptures : and in accordance
with what we have both believed and taught
while discharging the duties of presbyter and
the episcopal office itself, so now we believe
and present to you the distinct avowal of our
faith. It is this :

' " We believe in on« God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visible and invisible : — and
in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God
of God, Light of light, Life of life, the only-
begotten Son, born before all creation,-* begot-
ten of God the Father, before all ages, by whom
also all things were made ; who on account
of our salvation became incarnate, and lived

'" (c<iTr)xii(r«i ; the word is used of the steps preliminary to bap-
tism, chief among which was instruction in the truth. Cf. VII. 17,
and Smith's Diet. 0/ the Bible.

^ TfpwToTOKoi' jratr?)? KTiVew^, taken from Col. i. 15. For the
uses of irpitToi instead of irpbrcpot, see John i. 15.


I. 8.]


EUSEBIUS' REPORT OF THE NICENE COUNCIL.


II


among men ; and who suffered and rose again
on the third day, and ascended to the Father,
and shall come again in glory to judge the living
and the dead. We believe also in one Holy Spirit.
We believe in the existence and subsistence of
each of these [persons] : that the Father is
truly Father, the Son truly Son, and the Holy
Spirit truly Holy Spirit ; even as our Lord also,
when he sent forth his disciples to preach the
Gospel, said,-^ ' Go and teach all nations, bap-
tizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.' Concerning
these doctrines we steadfastly maintain their
truth, and avow our full confidence in them ;
such also have been our sentiments hitherto,
and such we shall continue to hold until death :
and in an unshaken adherence to this faith, we
anathematize every impious heresy. In the
presence of God Almighty, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ we testify, that thus we have be-
lieved and thought from our heart and soul,
since we have possessed a right estimate of our-
selves ; and that we now think and speak what
is perfectly in accordance with the truth. We
are moreover prepared to prove to you by un-
deniable evidences, and to convince you that
in time past we have thus believed, and so
preached."

'When these articles of faith were proposed,
there seemed to be no ground of opposition :
nay, our most pious emperor himself was the
first to admit that they were perfectly correct,
and that he himself had entertained the senti-
ments contained in them ; exhorting all present
to give them their assent, and subscribe to
these very articles, thus agreeing in a unanimous
profession of them, with the insertion, however, of
that single word" komoonsios'' (consubstantial),
an expression which the emperor himself ex-
plained, as not indicating corporeal affections or
properties ; and consequently that the Son did
not subsist from the Father either by division or
abscission : for, said he, a nature which is imma-
terial and incorporeal cannot possibly be subject
to any corporeal affection ; hence our concep-
tion of such things can only be in divine and
mysterious terms. Such was the philosophical
view of the subject taken by our most wise and
pious sovereign ; and the bishops on account of
the word honioousios, drew up this formula of
faith.

The CreedP

* " We believe in one God, the Father Al-
mighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible :
— and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, the only-begotten of the Father, that is
of the substance of the Father ; God of God,

*l /oia9i)TeucraTe, from Matt, xxviii. 19.
*• TO fiaBritia: lit. ' lesson.'


Light of light, tnie God of true God ; begotten
not made, consubstantial with the Father; by^
whom all things were made both which are in
heaven and on earth ; who for the sake of us
men, and on account of our salvation, descended,
became incarnate, was made man, suffered and
rose again on the third day ; he ascended into
the heavens, and will come to judge the living
and the dead. [We believe] also in the Holy
Spirit. But those who say * There was a time
when he was not,' or ' He did not exist before
he was begotten,' or ' He was made of nothing,'
or assert that ' He is of other substance or es-
sence than the Father,' or that the Son of God
is created, or mutable, or susceptible of change,
the Catholic and apostolic Church of God anathe-
matizes."

' Now this declaration of faith being pro-
pounded by them, we did not neglect to investi-
gate the distinct sense of the expressions " of the
substance of the Father, and consubstantial with
the Father." Whereupon questions were put
forth and answers, and the meaning of these
terms was clearly defined ; when it was generally
admitted that oitsias (of the essence or sub-
stance) simply implied that the Son is of the
Father indeed, but does not subsist as a part of
the Father. To this interpretation of the sacred
doctrine which declares that the Son is of the
Father, but is not a part of his substance, it
seemed right to us to assent. We ourselves
therefore concurred in this exposition ; nor do
we cavil at the word " hotnoousios^^ having regard
to peace, and fearing to lose a right understand-
ing of the matter. On the s'ame grounds we ad-
mitted also the expression " begotten, not made " :
" for made,'' said they, "is a term applicable in
common to all the creatures which were made
by the Son, to whom the Son has no resemblance.
Consequently he is no creature like those which
were made by him, but is of a substance far ex-
celling any creature ; which substance the Divine
Oracles teach was begotten of the Father by
such a mode of generation as cannot be explained
nor even conceived by any creature." Thus also
the declaration that " the Son is consubstantial
with the Father " having been discussed, it was
agreed that this must not be understood in a
corporeal sense, or in any way analogous to mor-
tal creatures ; inasmuch as it is neither by divi-
sion of substance, nor by abscission, nor by any
change of the Father's substance and power,
since the underived nature of the Father is in-
consistent with all these things. That he is
consubstantial with the Father then simply im-
plies, that the Son of God has no resemblance
to created things, but is in every respect like the
Father only who begat him ; and that he is of

'^ Through.


12


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.8.


no other substance or essence but of the Father.
To which doctrine, explained in this way, it
appeared right to assent, especially since we
knew that some eminent bishops and learned
writers among the ancients have used the term
"homoousios'' in their theological discourses con-
cerning the nature of the Father and the Son.
Such is what I have to state to you in reference
to the articles of faith which have been promul-
gated ; and in which we have all concurred, not
without due examination, but according to the
senses assigned, which were investigated in the
presence of our most highly favored emperor,
and for the reasons mentioned approved. We
have also considered the anathema pronounced
by them after the declaration of faith inoffensive ;
because it prohibits the use of illegitimate'-^
terms, from which almost all the distraction and
commotion of the churches have arisen. Accord-
ingly, since no divinely inspired Scripture con-
tains the expressions, " of things which do not
exist," and " there was a time when he was not,"
and such other phrases as are therein subjoined,
it seemed unwarrantable to utter and teach
them : and moreover this decision received our
sanction the rather from the consideration that
we have never heretofore been accustomed to
employ these terms. We deemed it incumbent
on us, beloved, to acquaint you with the caution
which has characterized both our examination
of and concurrence in these things : and that
on justifiable grounds we resisted to the last
moment the introduction of certain objectionable
expressions as long as these were not acceptable ;
and received them without dispute, when on
mature deliberation as we examined the sense
of the words, they appeared to agree with what
we had originally proposed as a sound confes-
sion of faith.'

Such was the letter addressed by Eusebius
Pamphilus to the Christians at Ccesarea in Pales-
tine. At the same time the Synod itself also,
with one accord, wrote the following epistle to
the church of the .Mexandrians, and to believers
in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis.


CHAPTER IX.

The Letter of the Svftod, relative to its Decisions :
and the Condemnation of Arius and those
who agreed with him.

To the holy, by the grace of God, and great
church of the Alexandrians, and to our beloved
brethren throughout Egypt, Libya, and Pentapo-
lis, the bishops assembled at Nicaea, constituting


" a')'pa<^oi<: lit. 'unwritten,' but defined by Hesychius as
above.


the great and holy Synod, send greeting in the
Lord.

Since, by the grace of God, a great and holy
Synod has been convened at Nicaea, our most
pious sovereign Constantine having summoned
us out of various cities and provinces for that
purpose, it appeared to us indispensably neces-
sary that a letter should be written to yeu on the
part of the sacred Synod ; in order that ye may
know what subjects were brought under consid-
eration and examined, and what was eventually
determined on and decreed.

In the first place, then, the impiety and guilt
of Arius and his adherents were examined into,
in the presence of our most religious emperor
Constantine : and it was unanimously decided
that his impious opinion should be anathema-
tized, with all the blasphemous expressions he
has uttered, in affirming that ' the Son of God
sprang from nothing,' and that ' there was a time
when he was not ' ; saying moreover that ' the Son
of God, because possessed of free will, was capa-
ble either of vice or virtue ; and calling him a
creature and a work. All these sentiments the
holy Synod has anathematized, having scarcely
patience to endure the hearing of such an im-
pious opinion, or, rather, madness, and such
blasphemous words. But the conclusion of our
proceedings against him you must either have
been informed of already or will soon learn ; for
we would not seem to trample on a man who
has received the chastisement which his crime
deserved. Yet so contagious has his pestilential
error proved, as to drag into perdition Theonas,
bishop of Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptole-
mais ; for they have suffered the same condem-
nation as himself. But when the grace of God
delivered us from those execrable dogmas, with
all their impiety and blasphemy, and from those
persons, who had dared to cause discord and
division among a people previously at peace,
there still remained the contumacy of Melitius
[to be dealt with] and those who had been or-
dained by him ; and we now state to you, be-
loved brethren, what resolution the Synod came
to on this point. It was decreed, the Synod
being moved to great clemency towards Melitius,
although strictly speaking he was wholly unde-
serving of favor, that he remain in his own city,
but exercise no authority either to ordain or
nominate for ordination; and that he appear
in no other district or city on this pretense, but
simply retain a nominal dignity. That those who
had received appointments from him, after hav-
ing been confirmed by a more legitimate ordina-
tion, should be admitted to communion on these
conditions : that they should continue to hold
their rank and ministry, but regard themselves
as inferior in every respect to all those who have
been ordained and established in each place and


1.9] LETTERS OF THE COUNCIL AND OF CONSTANTINE.


13


church by our most-honored fellow-minister,
Alexander, so that they shall have no authority
to propose or nominate whom they please, or to
do anything at all without the concurrence of
some bishop of the Catholic Church who is one
of Alexander's suffragans. On the other hand,
such as by the grace of God and your prayers
have been found in no schism, but have con-
tinued in the Catholic Church blameless, shall
have authority to nominate and ordain those
who are worthy of the sacred office,' and to act
in all things according to ecclesiastical law and
■usage. When it may happen that any of those
holding preferments in the church die, then let
these who have been thus recently admitted be
advanced to the dignity of the deceased, pro-
vided that they should appear worthy, and that
the people should elect them, the bishop of Al-
exandria also ratifying their choice. This privi-
lege is conceded to all the others indeed, but to
Melitius personally we by no means grant the
same license, on account of his former disorderly
conduct, and because of the rashness and levity
of his character, in order that no authority or
jurisdiction should be given him as a man liable
again to create similar disturbances. These are
the things which specially affect Egypt, and the
most holy church of the Alexandrians : and if
any other canon or ordinance has been estab-
lished, our Lord and most-honored fellow-minis-
ter and brother Alexander being present with us,
will on his return to you enter into more minute
details, inasmuch as he has been a participator in
whatever is transacted, and has had the principal
direction of it. We have also gratifying intelli-
gence to communicate to you relative to unity
of judgment on the subject of the most holy
feast of Easter : for this point also has been hap-
pily settled through your prayers ; so that all the
brethren in the East who have heretofore kept
this festival when the Jews did, will henceforth
conform to the Romans and to us, and to all who
from the earliest time have observed our period
of celebrating Easter. Rejoicing therefore in
these conclusions and in the general unanimity
and peace, as well as in the extirpation of all
heresy, receive with the greater honor and
more abundant love our fellow-minister and your
bishop Alexander, who has greatly delighted us
by his presence, and even at his advanced age
has undergone extraordinary exertions in order
that peace might be re-established among you.
Pray on behalf of us all, that the things decided
as just may be inviolably maintained through
Almighty God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, to-
gether with the Holy Spirit ; to whom be glory
for ever. Amen.

This epistle of the Synod makes it plain that
they not only anathematized Arius and his ad-


herents, but the very expressions of his tenets ;
and that having agreed among themselves re-
specting the celebration of Easter, they read-
mitted the heresiarch Melitius into communion,
suffering him to retain his episcopal rank, but
divesting him of all authority to act as a bishop.
It is for this reason I suppose that even at the
present time the Melitians in Egypt are separated
from the church, because the Synod deprived
Melitius of all power. It should be observed
moreover that Arius had written a treatise on
his own opinion which he entitled Thalia ; but
the character of the book is loose and dissolute,
similar in its style and metres to the songs of |
Sotades.^ This production also the Synod con-
demned at the same time. Nor was it the Synod
alone that took the trouble to write letters to
the churches announcing the restoration of peace,
but the emperor Constantine himself also wrote
personally and sent the following address to the
church of the Alexandrians.

The E7)ipe7-or's Letter.

Constantine Augustus, to the Catholic church
of the Alexandrians. Beloved brethren, hail !
We have received from Divine Providence the
inestimable blessing of being relieved from all
error, and united in the acknowledgment of one
and the same faith. The devil will no longer
have any pov/er against us, since all that which
he had malignantly devised for our destruction
has been entirely overthrown from the founda-
tions. The splendor of truth has dissipated at
the command of God those dissensions, schisms,
tumults, and so to speak, deadly poisons of dis-
cord. Wherefore we all worship one true God,
and believe that he is. But in order that this
might be done, by divine admonition I assem-
bled at the city of Nicaea most of the bishops ;
with whom I myself also, who am but one of
you, and who rejoice exceedingly in being your
fellow-servant, undertook the investigation of
the truth. Accordingly, all points which seemed
in consequence of ambiguity to furnish any pre-
text for dissension, have been discussed and
accurately examined. And may the Divine
Majesty pardon the fearful enormity of the
blasphemies which some were shamelessly utter-
ing concerning the mighty Saviour, our life and
hope ; declaring and confessing that they believe
things contrary to the divinely inspired Scrip-
tures. While more than three hundred bishops
remarkable for their moderation and intellectual
keenness, were unanimous in their confirmation
of one and the same faith, which according to
the truth and legitimate construction of the law

1 K\r\pov. cf. Bingham, Eccl. Antiq. I. 5.

2 Sotades, a Maronite, characterized .t; obscene. On the doctrines
of the Maronites, cf. Gibbon's Decline and Fall, Ch. XLVII.
sect. 3.


H


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.9.


of God can only be the faith ; Anus alone
beguiled by the subtlety of the devil, was dis-
covered to be the sole disseminator of this
mischief, first among you, and afterwards with
unhallowed purposes among others also. I.et
us therefore embrace that doctrine which the
Almighty has presented to us : let us return to
our beloved brethren from whom an irreverent
servant of the devil has separated us : let us go
with all speed to the common body and our
own natural members. Yox this is becoming
your penetration, faith antl sanctity ; that since
the error has been proved to be due to him
who is an enemy to the truth, ye should return
to the di"ine favor. For that which has com-
mended itself to the judgment of three hundred
bishops cannot be other than the doctrine of
God ; seeing that the Holy Spirit dwelling in
the minds of so many dignified persons has ef-
fectually enlightened them respecting the Divine
will. Wherefore let no one vacillate or linger,
but let all with alacrity return to the undoubted
path of duty ; that when I shall arrive among
you, which will be as soon as possible, I may
with you return due thanks to God, the inspector
of all things, for having revealed the pure faith,
and restored to you that love for which ye have
prayed. May God protect you, beloved brethren.

Thus wrote the emperor to the Christians of
Alexandria, assuring them that the exposition
of the faith was neither made rashly nor at
random, but that it was dictated with much
research, and after strict investigation : and not
that some things were spoken of, while others
were suppressed in silence ; but that whatever
could be fittingly advanced in support of any
opinion was fully stated. That nothing indeed
was precipitately determined, but all was pre-
viously discussed with minute accuracy ; so that
every point which seemed to furnish a pretext
for ambiguity of meaning, or difference of opin-
ion, was thoroughly sifted, and its difiiculties
removed. In short he terms the thought of all
those who were assembled there the thought of
God, and does not doubt that the unanimity of
so many eminent bishops was effected by the
Holy Spirit. Sabinus, however, the chief of the
heresy of the Macedonians, willfully rejects these
authorities, and calls those who were convened
there ignorant and illiterate persons ; nay, he
almost accuses Eusebius of Caesarea himself of
ignorance : nor does he reflect, that even if those
who constituted that synod had been laymen,
yet as being illuminated by God, and the grace
of the Holy Spirit, they were utterly unable to
err from the truth.' Nevertheless, hear farther

' It has always been the common belief of the Eastern Church
that the ecumenical councils were inspired in the same sense as the
writers of the Sacred Scriptures. Socrates in this respect simply
reflects the opinion of the age ar.d region.


what the emperor decreed in another circular
both against Arius and those who held his opin-
ions, sending it in all directions to the bishops
and people.

Another Epistle of Constantine.

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to the
bishops and people. — Since Arius has imita-
ted wicked and impious persons, it is just that
he should undergo the like ignominy. Where-
fore as Porphyry,'' that enemy of piety, for hav-
ing composed licentious treatises against relig-
ion, found a suitable recompense, and such as
thenceforth branded him with infamy, over-
whelming him with deserved reproach, his im-
pious writings also having been destroyed ; so
now it seems fit both that Arius and such as
hold his sentiments should be denominated
Porphyrians, that they may take their appella-
tion fr^m those whose conduct they have imi-
tated. ' And in addition to this, if any treatise
composed by Arius should be discovered, let it
be consigned to the flames, in order that not
only his depraved doctrine may be suppressed,
but also that no memorial of him may be by any
means left. This therefore I decree, that if any
one shall be detected in concealing a book com-
piled by Arius, and shall not instantly bring it
forward and burn it, the penalty for this offense
shall be death ; for immediately after conviction
the criminal shall suffer capital punishment.
May God preserve you !

Another Epistle?

Constantine Augustus, to the Churches.

Having experienced from the flourishing con-
dition of public affairs, how great has been the
grace of divine power, I judged this to be an
object above all things claiming my care, that
one faith, with sincere love, and uniform piety
toward Almighty God should be maintained
amongst the most blessed assemblies of the
Catholic Church. But inasmuch as I perceived
that this could not be firmly and permanently
established, unless all, or at least the greatest
part of the bishops could be convened in the
same place, and every point of our most holy
religion should be discussed by them in council ;
therefore as many as possible were assembled,
and I myself also as one of you was present ;
for I will not deny what I especially rejoice in,
that I am your fellow-servant. All points were
then minutely investigated, until a decision ac-
ceptable to Him who is the inspector of all
things, was published for the promotion of uni-

* Cf. III. 23, where the author makes further mention of Por-
phyry and his writings; see also Smith, Diet. 0/ Greek and Roman


Biog.

« 1


Euseb. Life of Cotiit. III. 17-19.


I. 9-]


CONSTANTINE'S CIRCULAR TO THE CHURCHES.


15


formity of judgment and practice; so that noth-
ing might be henceforth left for dissension or
controversy in matters of faith. There also the
question having been considered relative to the
most holy day of Easter, it was determined by
common consent that it should be proper that
all should celebrate it on one and the same day
everywhere. For what can be more appropriate,
or what more solemn, than that this feast from
which we have received the hope of immortality,
should be invariably kept in one order, and fon
an obvious reason among all ? And in the first
place, it seemed very unworthy of this most sa-
cred feast, that we should keep it following Jiie
custom of the Jews ; a people who having im-
brued their hands in a most heinous outrage,
have thus polluted their souls, and are deserv-
edly blind. Having then cast aside their usage^
we are free to see to it that the celebration of
this observance should occur in future in the
more correct order which we have kept from the
first day of the Passion until the present time.
Therefore have nothing in common with that
most hostile people the Jews. We have received
from the Saviour another way ; for there is set
before us both a legitimate and accurate course
in our holy religion : unanimously pursuing this,
let us, most honored brethren, withdraw our-
selves from that detestable association. For it
is truly absurd for them to boast that we are in-
capable of rightly observing these things without
their instruction. For on what subject will they
be competent to form a correct judgment, who
after that murder of their Lord, having been
bereft of their senses, are led not by any rational
motive, but by an ungovernable impulse, wher-
ever their innate fury may drive them? Thence
it is therefore, that even in this particular they
do not perceive the truth, so that they constantly
erring in the utmost degree, instead of making
a suitable correction, celebrate the Feast of
Passover a second time in the same year." Why
then should we follow the example of those who
are acknowledged to be infected with grievous
error? Surely we should never suffer Easter to
be kept twice in one and the same year ! But
even if these considerations were not laid before
you, it became your prudence at all times to take
heed, both by diligence and prayer, that the pu-
rity of your soul should in nothing have com-
munion, or seem to do so with the customs of
men so utterly depraved. Moreover this should
also be considered, that in a matter so important
and of such religious significance, the slightest
disagreement is most irreverent. For our Sa-

^ As the Jewish Passover month was a lunar month and began
on the fifth day of March and ended on the third of April, it hap-
pened sometimes that their Passover began before the equinox (the
beginning of the solar year), so that they celebrated two Passovers
during the same solar year. Their own year being lunar, of course
they never celebrated the Passover twice in a year according to their
point of view.


viour left us but one day to be observed in com-
memoration of our deliverance, that is the day
of his most holy Passion : he also wished his
Catholic Church to be one ; the members of
which, however much they may be scattered in
various places, are notwithstanding cherished by
one Spirit, that is by the will of God. Let the
prudence consistent with your sacred character
consider how grievous and indecorous it is, that
on the same days some should be observing
fasts, while others are celebrating feasts ; and
after the days of Easter some should indulge in
festivities and enjoyments, and others submit to
appointed fastings. On this account ^therefore
Divine Providence directed that an appropriate
correction should be effected, and uniformity
of practice established, as I suppose you are all
aware.

Since then it was desirable that this should
be so amended that we should have nothing in
common with that nation of parricides, and of
those who slew their Lord ; and since the order
is a becoming one which is observed by all the
churches of the western, southern, and northern
parts, and by some also in the eastern ; from
these considerations for the present all thought
it to be proper, and I pledged myself that it
would be satisfactory to your prudent penetra-
tion, that what is observed with such general
unanimity of sentiment in the city of Rome,
throughout Italy, Africa, all Egypt, Spain, France,
Britain, Libya, the whole of Greece, and the
dioceses of Asia, Pontus, and Cilicia, your intel-
ligence also would cheerfully accept ; reflecting
too that not only is there a greater number of
churches in the places before mentioned, but
also that this in particular is a most sacred obli-
gation, that all should in common desire what-
ever strict reason seems to demand, and what
has no communion with the perjury of the Jews.
But to sum up matters briefly, it was determined
by common consent that the most holy festival
of Easter should be solemnized on one and the
same day; for it is not even seemly that there (
should be in such a hallowed solemnity any
difference : and it is more commendable to adopt
that opinion in which there will be no intermix-
ture of strange error, or deviation from what is
right. These things therefore being thus con-
sistent, do you gladly receive this heavenly and
truly divine command : for whatever is done in
the sacred assemblies of the bishops is referable
to the Divine will. Wherefore, when ye have
indicated the things which have been prescribed
to all our beloved brethren, it behooves you to
publish the above written statements and to
accept the reasoning which has been adduced,
and to establish this observance of the most holy
day : that when I arrive at the long and earnestly
desired view of your order, I may be able to


1/


i6


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.9.


celebrate the sacred festival with you on one and
the same day ; and may rejoice with you for all
things, in seeing Satanic cruelty frustrated by
divine power through our efforts, while your faith,
peace and concord are everywhere flourishing.
May God preserve you, beloved brethren.

Another Epistle to Eusebius?

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to
Eusebius.

Since an impious purpose and tyranny have
even to the present time persecuted the servants
of God our Saviour, I have been credibly in-
formed and am fully persuaded, most beloved
brother, that all our sacred edifices have either
by neglect gone to decay, or from dread of
impending danger have not been adorned with
becoming dignity. But now that liberty has
been restored, and that persecuting dragon Li-
cinius has by the providence of the Most High
God, and our instrumentality, been removed
from the administration of public affairs, I imag-
ine that the divine power has been made man-
ifest to all, and at the same time that those who
either through fear or unbelief fell into any sins,
having acknowledged the living God, will come
to the true and right course of life. Wherefore
enjoin the churches over which you yourself
preside, as well as the other bishops presiding
in various places, together with the presbyters
and deacons whom you know, to be diligent
, about the sacred edifices, either by repairing
I those which remain standing, or enlarging them,
or by erecting new ones wherever it may be
requisite. And do you yourself ask, and the
rest through you, the necessary supplies both
from the governors of the provinces, and the
officers of the praetorian prefecture : for direc-
tions have been given to them to execute with
all diligence the orders of your holiness. May
God preserve you, beloved brother.

These instructions, concerning the building
of churches were sent by the emperor to the
bishoi)s in every province : but what he wrote
to Eusebius of Palestine respecting the prepara-
tion of some copies of the Scriptures, we may
ascertain from the letters themselves : ^

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to
Eusebius of C»sarea.

In the city which derives its name from us,
a very great multitude of persons, through the
assisting providence of our Saviour God, have
united themselves to the most holy Church, so
that it has received much increase there. It is

' Valesius thinks this letter is misplaced; as it alludes to the
-death of Licinius as a recent event, he thinks it must have been
written about 31 5-316 A.D., hence ten years before the Council of
Nicxa. Cf. Kuseb. Life 0/ Const. II. 46.

• Euseb. Life of Const. IV. 36.


therefore requisite that more churches should
be furnished in that place : wherefore do you
most cordially enter into the purpose which I
have conceived. I have thought fit to intimate
this to your prudence, that you should order to
be transcribed on well-prepared parchment, by
competent writers accurately acquainted with
their art, fifty copies of the Sacred Scriptures,
both legibly described, and of a portable size,
the provision and use of which you know to be
needful for the instruction of the Church. Let-
ters have also been despatched from our clem-
ency, to the financial agent '-^ of the diocese that
he be careful to provide all things necessary for
the preparation of them. That these copies
may be got ready as quickly as possible, let it
be a task for your diligence : and you are au-
thorized, on the warrant of this our letter, to
use two of the public carriages for their convey-
ance ; for thus the copies which are most satis-
factorily transcribed, may be easily conveyed for
our inspection, one of the deacons of your
church fulfilling this commission ; who when he
has reached us shall experience our bounty.
May God preserve you, beloved brother.


Another Epistle to Macarius}^

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to
Macarius of Jerusalem. — Such is the grace of
our Saviour, that no supply of words seems to
be adequate to the expression of its present
manifestation. For that the monument " of his_
most holy passion, long since hidden under the
earth, should have lain concealed for a period
of so many years, until, through the destruction
of the common enemy of all,'- it should shine
forth to his own servants after their having re-
gained their freedom, exceeds all admiration.
For if all those who throughout the whole habi-
table earth are accounted wise, should be con-
vened in one and the same place, desiring to
say something worthy of the event, they would
fall infinitely short of the least part of it ; for the
apprehension of this wonder as far transcends
every nature capable of human reasoning, as
heavenly things are mightier than human. Hence
therefore this is always my especial aim, that as
the credibility of the truth daily demonstrates
itself by fresh miracles, so the souls of us all
should become more diligent respecting the holy


* 5ioi>(>)<r<u>c KoSoXiKov: this office was peculiar to the Eastern
Church. The nearest equivalent to it in the terminology of the
Western Church is that of vicar-general : but as the non-iechnical
expression ' financial agenl ' describes the official to the modem
reader, it has been adopted in the present translation. Concerning
the office, cf. Euscb. H. E. VII. 10. It may be also noted that the
very common ecclesiastical term diocese (4ioi<tr)<7i?) originated dur-
ing the reign of Constantine, as becomes evident from his letters.
See Eureh. Life of Const. III. 36.

'0 Euseb. Life of Const. III. 30.

II yi'uppi<TMn: the sepulchre near Calvary commonly known as
the Saviour's is meant.

•' Licinius.


I. lO.]


CONSTANTINE'S PATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH.


17


law, with modesty and unanimous eagerness.
But I desire that you should be fully aware of
what I conceive is pretty generally known, that
it is now my chief care, that we should adorn
with magnificent structures that hallowed spot,
which by God's appointment I have disencum-
bered of a most disgraceful addition '^ of an
idol, as of some grievous burden ; which was
consecrated indeed from the beginning in the
purpose of God, but has been more manifestly
sanctified since he has brought to light the evi-
dence of the Saviour's passion. Wherefore it
is becoming your prudence to make such ar-
rangements, and provision of everything neces-
sary, that not only a church" should be built
in itself superior to any elsewhere, but that the
rest of its parts also may be such that all the
most splendid edifices in every city may be ex-
celled by this. With regard to the workmanship
and chaste execution of the walls, know that we
have entrusted the care of these things to our
friend Dracilian, deputy to the most illustrious
prefects of the praetorium, and to the governor
of the province : for my piety has ordered that
artificers and workmen, and whatever other
things they may be informed from your sagacity
to be necessary for the structure, shall through
their care be immediately sent. Respecting the
columns or the marbles, whatever you may judge
to be more precious and useful, do you yourself
after having inspected the plan take care to write
to us ; that when we shall understand from your
letter how many things and of what kind there
may be need of, these may be conveyed to you
from all quarters : for it is but just that the most
wonderful place in the world, should be adorned
in accordance with its dignity. But I wish to
know from you, whether you consider that the
vault of the basilica should be fretted, or con-
structed on some other plan : for if it is to be
fretted, it can also be decorated with gold. It
remains that your holiness should inform the
officers before mentioned as soon as possible,
how many workmen and artificers, and what
money for expenses you will want. Be careful
at the same time to report to me speedily,
not only concerning the marbles and columns,
but also concerning the fretted vault, if indeed
you should decide this to be the more beautiful.
May-God preserve you, beloved brother

The emperor having also written other letters
of a more oratorical character against Arius and
his adherents, caused them to be everywhere
published throughout the cities, exposing him to
ridicule, and taunting him with irony. More-

" A temple of Venus built by Adrian, the emperor, on Mount
Calvary.

" 3a<riAiic»)i', 'basilica *•, the ancient Roman basilicas were often
turned into churches. The term has become familiar in ecclesiasti-
<:al architecture.


over, writing to the Nicomedians against Euse-
bius and Theognis, he censures the misconduct
of Eusebius, not only on account of his Arian-
ism, but because also having formerly been well-
affected to the ruler, he had traitorously con-
spired against his affairs. He then exhorts them
to elect another bishop instead of him. But I
thought it would be superfluous to insert here
the letters respecting these things, because of
their length : those who wish to do so may
find them elsewhere and give them a perusal.
This is sufficient notice of these transactions.


CHAPTER X.

The Emperor also summons to the Synod Ace-
sius. Bishop of the Novatians.

The emperor's diligence induces me to men-
tion another circumstance expressive of his
mind, and serving to show how much he desired
peace. For aiming at ecclesiastical harmony,
he summoned to the council Acesius also, a
bishop of the sect of Novatians. Now, when
the declaration of faith had been written out
and subscribed by the Synod, the emperor asked
Acesius whether he would also agree to this
creed to the settlement of the day on which
Easter should be observed. He replied, ' The
Synod has determined nothing new, my prince :
for thus heretofore, even from the beginning,
from the times of the apostles, I traditionally
received the definition of the faith, and the
time of the celebration of Easter.' When,
therefore, the emperor further asked him, ' For
what reason then do you separate yourself from
communion with the rest of the Church?' he
related what had taken place during the per-
secution under Decius ; and referred to the
rigidness of that austere canon which declares,
that it is not right persons who after baptism
have committed a sin, which the sacred Scrip-
tures denominate ' a sin unto death ' ^ to be
considered worthy of participation in the sacra-
ments : ^ that they should indeed be exhorted to
repentance, but were not to expect remission
from the priests, but from God, who is able and
has authority to forgive sins.^"* When Acesius
had thus spoken, the emperor said to him,
' Place a ladder, Acesius, and climb alone into
heaven.' * Neither Eusebius Pamphilus nor
any other has ever mentioned these things : but
I heard them from a man by no means prone
to falsehood, who was very old, and simply stated
what had taken place in the council in the
course of a narrative. From which I conjec-
ture that those who have passed by this occur-


' John V. 16.

2 Qclutv fivirnqpitov.


3 Cf. IV. 28.
* Sozom. I. 22.


i8


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. lO.


rence in silence, were actuated by motives
which have influenced many other historians :
for they frequently suppress important facts,
either from prejudice against some, or partiality
towards others.


CHAPTER XI.

Of the Bishop Paphnutius.

As we have promised above ^ to make some
mention of Paphnutius and Spyridon, it is time
to speak of them here. Paphnutius then was
bishop of one of the cities in Upper Thebes :
he was a man so favored divinely that extraor-
dinary miracles were done by him. In the time
of the persecution he had been deprived of one
of his eyes. The emperor honored this man
exceedingly, and often sent for him to the
palace, and kissed the part where the eye had
been torn out. So great devoutness character-
ized the emperor Constantine. Let this single
fact respecting Paphnutius suffice : I shall now
explain another thing which came to pass in
consequence of his advice, both for the good
of the Church and the honor of the clergy.
It seemed fit to the bishops to introduce a new
law into the Church, that those who were in
holy orders, I speak of bishops, presbyters, and
deacons, should have no conjugal intercourse
with the wives whom they had married while
still laymen.- Now when discussion on this
matter was impending, Paphnutius having arisen
in the midst of the assembly of bishops, earnestly
entreated them not to impose so heavy a yoke
on the ministers of religion : asserting that
' marriage itself is honorable, and the bed
undefiled ' ;^ urging before God that they ought
not to injure the Church by too stringent re-
strictions. ' For all men,' said he, ' cannot
bear the practice of rigid continence ; neither
perhaps would the chastity of the wife of each
be preserved ' : and he termed the intercourse
of a man with his lawful wife chastity. It
would be sufficient, he thought, that such as
had previously entered on their sacred calling
should abjure matrimony, according to the an-
cient tradition of the Church : but that none
should be separated from her to whom, while
yet unordained, he had been united. And these
sentiments he expressed, although himself with-
out experience of marriage, and, to speak
plainly, without ever having known a woman :
for from a boy he had been brought up in a
monastery,* and was specially renowned above

• Above, chap. 8.

' Cf. Apoit. Cann. 5, 17, 26, 51. In general, voluntary celibacy
of the clergy was encouraged in the ancient Church.
' Heb. xiii. 4.

* aaKffT^fiia: lit. ' place for the exercise ' 0/ virtue.


all men for his chastity. The whole assembly
of the clergy assented to the reasoning of Paph-
nutius : wherefore they silenced all further de-
bate on this point, leaving it to the discretion
of those who were husbands to exercise absti-
nence if they so wished in reference to their
wives. Thus much concerning Paphnutius.


J>


CHAPTER XII.


0/ Spyridon, Bishop of the Cypriots.

With respect to Spyridon, so great was his
sanctity while a shepherd, that he was thought
worthy of being made a Pastor of men : and
having been assigned the bishopric of one of
the cities in Cyprus named Trimithus, on ac-
count of his extreme humility he continued to
feed his sheep during his incumbency of the
bishopric. Many extraordinary things are re-
lated of him : I shall however record but one or
two, lest I should seem to wander from my sub-
ject. Once about midnight, thieves having clan-
destinely entered his sheepfold attempted to
carry off some of the sheep. But God who
protected the shepherd preserved his sheep
also ; for the thieves were by an invisible power
bound to the folds. At daybreak, when he
came to the sheep and found the men with
their hands tied behind them, he understood
what was done : and after having prayed he
liberated the thieves, earnestly admonishing and
exhorting them to support themselves by honest
labor, and not to take anything unjustly. He
then gave them a ram, and sent them away,
humorously adding, ' that ye may not appear to
have watched all night in vain.' This is one
of the miracles in connection with Spyridon.
Another was of this kind. He had a virgin
daughter named Irene, who was a partaker of
her father's piety. An acquaintance entrusted
to her keeping an ornament of considerable
value : she, to guard it more securely, hid what
had been deposited with her in the ground, and
not long afterwards died. Subsequently the
owner of the property came to claim it ; and
not finding the virgin, he began an excited conver-
sation with the father, at times accusing him
of an attempt to defraud him, and then again
beseeching him to restore the deposit. The
old man, regarding this person's loss as his own
misfortune, went to the tomb of his daughter,
and called upon God to show him before its
proper season the promised resurrection. Nor
was he disappointed in his hope : for the virgin
again reviving appeared to her father, and having
pointed out to him the spot where she had hidden
the ornament, she once more departed. Such
characters as these adorned the churches in the


I. 14-]


EUTYCHIAN'S MIRACLES.


1


19


time of the emperor Constantine. These details
I obtained from many inhabitants of Cyprus. I
have also found a treatise composed in Latin by
the presbyter Rufinus, from which I have col-
lected these and some other things which will
be hereafter adduced.'


v<


\


y


\v


CHAPTER XIIL
Of Eutychian the Monk.


I HAVE heard moreover concerning Euty-
chian, a devout person who flourished about
the same time ; who also belonged to the Nova-
tian church, yet was venerated for the perform-
ance of similar miracles. I shall unequivocally
state my authority for this narrative, nor will I
attempt' to conceal it, even though I give offense
to some parties. It was Auxanon, a very aged
presbyter of the Novatian church ; who when
quite a youth accompanied Acesius to the Synod
at Niccca, and related to me what I have said
concerning him. His life extended from that
period to the reign of Theodosius the Younger ;
and when I was a mere youth he recounted to
me the acts of Eutychian, enlarging much on
the divine grace which was manifested in him :
but one circumstance he alluded to, which oc-
curred in the reign of Constantine, peculiarly
worthy of mention. One of those military at-
tendants, whom the emperor calls his domestic
[or body] guards having been suspected of
treasonable practices, sought his safety in flight.
The indignant monarch ordered that he should
be put to death, wherever he might be found :
who, having been arrested on the Bithynian
Olympus, was bound with heavy and painful
chains and kept imprisoned near those parts of
Olympus where Eutychian was leading a solitary
life, and healing both the bodies and souls of
many. The aged Auxanon being then very
young was with him, and was being trained by
him in the discipline of the monastic life.
Many persons came to this Eutychian, entreat-
ing him to procure the release of the prisoner
by interceding for him with the emperor. For
the fame of the miracles done by Eutychian had
reached the ears of the emperor. He readily
pro'-iiised to go to the sovereign ; but as the
chiins inflicted intolerable suffering, those who
interested themselves on his behalf declared that
death caused by the effect of his chains would
anticipate both the emperor's vengeance and
any intercession that might be made for the
prisoner. Accordingly Eutychian sent to the
jailers requesting them to relieve the man ; but
they having answered that they should bring


themselves into danger by relieving a criminal,
he went himself to the prison, attended by Aux-
anon ; and as they refused to open the jail, the
grace which rested on Etitychian was rendered
more conspicuous : for the gates of the prison
opened of their own accord, while the jailers
had the keys in their custody. As soon as
Eutychian, together with Auxanon, had entered
the prison, to the great astonishment of all then
present the fetters spontaneously fell from the
prisoner's limbs. He then proceeded with Aux-
anon to the city which was anciently called
Byzantium but afterwards Constantinople, where
having been admitted into the imperial palace,
he saved the man from death ; for the emperor,
entertaining great veneration for Eutychian,
readily granted his request. This indeed oc-
curred some time after [the period to which
this part of our history refers].

The bishops who were convened at the coun-
cil of Nicaea, after having drawn up and enrolled
certain other ecclesiastical regulations which
they are accustomed to term canons, again de-
parted to their respective cities : and as I con-
ceive it will be appreciated by lovers of learning,
I shall here subjoin the names of such as were
present, as far as I have been able to ascertain
them, with the province and city over which
they severally presided, and likewise the date
at which this assembly took place. Hosius, who
was I believe bishop of Cordova in Spain, as I
have before stated. Vito and Vicentius, pres-
byters of Rome, Alexander, bishop of Egypt,
Eustathius of Anliochia Magna, Macarius of
Jerusalem, and Harpocration of Cynopolis : the
names of the rest are fully reported in The Sy-
nodicon'^ of Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.
This Synod was convened (as we have discov-
ered from the notation of the date prefixed to
the record of the Synod) in the consulate of
Paulinus and Julian, on the 20th day of May, |
and in the 636th year from the reign of .Alexan-
der the Macedonian.- Accordingly the work of
the council was accomplished. It should be
noted that after the council the emperor went
into the western parts of the empire.


1 On the use Socrates made of Rufinus, and the question of his
knowledge of Latin therein involved, see Introd. p. x.


CHAPTER XIV.

Eitsebiiis Bishop of Nicomcdia, and Theognis
Bishop of Niccea, who had been batiished for
Oi^reeing in Opinion with Ariits, having pub-
lished their Recantation, and assented to the
Creed, are reinstated in their Sees.

EusEBius^and Theognis having sent a peni-
tential confession to the principal bishops, were

' This work of Athanasius is not now extant.
- May 20, 325 A.D.

1 This is not in its place according to chronological order, inas-
much as it occurred in 328 a.d. It appears also from the accounts


20


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


y


[1. 14-


by an imperial edict recalled from exile and re-
stored to their own churches, displacing those
who had been ordained in their places ; Euse-
bius [displacing] Amphion, and Theognis Chres-
tus. This is a copy of their written retraction :

* We having been sometime since condemned
by your jnety, without a formal trial, ought to
bear in silence the decisions of your sacred
adjudication. But since it is unreasonable that
■we by silence should countenance caluminators
against ourselves, we on this account declare
that we entirely concur with you in the faith ;
and also that, after having closely considered
the import of the term consubstantial, we have
been wholly studious of peace, having never
followed the heresy. After suggesting whatever
entered our thought for the security of the
churches, and fully assuring those under our in-
fluence, we subscribed the declaration of faith ;
we did not subscribe the anathematizing ; no*^
as objecting to the creed, but as disbelieving the
party accused to be such as was represented,
having been satisfied on this point, both from
his own letters to us, and from personal conver-
sations. But if your holy council was convinced,
we not opposing but concurring in your decis-
ions, by this statement give them our full assent
and confirmation : and this we do not as wearied
with our exile, but to shake off the suspicion of
heresy. If therefore ye should now think fit to
restore us to your presence, ye will have us on
all points conformable, and acquiescent in your
decrees : especially since it has seemed good to
your piety to deal tenderly with and recall even
him who was primarily accused. It would be
absurd for us to be silent, and thus give pre-
sumptive evidence against ourselves, when the
one who seemed responsible has been permitted
to clear himself from the charges brought against
him. Vouchsafe then, as is consistent with that
Christ-loving piety of yours, to remind our most
religious emperor, to present our petitions, and
to determine speedily concerning us in a way
becoming yourselves.'

Such was the language of the recantation of
Eusebius and Theognis ; from which I infer
that they had subscribed the articles of faith
which had been set forth, l)ut would not become
parties to the condemnation of Arius. It ap-
pears also that Arius was recalled before them ;
but, although this may be true, yet he had been
forbidden to enter Alexandria. This is evident
from the fact that he afterwards devised a way
of return for himself, both into the church and
into Alexandria, by having made a fictitious
repentance, as we shall show in its proper place.


of the other historians of this period that Socrates does not give the
correct reason for the banishment of Eusebius and Theognis. Cf.
Theodoret, H. E. I. 20; also Sozom. I. 21.


CHAFFER XV.

After the Synod, on the Death of Alexander,
Athanasius is constituted Bishop of Alexan-
dria.

A LiiTLE after this, Alexander bishop of Alex-
andria having died,' Athanasius was set over
that church. Rufinus relates, that this [Athana-
sius] when quite a boy, played with others of his
own age at a sacred game : this was an imitation
of the priesthood and the order of consecrated
persons. In this game therefore Athanasius
was allotted the episcopal chair, and each of the
other lads personated either a presbyter or a
deacon. The children engaged in this sport
on the day in which the memory of the martyr
and bishop Peter was celebrated. Now at that
time Alexander bishop of Alexandria happening
to pass by, observed the play in which they
were engaged, and having sent for the children,
enquired from them the part each had been
assigned in the game, conceiving that something
might be portended by that which had been
done. He then gave directions that the chil-
dren should be taken to the church, and in-
structed in learning, but especially Athanasius ;
and having afterwards ordained him deacon on
his becoming of adult age, he brought him to
Nicaea to assist him in the disputations there
when the Synod was convened. This account
of Athanasius Rufinus has given in his own
writings ; nor is it improbable that it took place,
for many transactions of this kind have often
occurred. Concerning this matter it will suffice
to have said the above.^


CHAPTER XVI.

The Emperor Constantine having enlarged the
Ancient Byzantium, calls it Constantinople.

After the Synod the emperor spent some
time in recreation, and after the public celebra-
tion of his twentieth anniversary of his .acces-
sion,' he immediately devoted himself to the
reparation of the churches. This he carried
into effect in other cities as well as in the city
named after him, which being previously called
Byzantium, he enlarged, surrounded with mas-
sive walls,'^ and adorned with various edifices ;


' Socrates and Sozomen are both mistaken in pu;ting the death
of Alexander and ordination of Athanasius after the return of Euse-
bius and Theognis from exile. According to Theodoret (//. E.
I. 26), Alexander died a few months after the Council of Nicaea,
hence in 325 a.d., and Athanasius succeeded him at the end of the
same year, or at the beginning of the next.

' See, for additional features of the story not reproduced by
Socrates, Rufinus, H. E. I. 14.

' The Vicennalia.

' These walls were superseded by the great walls built under
Theodosius the Younger; see VII. 31.


1. 17.] RECOVERY OF THE CROSS OF CHRIST BY HELENA.


21


and having rendered it equal to imperial Rome,
he named it Constantinople, establishing by law
that it should be designated New Rome. This law
was engraven on a pillar of stone erected in public
view in the Strategium,' near the emperor's eques-
trian statue.'* He built also in the same city two
churches, one of which he named Irene, and the
other The Apostles!" Nor did he only improve
the affairs of the Christians, as I have said, but he
also destroyed the superstition of the heathens ;
for he brought forth their images into public
view to ornament the city of Constantinople,
and set up the Delphic tripods publicly in the
Hippodrome. It may indeed seem now super-
fluous to mention these things, since they are
seen before they are heard of. But at that time
the Christian cause received its greatest aug-
mentation ; for Divine Providence preserved
very many other things during the times of the
emperor Constantine.*^ Eusebius Pamphilus has
in magnificent terms recorded the praises of the
emperor ; ^ and I considered it would not be ill-
timed to advert thus to them as concisely as
possible.

CHAPTER XVII.

The Emperor's Mother Helena having cotne to
Jerusalem, searches for and finds the Cross of
Christ, and builds a Church.

Helena, the emperor's mother (from whose
name having made Drepanum, once a village, a
city, the emperor called it Helenopolis), being
divinely directed by dreams went to Jerusalem.
Finding that which was once Jerusalem, desolate
'as a Preserve for autumnal fruits,' ^ according to
the prophet, she sought carefully the sepulchre
of Christ, from which he arose after his burial ;
and after much difficulty, by God's help she
discovered it. What the cause of the difficulty
was I will explain in a i^w words. Those who
embraced the Christian faith, after the period
of his passion, greatly venerated this tomb ; but
those who hated Christianity, having covered
the spot with a mound of earth, erected on it a
temple to Venus, and set up her image there,
not caring for the memory of the place.^ This
succeeded for a long time ; and it became
known to the emperor's mother. Accordingly

' ' Mansion house,' the building in which the two chief magis-
trates had their headquarters.

* The city was formally dedicated as the capital of the empire
in 330 A.D.

^ Cf. II. 16, and I. 40.

8 The te.xt seems somewhat doubtful here. Valcsius conjectures
TO. re 6.k\a. ■nKtmna. icat touto /naAi(TTa, idiomatically, ' this among
many other things'; but the MSS. read more obscurely, ical oAAa
wAeio'Ta.

' Euseb. Life of Const. III. 33; cf. also 52-55.

1 Isa. i. 8. oTTiupoffruAa/cioi', ' a lodge in a garden of cucumbers,'
according to the English versions (both authorized and revised),
which follows the Hebrew; in the LXX the words kv aiKUT/paTw
are added.

2 See the Ep. of Constantine to Macarius, in chap. 9 above.


she having caused the statue'' to be thrown
down, the earth to be removed, and the ground
entirely cleared, found three crosses in the sepul-
chre : one of these was that blessed cross on
which Christ had hung, the other two were those
on which the two thieves that were crucified
with him had died. With these was also found
the tablet ■* of Pilate, on which he had inscribed
in various characters, that the Clirist who was
crucified was king of the Jews. Since, however,
it was doubtful which was the cross they were
in search of, the emperor's mother was not a
little distressed ; but from this trouble the bishop
of Jerusalem, Macarius, shortly relieved her.
And he solved the doubt by faith, for he sought
a sign from God and obtained it. The sign was
this : a certain woman of the neighborhood, who
had been long afilicted with disease, was now
just at the point of death ; the bishop therefore
arranged it so that each of the crosses should be
brought to the dying woman, believing that she
would be healed on touching the precious cross.
Nor was he disappointed in his e.xpcctation : for
the two crosses having been applied which were
not the Lord's, the woman still continued in a
dying state ; but when the third, which was the
true cross, touched her, she was immediately \
healed, and recovered her former strength. In
this manner then was the genuine cross discov-
ered. The emperor's mother erected over the
place of the sepulchre a magnificent church;'
and named it Nezu Jerusalem, having built it
facing that old and deserted city. There she
left a portion of the cross, enclosed in a silver
case, as a memorial to those who might wish to
see it : the other part she sent to the emperor,
who being persuaded that the city would be
perfectly secure where that relic should be pre-
served, privately enclosed it in his own statue,
which stands on a large column of porphyry in
the forum called Constantine's at Constanti-
nople. I have written this from report indeed ;
but almost all the inhabitants of Constantinople
affirm that it is true. Moreover the nails with
which Christ's hands were fastened to the cross
(for his mother having found these also in tlie
sepulchre had sent them) Constantine took and
had made into bridle-bits and a helmet, which •
he used in his military expeditions. The em-
peror supplied all materials for the construction
of the churches, and wrote to Macarius the
bishop to expedite these edifices. When the
emperor's mother had completed the New Jeru-
salem, she reared another church not at all
inferior, over the cave at Bethlehem where
Christ was born according to the flesh : nor
did she stop here, but built a third on the

^ ^orLvov, as distinguished from dyaA^a, or ai'Spta^, used with
less reverence; the word is derived from few, ' to polish.'
* <r<xvi^, ' board.'
° oiKQv fVKT-qpiov, ' house of prayer.'


V


22


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 17.


mount of his Ascension. So devoutly was she
affected in these matters, that she would pray
in the company of women ; and inviting the
virgins enrolled in the register" of the churches
to a repast, serving them herself, she brought
the dishes to table. She was also very munifi-
cent to the churches and to the poor ; and having
lived a life of piety, she died when about eighty
years old. Her remains were conveyed to New
Rome, the capital, and deposited in the imperial
sepulchres.


CHAPTER XVIII.

The Eviperor Constaniine abolishes Paganism
and erects many Churches in Different Places.

After this the emperor became increasingly
attentive to the interests of the Christians, and
abandoned the heathen superstitions. He abol-
ished the combats of the gladiators, and set up
his own statues in the temples. And as the
heathens affirmed that it was Serapis who brought
up the Nile for the purpose of irrigating Egypt,
because a cubit was usually carried into his
temple, he directed Alexander to transfer the
cubit to the church. And although they pre-
dicted that the Nile would not overflow because
of the displeasure of Serapis, nevertheless there
was an inundation in the following year and
afterwards, taking place regularly : thus it was
proved by fact that the rising of the Nile was
not in consequence of their superstition, but by
reason of the decrees of Providence. About
the same time those barbarians the Sarmatians
and Goths made incursions on the Roman terri-
tory ; yet the emperor's earnestness respecting
the churches was by no means abated, but he
made suitable provision for both these matters.
Placing his confidence in the Christian banner,'
he completely vanquished his enemies, so as
even to cast off the tribute of gold which preced-
ing emperors were accustomed to pay the barba-
rians : while they themselves, being terror-struck
j^t the unexpectedness of their defeat, then for
the first time embraced the Christian religion,
by means of which Constantine had beeij pro-
tected. Again he built other churches, one of
which was erected near the Oak of Mamre,
under which the Sacred Oracles declare that
Abraham entertained angels. For the emperor
having been informed that altars had been
reared under that oak, and that pagan sacrifices
were offered upon them, censured by letter
Eusebius bishop of Caesarea, and ordered that
the altars should be demolished, and a house of

" Ktivovx.: a word of many meanings; sec Sophocles' Lex. and a
dissertation on the word in Westcott On the Canon Appendix A,

' rporaKii: see above, chap. 3.


prayer erected beside the oak. He also di-
rected that another church should be constnicted
in Heliopolis in Phoenicia, for this reason. Who
originally legislated for the inhabitants of Heli-
opolis I am unable to state, but his character and
morals may be judged of from the [practice of
that] city ; for the laws of the country ordered
the women among them to be common, and
therefore the children born there were of doubt-
ful descent, so that there was no distinction of
fathers and their offspring. Their virgins also
were presented for prostitution to the strangers
who resorted thither. The emperor hastened to
correct this evil which had long prevailed among
them. And passing a solemn law of chastity,
he removed the shameful evil and provided for
the mutual recognition of families. And having
built churches there, he took care that a bishop
and sacred clergy should be ordained. Thus
he reformed the corrupt manners of the peo-
ple of Heliopolis. He likewise demolished the
temple of Venus at Aphaca on Mount Libanus,
and abolished the infamous deeds which were
there celebrated. Why need I describe his ex-
pulsion of the Pythonic demon from Cilicia, by
commanding the mansion in which he was lurk-
ing to be razed from its foundations? So great
indeed was the emperor's devotion to Christian-
ity, that when he was about to enter on a war
with Persia, he prepared a tabernacle formed of
embroidered linen on the model of a church,
just as Moses had done in the wilderness ; ^ and
this so constructed as to be adapted to convey-
ance from place to place, in order that he might
have a house of prayer even in the most desert
regions. But the war was not at that time ,
carried on, being prevented through dread of ^,
the emperor. It would, I conceive, be out of ]
place here to describe the emperor's diligence
in rebuilding cities and converting many villages
into cities ; as for example Drepanum, to which
he gave his mother's name, and Constantia in
Palestine, so called from his sister. Eor my task
is not to enumerate of the emperor's actions, buti
simply such as are connected with Cliristianity,
and especially those which relate to the churches. '
Wherefore I leave to others more competent
to detail such matters, the emperor's glorious
achievements, inasmuch as they belong to a dif-
ferent subject, and rcfjuire a distinct treatise.
But 1 myself should have been silent, if the
Church had remained undisturbed by divisions -^
for where the subject does not supply matter
for relation, there is no necessity for a narrator.
Since however subtle and vain disputation has
confused and at the same time scattered the
apostolic faith of Christianity, I thought it desir-
able to record these things, in order that the


' Ex. XXXV. -xl.


1. 19.]


CONVERSION OF ETHIOPIA TO CHRISTIANITY.


23


transactions of the churches might not be lost in
obscurity. P'or accurate information on these
points procures celebrity among the many, and
at the same time renders hfm who is acquainted
with them more secure from error, and instructs
him not to be carried away by any empty sound
of sophistical argumentation which he may
chance to hear.


CHAPTER XIX.^

In what Manner the Nations in the Interior
of India %vere Christianized in the Times of
Constantine.

We must now mention in what manner Chris-
tianity was spread in this emperor's reign : for
it was in his time that the nations both of the
Indians in the interior, and of the Iberians first
embraced the Christian faith. But I shall briefly
explain why I have used the appended ex-
pression in the interior. When the apostles
went forth by lot among the nations, Thomas
received the apostleship of the Parthians ; Mat-
thew was allotted Ethiopia; and Bartholomew
the part of India contiguous to that country :
but the interior India, in which many barbarous
nations using different languages lived, was not
enlightened by Christian doctrine before the
times of Constantine. I now come to speak of
the cause which led them to become converts
to Christianity. A certain philosopher, Mero-
pius, a Tyrian by race, determined to acquaint
himself with the country of the Indians, being
stimulated to this by the example of the philos-
opher Metrodorus, who had previously traveled
through the region of India. Having taken
with him therefore two youths to whom he was
related, who were by no means ignorant of the
Greek language, Meropius reached the country
by ship ; and when he had inspected whatever
he wished, he touched at a certain place which
had a safe harbor, for the purpose of procuring
some necessaries. It so happened that a little
before that time the treaty between the Romans
and Indians had been violated. The Indians,
therefore, having seized the philosopher and
those who sailed with him, killed them all
except his two youthful kinsmen ; but sparing
them from compassion for their tender age,
they sent them as a gift to the king of the
Indians. He being pleased with the personal

• ' In this chapter Socrates has translated Rufiniis ( H. E. I. 9)
almost word for word; and calls those tottovs iJia^oi'Ta';, which Ru-
finus has termed conventicula. Now coitventicula are properly
private places wherein collects or short prayers are made; and from
these places churches are distinguished, which belong to the right of
the public, and are not in the power of any private person. It is to
be observed that there are reasons for thinking that this conversion
of the Indians by Frumentius happened in the reign of Constnntins
and not of Constantine ' (Valesius). .See also Euseb. H. E. V. 10,
attributing an earlier work to the apostles Matthew and Bartholomew ;


appearance of the youths, constituted one of
them, whose name was Edesius, cup-bearer at
his table ; the other, named Frumentius, he
entrusted with the care of the royal records.
The king dying soon after, left them free, the
government devolving on his wife and infant
son. Now the queen seeing her son thus left
in his minority, begged the young men to under-
take the charge of him, until he should become
of adult age. Accordingly, the youths accepted
the task, and entered on the administration of
the kingdom. Thus Frumentius controlled all
things and made it a task to enquire whether
among the Roman merchants trafficking with
that country, there were any Christian* to be
found : and having discovered some, he informed
them who he was, and exhorted them to select
and occupy some appropriate places for the
celebration of Christian worship. In the course
of a little while he built a house of prayer ; and
having instructed some of the Indians in the
principles of Christianity, they fitted them for
participation in the worship. On the young
king's reaching maturity, Frumentius and his
associates resigned to him the administration of
public affairs, in the management of which they
had' honorably acquitted themselves, and be-
sought permibsion to return to their ov\ti coun-
try. Both the king and his mother entreated
them to remain ; but being desirous of revisit-
ing their native place, they could not be pre-
vailed on, and consequently departed. Edesius
for his part hastened to Tyre to see his parents
and kindred ; but Frumentius arriving at Alex-
andria, reported the affair to Athanasius the
bishop, who had but recently been invested
with that dignity ; and acquainting him both
with the particulars of his wanderings and the
hopes Indians had of receiving Christianity.-
He also begged him to send a bishop and clergy
there, and by no means to neglect those who
might thus be brought to salvation. Athanasius
having considered how this could be most profit-
ably effected, requested Frumentius himself to
accept the bishopric, declaring that he could ap-
l^oint no one more suitable than he was. Accord-
ingly this was done ; Frumentius invested with
episcopal authority, returned to India and be-
came there a preacher of the Gospel, and built
several churches, being aided also by divine
grace, he performed various miracles, healing
with the souls also the bodily diseases of many.
Rufinus assures us that he heard these facts
from Edesius, who was afterwards ordained to
the priesthood at Tyre.^

■anAQsMC, Lives pf the Apostles. The Indians mentioned in this
chapter are no other than the Abyssinians. The name India is
used as an equivalent of Ethiopia. The christianization of Ethiopia
is attributed by the Ethiopians in their own records to Fremonatos
and Sydracos. See Ludolf.ft'/i/. Eth. III. 2.

- Christianity here must mean Christian instruction.

^ €u/<T)jpia: see note 5, chap. 17 above.


24


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 20.


CHAPTER XX.

In what Manner the Iberians were converted to
Christianity.

It is now proper to relate how the Iberians '
about the same time became proselytes to the
faith. A certain woman leading a devout and
chaste life, was, in the providential ordering of
God, taken captive by the Iberians. Now these
Iberians dwell near the Euxine Sea, and are a
colony of the Iberians of Spain. Accordingly
the woman in her captivity exercised ^ herself
among the barbarians in the practice of virtue :
for she not only maintained the most rigid con-
tinence, but spent much time in fastings and
prayers. The barbarians observing this were
astonished at the strangeness of her conduct.
It happened then that the king's son, then a
mere babe, was attacked with disease ; the queen,
according to the custom of the country, sent
the child to other women to be cured, in the
hope that their experience would supply a
remedy. After the infant had been carried
around by its nurse without obtaining relief
from any of the women, he was at length
brought to this captive. She had no knowledge
of the medical art, and applied no material
remedy ; but taking the child and laying it on
her bed vvhich was made of horsecloth, in the
presence of other females, she simply said,
' Christ, who healed many, will heal this child
also ' ; then having prayed in addition to this
expression of faith, and called upon God, the
boy was immediately restored, and continued
well from that period. The report of this
miracle spread itself far and wide among the
barbarian women, and soon reached the queen,
so that the captive became very celebrated.
Not long afterwards the queen herself having
fallen sick sent for the captive woman. Inas-
much as she being a person of modest and re-
tiring manners excused herself from going, the
queen was conveyed to her. The captive did
the same to her as she had done to her son
before ; and immediately the disease was re-
moved. And the queen thanked the stranger ;
but she rephcd, ' this work is not mine, but
Christ's, who is the Son of God that made the
world ' ; she therefore exhorted her to call
upon him, and acknowledge the true God.
Amazed at his wife's sudden restoration to health,
the king of the Iberians wished to requite with


• These Iberians dwelt on the east shore of the Black Sea in the
present region of Georgia. What their relation to the .Spanish Ibe-
rians was, or why both the peoples had the same name it is not
possible to know at present. It was probably not the one suggested
by Socrates. For a similar identity of name in peoples living widely
apart, compare the Gauls of Europe and the Galata; of Asia.

' ci^iAotroc^t : the ethical sense herc^ttachcd to the word became
very common after the time of the Stoics and their attempt to make
ethics the basis and starting-point of philosophy.


gifts her whom he had understood to be the
means of effecting these cures ; she however
said that she needed not riches, inasmuch as
she possessed as riches the consolations of re-
ligion ; but that she would regard as the greatest
present he could offer her, his recognition of
the God whom she worshiped and declared.
With this she sent back the gifts. This answer
the king treasured up in his mind, and going
forth to the chase the next day, the following
circumstance occurred : a mist arid thick dark-
ness covered the mountain tops and forests
where he was hunting, so that their sport was
embarrassed, and their path became inextricable.
In this perplexity the prince earnestly invoked
the gods whom he worshiped ; and as it availed
nothing, he at last determined to implore the
assistance of the captive's God ; when scarcely
had he begun to pray, ere the darkness arising
from the mist was completely dissipated. Won-
dering at that which was done, he returned to
his palace rejoicing, and related to his wife
what had happened ; he also immediately sent
for the captive stranger, and begged her to in-
form him who that God was whom she adored.
The woman on her arrival caused the king of
the Iberians to become a preacher of Christ :
for having believed in Christ through this de-
voted woman, he convened all the Iberians who
were under his authority ; and when he had
declared to them what had taken place in refer-
ence to the cure of his wife and child not
only, but also the circumstances connected with
the chase, he exhorted them to worship the
God of the captive. Thus, therefore, both the
king and the queen were made preachers of
Christ, the one addressing their male, and the
other their female subjects. Moreover, the king
having ascertained from his prisoner the plan
on which churches were constructed among the
Romans, ordered a church to be built, and im-
mediately provided all things necessary for its
erection ; ind the edifice was accordingly com-
menced. But when they came to set up the
pillars, Divine Providence interposed for the
confirmation of the inhabitants in the faith ;
for one of the columns remained immovable,
and no means were found capable of moving
it ; but their ropes broke and their machinery
fell to pieces ; at length the workmen gave up
all further effort and departed. Then was
proved the reality of the captive's faith in the
following manner : going to the place at night
without the knowledge of any one, she spent
the whole time in prayer ; and by the power of
God the ])illar was raised, and stood erect in
the air above its base, yet so as not to touch it.
At daybreak the king, who was an intelligent
person, came himself to inspect the work, and
seeing the pillar suspended in this position


22.]


ORIGIN OF MANICH^ISM.


25


without support, both he and his attendants
were amazed. Shortly after, in fact before
their very eyes, the pillar descended on its own
pedestal, and there remained fixed. Upon this
the people shouted, attesting the truth of the
king's faith, and hymning the praise of the God
of the captive. They believed thenceforth, and
with eagerness raised the rest of the columns,
and the whole building was soon completed.
An embassy was afterwards sent to the Emperor
Constantine, requesting that henceforth they
might be in alliance with the Romans, and re-
ceive from them a bishop and consecrated
clergy, since they sincerely believed in Christ.
Rufinus says that he learned these facts from
Bacurius,' who was formerly one of the petty
princes* of the Iberians, but subsequently went
over to the Romans, and was made a captain
of the military force in Palestine ; being at
length entmsted with the supreme command in
the war against the tyrant Maximus, he assisted
the Emperor Theodosius. In this way then,
during the days of Constantine, were the Ibe-
rians also converted to Christianity.


CHAPTER XXI.

Of Anthony the Monk.

What sort of a man the monk Anthony was,
who lived in the same age, in the Egyptian
desert, and how he openly contended with
devils, clearly detecting their devices and wily
modes of warfare, and how he performed many
miracles, it would be superfluous for us to say ;
for Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, has antici-
pated us, having devoted an entire book to his
biography.^ Of such good men there was a
large number at one time during the years of
the Emperor Constantine.


CHAPTER XXII.

Of Manes, the Founder of the Manichcean
Heresy, and on his Origin.

But amidst the good wheat, tares are accus
tomed to spring up ; for envy loves to plot in-
sidiously against the good. Hence it was that
a Uttle while before the time of Constantine, a
species of heathenish Christianity made its ap-
pearance together with that which was real ;
just as false prophets sprang up among the true,

3 Rufinus, H. E. I. 10, gives their story and adds that Bacurius
was a faithful and religious person and rendered service to Theo-
dosius in his war with Eugenius.

< ^aaiAiaKO!: lit. ' little king.'

' Athanasius' L.ife 0/ Anthony is included in the editions of his
works, such as the Benedictine (1698), that of Padua (1777). On
Anthony, see also Soz. I. 3; II. 31, 34,


and false apostles among the true apostles. For
at that time a dogma of Empedocles, the hea-
then philosopher, by means of Manichaeus, as-
sumed the form of Christian doctrine. Euse-
bius Pamphilus has indeed mentioned this per-
son in the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical
History,' but has not entered into minute details
concerning him. Wherefore, I deem it incum-
bent on me to supply some particulars which he
has left unnoticed : thus it will be known who
this Manichaeus was, whence he came, and what
was the nature of his presumptuous daring.

A Saracen named Scythian married a captive
from the Upper Thebes. On her account he
dwelt in Egypt, and having versed himself in
the learning of the Egyptians, he subtly intro-
duced the theory of Empedocles and Pythago-
ras among the doctrines of the Christian faith.
Asserting that there were two natures, a good
and an evil one, he termed, as Empedocles had
done, the latter Discord, and the former friend-
ship. Of this Scythian, Buddas, who had been
previously called Terebinthus, became a disciple ;
and he having proceeded to Babylon, which the
Persians inhabit, made many extravagant state-
ments respecting himself, declaring that he was
born of a virgin, and brought up in the moun-
tains. The same man afterwards composed
four books, one he entitled The Mysteries,
another The Gospel, a third The Treasure ^
and the fourth Heads \_Sii>njnaries'\ ; but pre-
tending to perform some mystic rites, he was
hurled down a precipice by a spirit,' and so
perished. A certain woman at whose house he
had lodged buried him, and taking possession
of his property, bought a boy about seven years
old whose name was Cubricus : this lad she en-
franchised, and having given him a liberal educa-
tion, she soon after died, leaving him all that
belonged to Terebinthus, including the books he
had written on the principles inculcated by
Scythian. Cubricus, the freedman, taking these
things with him and having withdrawn into the
regions of Persia, changed his name, calling him-
self Manes ; and disseminated the books of
Buddas or Terebinthus among his deluded fol-,
lowers as his own. Now the contents of these \
treatises apparently agree with Christianity in
expression, but are pagan in sentiment : for
Manichaius being an atheist, incited his disci-
ples to acknowledge a plurality of gods, and
taught them to worship the sun. He also intro-
duced the doctrine of Fate, denying human
free-will ; and affirmed a transmutation ^ of
bodies, clearly following the opinions of Empe-
docles, Pythagoras, and the Egyptians. He

' Cf. Eus. H. E. VII. 31. The literature of Manichseism is
voluminous and will be found in Smith, Diet, of the Bible, as-
well as encyclopaedias like Herzog, McClintock and Strong, &c.

- rrvfvy.a.TO'i: possibly ' wind.'

8 /ueTcccraj^aTtija'ti', the converse of metempsychosis.


26


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[1.22.


denied that Christ existed in the flesh, asserting
that he was an apparition ; and rejected more-
over the law and the prophets, caUing himself the
* Comforter,' — all of which dogmas are totally
at variance with the orthodox faith of the church.
In his epistles he even dared to call himself an
apostle ; but for a pretension so unfounded he
brought upon himself merited retribution in
the following manner. The son of the Persian
monarch having been attacked with disease, his
father became anxious for his recovery, and left
no means untried in order to effect it ; and as
he had heard of the wonder-working of Mani-
chsus, and thinking that these miracles were
real, he sent for him as an aposde, trusting that
through him his son might be restored. He ac-
cordingly presented himself at court, and with
his assumed manner undertook the treatment
of the young prince. But the king seeing that
the child died in his hands shut up the deceiver
in prison, with the intention of putting him to
death. However, he contrived to escape, and
fled into Mesopotamia ; but the king of Persia
having discovered that he was dwelling there,
caused him to be brought thence by force, and
after having flayed him alive, he stuffed his skin
with chaff, and suspended it in front of the gate
of the city. These things we state not having
manufactured them ourselves, but collected from
a book entitled The disputatioti of Atchelaus
bishop of Caschara (one of the cities of
Mesopotamia).* For Archelaus himself states
that he disputed with Manichaeus face to face,
and mentions the circumstances connected with
his life to which we have now alluded. Envy
thus delights, as we before remarked, to be in-
sidiously at work in the midst of a prosperous
condition of affairs. But for what reason the
goodness of Cod permits this to be done,
whether he wishes thereby to bring into activity
the excellence of the principles of the church,
and to utterly break down the self-importance
which IS wont to unite itself with faith ; or for
what other cause, is, at the same time, a difficult
question, and not relevant to the present discus-
sion. For our object is neither to examine the
soundness of doctrinal views, nor to analyze the
mysterious reasons for the providences and
judgments of God ; but to detail as faithfully as
possible the history of transactions which have
taken place in the churches. The way in which
the superstition of the Manichoeans sprang up a
little before the time of Constantine has been
thus described ; now let us return to the times
and events which are the proper subjects of this
history.


CHAPTER XXin.

Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis
Bishop of Niccca, having recoi'cred Confidence,
endeavor to subvert the Nicene Creed, by plot-
ting against Athanasius.

The partisans of Eusebius and Theognis hav-
ing returned from their exile, these latter were
reinstated in their churches, having expelled, as
we observed, those who had been ordained in
their stead. Moreover, they came into great
consideration with the emperor, who honored
them exceedingly, as those who had returned
from error to the orthodox faith. They, how-
ever, abused the license thus aflbrded them, by
exciting greater commotions in the world than
they had done before ; being instigated to this
by two causes — on the one hand the Arian
heresy with which they had been previously
infected, and bitter animosity against Athana-
sius on the other, because he had so vigorously
withstood them in the Synod while the articles
of faith were under discussion. And in the first
place they objected to the ordination of Athana-
sius partly as a person unworth)' of the prelacy,
and partly because he had been elected by dis-
qualified persons. But when Athanasius had
shown himself superior to this calumny (for
having assumed control of the church of Alex-
andria, he ardently contended for the Nicene
creed), then Eusebius exerted himself to the
utmost insidiously to cause the removal of Atha-
nasius and to bring Arius back to Alexandria ;
for he thought that thus only he should be able
to cxi)unge the doctrine of consubstantiality,
and introduce Arianism. Eusebius therefore
wrote to Athanasius, desiring him to re-admit
Arius and his adherents into the church. Now
the tone of his letter indeed was that of entreaty,
but openly he menaced him. And as Athana-
sius would by no means accede to this, he en-
deavored to induce the emperor to give Arius
an audience, and then i)ermit him to return to
Alexandria : and by what means he attained his
object, I shall mention in its proper place.
Meanwhile before this another commotion was
raised in the church. .In fact, her own children
again disturbed her peace. Eusebius Pamphilus
says,* that immediately after the Synod, Egypt
became agitated by intestine divisions : not as-
signing, however, the reason for this, so that
hence he has won the reputation of disingenu-
ousness, and of avoiding to specify the causes of


* The more commonly known name of the town is ' Carrha,' and
the exact title of Archelaus' work as it appears in Valesius' Anno-
tationrs [cd. of 1677, see Introd. p. xvi.] is Disputatio advtrsus


Mttnic/itrum. It constitutes p. 197-203 of the Annotatioiies, and
is in Latin. It has been published also in Latin by L. A. Zacagui
in his collectanea monumentorum vrterum Ecclcsia Grirca ac
Laiintr, 1698.

> Kuseb. Lt/eof Const. IIL 23.


1. 24.]


EUSTATHIUS OF ANTIOCH DEPOSED.


27


these dissensions, from a determination on his
part not to give his sanction to the proceedings
at Nicaea. Yet as we ourselves have discovered
from various letters which the bishops wrote to
one another after the Synod, the term homoou-
sios troubled some of them. So that while they
occupied themselves in a too minute investiga-
tion of its import, they roused the strife against
each other ; it seemed not unlike a contest in
the dark ; for neither party appeared to under-
stand distinctly the grounds on which they calum-
niated one another. Those who objected to
the word hotnoousios, conceived that those who
approved it favored the opinion of Sabellius"
and Montanus ; " they therefore called them
blasphemers, as subverting the existence of the
Son of God. And again the advocates of this
term, charging their opponents with polytheism,
inveighed against theni as introducers of heathen
superstitions. Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, ac-
cuses Eusebius Pamphilus of perverting the Ni-
cene Creed ; Eusebius again denies that he vio-
lates that exposition of the faith, and recrimi-
nates, saying that Eustathius was a defender of
the opinion of Sabellius. In consequence of
these misunderstandings, each of them wrote as
if contending against adversaries : and although
it was admitted on both sides that the Son of
God has a distinct person and existence, and all
acknowledged that there is one God in three
Persons, yet from what cause I am unable to
divine, they could not agree among themselves,
and therefore could in no way endure to be at
peace.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Of the Svnod held at Antiocli, which deposed
Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, on whose
account a Sedition broke out and almost
ruined the City.

Having therefore convened a Synod at An-
tioch, they deposed Eustathius, as a supporter
of the Sabellian heresy, rather than of the tenets
which the council at Nicaea had formulated.
As some affirm [this measure was taken] for
other and unsatisfactory reasons, though none
other have been openly assigned : this is a
matter of common occurrence ; the bishops are
accustomed to do this in all cases, accusing and
pronouncing impious those whom they depose,
but not explaining their warrant for so doing.
George, bishop of Laodicea in Syria, one of the

' Cf. ch. 5, and note.

' It is not clear why Socrates joins the name of Montanus to that
of Sabellius; the former was undoubtedly in accord with the com-
mon doctrine of the church as to the Trinity. Cf. Epiphan. H<fr.
XLVIII. and TertulUan ad. Praxeam. It was, however, fre-
quently alleged by various writers of the age that Montanus and the
Montanists held erroneous views concerning the Godhead. See
Eus. H. E. V. 16.


number of those who abominated the term hotno-
ousios, assures us in his Encomium of Eusebius
Emiscnus, that they deposed Eustathius as
favoring Sabellianism, on the impeachment of
Cyrus, bishop of Bercea. Of FLusebius Emise-
nus we shall speak elsewhere in due order.'
George has written of Eustathius [somewhat
inconsistently] ; for after asserting that he was
accused by Cyrus of maintaining the heresy of
Sabellius, he tells us again that Cyrus himself
was convicted of the same error, and degraded
for it. Now how was it possible that Cyrus
should accuse Eustathius as a Sabellian, when
he inclined to Sabellianism himself? It appears
likely therefore that Eustathius must have been
condemned on other grounds. At that time,
however, there arose a dangerous sedition at
Antioch on account of his deposition : for when
they proceeded to the election of a successor,
so fierce a dissension was kindled, as to threaten
the whole city with destruction. The populace
was divided into two factions, one of which
vehemently contended for the translation of
Eusebius Pamphilus from Ca^sarea in Palestine
to Antioch ; the other equally insisted on the
reinstatement of Eustathius. And the popu-
lace of the city were infected with the spirit
of partisanship in this quarrel among the Chris-
tians, a military force was arrayed on both sides
with hostile intent, so that a bloody collision
would have taken place, had not God and the
dread of the emperor repressed the violence of
the multitude. For the emperor through letters,
and Eusebius by refusing to accept the bishop-
ric, served to allay the ferment : on which ac-
count that prelate was exceedingly admired by
the emperor, who wrote to him commending his
prudent determination, and congratulating him
as one who was considered worthy of being
bishop not of one, city merely, but of almost the
whole world. Consequently it is said that the
episcopal chair of the church at Antioch was
vacant for eight consecutive years after this
period ; - but at length by the exertions of those
who aimed at the subversion of the Nicene
creed, Euphronius was duly installed. This is
the amount of my information respecting the
Synod held at Antioch on account of Eustathius.
Immediately after these events Eusebius, who
had long before left Berytus, and was at that
time presiding over the church at Nicomcdia,
strenuously exerted himself in connection to
those of his ])arty, to bring back Arius to
Alexandria. But how they managed to effect
this, and by what means the emperor was pre-


1 Sec II. 9.

2 Socr;ites is in error here, as according to Eusebius {//. E.
X. i), immedi.itely after the deposition of P^ustathius and his own
refusal of the bishopric of Antioch, Paulinus was transferred there
from the see of Tyre. This was in 329 A.D., so that no vacancy of
eight years intervened.


28


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 24.


vailed on to admit both Arius and with him
Euzoius into his presence must now be related.

CHAPTER XXV.

Of the Presbyter who exerted himself for the
Recall of Arius}

The Emperor Constantine had a sister named
Constantia, the widow of Licinius, who had for
some time shared the imperial dignity with Con-
stantine, but had assumed tyrannical powers and
had been put to death in consequence. This prin-
cess maintained in her household establishment
a certain confidential presbyter, tinctured with
the dogmas of Arianism ; Eusebius and others
having prompted him, he took occasion in his
familiar conversations with Constantia, to insinu-
ate that the Synod had done Arius injustice, and
that the common report concerning him was not
true. Constantia gave full credence to the pres-
byter's assertions, but durst not report them to
the emperor. Now it happened that she be-
came dangerously ill, and her brother visited her
daily. As the disease became aggravated and
she expected to die, she commended this pres-
byter to the emperor, testifying to his diligence
and piety, as well as his devoted loyalty to his
sovereign. She died soon after, whereupon the
presbyter became one of the most confidential
persons about the emperor ; and having gradu-
ally increased in freedom of speech, he repeated
to the emperor what he had before stated to his
sister, affirming that Arius had no other views
than the sentiments avowed by the Synod ; and
that if he were admitted to the imperial pres-
ence, he would give his full assent to what the
Synod had decreed : he added, moreover, that
he had been unreasonably slandered. The pres-
byter's words appeared strange to the emperor,
and he said, ' If Arius subscribes with the Synod
and holds its views, I will both give him an au-
dience, and send him back to Alexandria with
honor.' Having thus said, he immediately wrote
to him in these words :

Victor Constantine Maximiis Augustus, to Arius.

It was intimated to your reverence some
time since, that you might come to my court, in
order to obtain an interview with us. We are
not a little surprised that you did not do this
immediately. Wherefore having at once mounted
a public vehicle, hasten to arrive at our court ;
that when you have experienced our clemency
and regard for you, you may return to your own

• Cf. Rufinus, H. E. I. II. The fact th.-it the name of this
presbyter is not mentioned, and Athanasius' apparent ignorance of
the story, together with the untrustworthiness of Rufinus, throw sus-
picion on the authenticity of this account. Cf. also ch. 39, note 2.


country. May God protect you, beloved. Dated
the twenty- fifth of November.

This was the letter of the emperor to Arius.
And I cannot but admire the ardent zeal which
the prince manifested for religion : for it appears
from this document that he had often before ex-
horted Arius to change his views, inasmuch as
he censures his delaying to return to the truth,
although he had himself written frequently to
him. Now on the receipt of this letter, Arius
came to Constantinoi)le accompanied by Euzoius,
whom Alexander had divested of his deaconship
when he excommunicated Arius and his parti-
sans. The emperor accordingly admitted them
to his presence, and asked them whether they
would agree to the creed. And when they
readily gave their assent, he ordered them to
deliver to him a written statement of their faith.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Arius, on being recalled, presents a Recantation
to the Emperor, and pretends to accept the
Nicene Creed.

They having drawn up a declaration to the
following effect, presented it to the emperor.

' Arius and Euzoius, to our Most Religious
and Pious Lord, the Emperor Constantine.

' In accordance with the command of your
devout piety, sovereign lord, we declare our
faith, and before God profess in writing, that we
and our adherents believe as follows :

* W^e believe in one God the Father Almighty :
and in the Lord Jesus Christ his Son, who was
begotten ' of him before all ages, God the Word
through whom all things were made, both those
which are in the heavens and those upon the
earth ; who descended, and became incarnate,
and suffered, and rose again, ascended into the
heavens, and will again come to judge the living
and the dead. [We believe] also in the Holy
Spirit, and in the resurrection of the flesh, and
in the life of the coming age, and in the king-
dom of the heavens, and in one Catholic Church
of Ciod, extending from one end of the earth to
the other.

' This faith we have received from the holy
gospels, the Lord therein saying to his discii)les : ^
" Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit." If we do not so believe and truly
receive the leather, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
as the whole Catholic Church and the holy

' The old English translation rendered ' made ' on the assump-
tion that the fircck was yfyivr\ti.ivov^ not yiyKvvi)ti.fv<iv , So also
Valcsius read and translated 'factum ' ; but Bright without men-
tioning any variant reading, gives ytyevvrniivov , and we have ven-
tured to translate accordingly.

' Matt, xxviii. 9.


1. 27.]


DISPUTE IN ALEXANDRIA ABOUT ARIUS.


29


Scriptures teach (in which we beheve in every
respect), God is our judge both now, and in the
coming judgment. Wherefore we beseech your
piety, most devout emperor, that we who are
persons consecrated to the ministry, and holding
the faith and sentiments of the church and of
the holy Scriptures, may by your pacific and
devoted piety be reunited to our mother, the
Church, all superfluous questions and disputings
being avoided : that so both we and the whole
church being at peace, may in common offer
our accustomed prayers for your tranquil reign,
and on behalf of your whole family.'


CHAPTER XXVII.

Arius haznng irtiirned to Alexandria with the
Emperor's Consent, and not being received by
Athanasius, the Partisans of Eusebius bring
Many Chaises against Athanasius before the
Emperor.

Arius having thus satisfied the emperor, re-
turned to Alexandria. But his artifice for sup-
pressing the truth did not succeed ; for on his
arrival at Alexandria, as Athanasius would not
receive him, but turned away from him as a pest,
he attempted to excite a fresh commotion in
that city by disseminating his heresy. Then in-
deed both Eusebius' himself wrote, and prevailed
on the emperor also to write, in order that Arius
and his partisans might be readmitted into the
church. Athanasius nevertheless wholly refused
to receive them, and wrote to inform the empe-
ror in reply, that it was impossible for those who
had once rejected the faith, and had been anath-
ematized, to be again received into communion
on their return. But the emperor, provoked at
this answer, menaced Athanasius in these terms :

' Since you have been apprised of my will, afford
unhindered access into the church to all those
who are desirous of entering it. For if it shall
be intimated to me that you have prohibited any
of those claiming to be reunited to the church,
or have hindered their admission, I will forth-
with send some one who at my command shall
depose you, and drive you into exile.'

The emperor wrote thus from a desire of
promoting the public good, and because he did
not wish to see the church ruptured ; for he
labored earnestly to bring them all into harmony.
Then indeed the partisans of Eusebius, ill-dis-
posed towards Athanasius, imagining they had
found a seasonable opportunity, welcomed the
emperor's displeasure as an auxiliary to their
own purpose : and on this account they raised
a great disturbance, endeavoring to eject him
from his bishopric ; for they entertained the hope


that the Arian doctrine would prevail only upon
the removal of Athanasius. The chief conspir-
ators against him were Eusebius bishojj of Nico-
media, Theognis of Nicaea, Maris of Chalcedon,
Ursacius of Singidnum in Upper Moesia, and
Valens of Mursa in Upper Pannonia. These
persons suborn by bribes certain of the Melitian
heresy to fabricate various charges against Atha-
nasius ; and first they accuse him through the
Melitians Ision, Eudsemon and Callinicus, of
having ordered the Egyptians to pay a linen
garment as tribute to the church at Alexandria.
But this calumny was immediately disproved by
Alypius and Macarius, presbyters of the Alexan-
drian church, who then happened to be at Ni-
comedia ; they having convinced the emperor
that these statements to the prejudice of Atha-
nasius were false. Wherefore the emperor by
letter severely censured his accusers, but urged
Athanasius to come to him. But before he
came the Eusebian faction anticipating his arri-
val, added to their former accusation the charge
of another crime of a still more serious nature
than the former ; charging Athanasius with plot-
ting against his sovereign, and with having sent
for treasonable purposes a chest full of gold to
one Philumenus. When, however, the emperor
had himself investigated this matter at Psama-
thia, which is in the suburbs of Nicomedia, and
had found Athanasius innocent, he dismissed
him with honor ; and wrote with his own hand
to the church at Alexandria to assure them that
their bishop had been falsely accused. It would
indeed have been both proper and desirable to
have passed over in silence the subsequent at-
tacks which the Eusebians made upon Athana-
sius, lest from these circumstances the Church
of Christ should be judged unfavorably of by
those who are adverse to its interests.^ But
since having been already committed to writing,
they have become known to everybody, I have
on that account deemed it necessary to make
as cursory allusion to these things as possible,
the particulars of which would require a special
treatise. Whence the slanderous accusation
originated, and the character of those who
devised it, I shall now therefore state in brief.
Mareotes^ is a district of Alexandria; there are
contained in it very many villages, and an
abundant po])ulation, with numerous splendid
churches ; these churches are all under the
jurisdiction of the bishop of Alexandria, and are

' From the sentiments expressed Iiere may be inferred the respect
of the author for the church. His view on the suppression of facts
which did not redound to the honor of the church does not show a
very high ideal of history, but it bespeaks a laudable regard for the
good name of Christianity.

^ This description is probably dependent on Athanasius, who
says in his Afietogia contra Arianos, 85, ' Mareotes is a re-
gion of Alexandria. In that region there never was a bishop or a
deputy bishop; but the churches of the whole region are subject
to the bishop of Alexandria. Each of the presbyters has separate
villages, which are numerous, — sometimes ten or more.' Ischyras
was probably a resident of one of the obscurest of these villages;


30


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 27.


subject to his city as parishes.' There was in
this region a person named Ischyras, who had
been guilty of an act deserving of many deaths ;■*
for although he had never been admitted to holy
orders, he had the audacity to assume the title
of presbyter, and to exercise sacred functions
belonging to the priesthood. But having been
detected in his sacrilegious career, he made his
escape thence and sought refuge in Nicomedia,
where he implored the protection of the party
of Kusebius ; who from their hatred to Athana-
sius, not only received him as a presbyter, but
even promised to confer upon him the dignity
of the episcopacy, if he would frame an accusa-
tion against Athanasius, listening as a pretext
for this to whatever stories Ischyras had invented.
For he spread a report that he had suffered
dreadfully in consequence of an assault ; and
that Macarius had rushed furiously toward the
altar, had overturned the table, and broken a
mystical cup : he added also that he had burnt
the sacred books. As a reward for this accu-
sation, the Eusebian faction, as I have said,
promised him a bishopric ; foreseeing that the
charges against Macarius would involve, along
with the accused party, Athanasius, under whose
orders he would seem to have acted. But this
charge they formulated later ; before it they de-
vised another full of the bitterest malignity, to
which I shall now advert. Having by some
means, I know not what, obtained a man's hand ;
whether they themselves had murdered any one,
and cut off his hand, or had severed it from
some dead body, God knows and the authors of
the deed : but be that as it may, they publicly
exposed it as the hand of Arsenius, a Melitian
bishop, while they kept the alleged owner of it
concealed. This hand, they asserted, had been
made use of by Athanasius in the performance
of certain magic arts ; and therefore it was made
the gravest ground of accusation which these ca-
lumniators had concerted against him : but as it
generally happens, all those who entertained any
piepie against Athanasius came forward at the
same time with a variety of other charges.
When the emperor was informed of these pro-
ceedings, he wrote to his nephew Dalmatius the
censor, who then had his residence at Antioch
in Syria, directing him to order the accused
parties to be brought before him, and after due
investigation, to inflict punishment on such as
might be convicted. He also sent thither Ku-
sebius and Theognis, that the case might be
tried in their presence. When Athanasius knew
that he was to be summoned before the censor,
he sent into Egypt to make a strict search after

and it can be seen that what is said of his doings here could easily
come to pass.

s n'apoi<ta= later ' parochia ': hence the derivatives.

* Another evidence of the author's reverence for the institutions
of religion. For subsequent history of Ischyras, sec II. 20.


Arsenius ; and he ascertained indeed that he
was secreted there, but was unable to appre-
hend him, because he often changed his place
of concealment. Meanwhile the emperor sup-
pressed the trial which was to have been held
before the censor, on the following account.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

On Account of the Charges against Athanasius,
the Emperor convokes a Synod of Bishops at
Tyre.

Thk emperor had ordered a Synod of bishops
to be present at the consecration of the church
which he had erected at Jerusalem. He there-
fore directed that, as a secondary matter, they
should on their way first assemble at Tyre, to
examine into the charges against Athanasius ;
in order that all cause of contention being re-
moved there, they might the more peacefully
perform the inaugural ceremonies^ in the dedi-
cation of the church of God. This was the
thirtieth year of Constantine's reign, and sixty
bishops were thus convened at Tyre from various
places, on the summons of Dionysius the con-
sul. As to Macarius the presbyter, he was con-
ducted from Alexandria in chains, under a mili-
tary escort ; while Athanasius was unwilling to
go thither, not so much froni dread, because he
was innocent of the charges made, as because
he feared lest any innovations should be made
on the decisions of the council at Nicaea ; he
was, however, constrained to be present by the
menacing letters of the emperor. For it had
been written him that if he did not come volun-
tarily, he should be brought by force.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Of Arsenius, and his Hand which was said to
have been cut off.

The special providence of God drove .•Xrse-
nius also to Tyre ; for, disregarding the injunc-
tions he had received from the accusers who
had bribed him, he went thither disguised to
see what would be done. It by some means
happened that the servants of Archelaus, the
governor of the province, heard some persons
at an inn affirm that Arsenius, who was reported
to have been murdered, was concealed in the
house of one of the citizens. Having heard
this and marked the individuals by whom this
statement was made, they communicated the
information to their master, who causing strict
search to be made for the man immediately,

' <iii/3aTi)pia: lit. • ceremonies performed at embarkation.'


1. 32.]


INTRIGUES AGAINST ATHANASIUS FAIL.


31


discovered and properly secured him ; after
which he gave notice to Athanasius that he need
not be under any alarm, inasmuch as Arsenius
was alive and there present. Arsenius on being
apprehended, at first denied that he was the
person ; but Paul, bishop of Tyre, who had
formerly known him, established his identity.
Divine providence having thus disposed matters,
Athanasius was shortly after summoned by the
Synod ; and as soon as he presented himself, his
traducers exhibited the hand, and pressed their
charge. He managed the affair with great pru-
dence, for he enquired of those present, as well
as of his accusers, who were the persons who
knew Arsenius? and several having answered
that they knew him, he caused Arsenius to be
introduced, having his hands covered by his
cloak. Then he again asked them, ' Is this the
person who has lost a hand ? ' All were aston-
ished at the unexpectedness of this procedure,
except those who knew whence the hand had
been cut off; for the rest thought that Arsenius
was really deficient of a hand, and expected
that the accused would make his defense in
some other way. But Athanasius turning back
the cloak of Arsenius on one side showed one
of the man's hands ; again, while some were
supposing that the other hand was wanting, per-
mitting them to remain a short time in doubt,
afterward he turned back the cloak on the
other side and exposed the other hand. Then,
addressing himself to those present, he said,
' Arsenius, as you see, is found to have two
hands : let my accusers show the place whence
the third was cut off.' ^


CHAPTER XXX.

Athanasius is found Innocent of what he was
accused; his Accusers take to Flight.

Matters having been brought to this issue
with regard to Arsenius, the contrivers of this
imposture were reduced to perplexity ; and
Achab,^ who was also called John, one of the
principal accusers, having slipped out of court
in the tumult, effected his escape. Thus Athana-
sius cleared himself from this charge, without
having recourse to any pleading ; - for he was
confident that the sight only of Arsenius alive
would confound his calumniators.


1 A full account of the circumstances narrated in this and the
following chapters is given by Athanasius in his Apol. contra A ria-
nos, 65, 71 and 72. Parallel accounts may also be found in Sozom.
II. 25; Theodoret, H. E. I. 28; Rufinus, H. E. X. 17; Philostor-
gius, II. II.

^ In Athanasius' account {Afiol. c. Ariatt. 65) this man's name
is given as ' \pxa.ib (Archaph), which is an Egyptian name; its as-
sonance with the biblical '.\x<ia3 may have made the latter a current
appellation. John was no doubt his monastic name.

2 7rapa-ypa<|)i7, legal term; vpac/))) =' indictment,' napiiypa.<i)-if=:
'demurrer,' so used by Isocrates, Demosthenes, &c., of the classi-
cal authors.


CHAFrP:R XXXI.

IVhen the Bishops 7uill not listen to Athanasius^
Defense on the Second Charge, he betakes
himself to the Emperor.

But in refuting the false allegations against
Macarius, he made use of legal forms ; taking
exception in the first place to Eusebius and his
party, as his enemies, protesting against the in-
justice of any man's being tried by his adver-
saries. He next insisted on its being proved
that his accuser Ischyras had really obtained
the dignity of presbyter ; for so he had been
designated in the indictment. But as the judges
would not allow any of these objections, the
case of Macarius was entered into, and the in-
formers being found deficient of proofs, the
hearing of the matter was postponed, until some
persons should have gone into Mareotis, in order
that all doubtful points might be examined on
the spot. Athanasius seeing that those very
individuals were to be sent to whom he had
taken exception (for the persons sent were
Theognis, Maris, Theodorus, IVIacedonius, Valens,
and Uisacius), exclaimed that ' their procedure
was both treacherous and fraudulent ; for that it
was unjust that the presbyter Macarius should
be detained in bonds, while the accuser together
with the judges who were his adversaries, were
permitted to go, in order that an ex parte col-
lection of the facts in evidence might be made.*
Having made this protest before the whole Synod
and Dionysius the governor of the province, and
finding that no one paid any attention to his
appeal, he privately withdrew. Those, therefore,
who were sent to Mareotis, having made an ex
parte investigation, held that what the accuser
said was true.

CHAPTER XXXII.

On the Departure of Athanasius, those who
composed the Synod rote his Deposition.

Thus Athanasius departed, hastening to the
emperor, and the Synod in the first place con-
demned him in his absence ; and when the re-
sult of the enquiry which had been instituted at
Mareotis was presented, they voted to depose
him ; loading him with opprobrious epithets in
their sentence of deposition, but being wholly
silent respecting the disgraceful defeat of the
charge of murder brought by his calumniators.
They moreover received into communion .Arse-


* e<c novoy^f pov<;, Lat. ex parte; the term, however, is not re-
stricted to this technical sense, but may be used of any form of
partiality. Cf. Sophocles' Greek Lex. of Rom. and Byz. As al-
ready noted in the Intro, p.ix, Harnack denies that there is any
special juristic knowledge shown here; it must be conceded that the
language used is such as might have been at the command of any
intelligent and educated non-professional man.


32


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I-32-


nius, who was reported to have been murdered ;
and he who had formerly been a bishop of the
Melitian lieresy subscribed to the deposition of
Athanasius as bishop of the city of HypselopoHs.
Thus by an extraordinary course of circumstan-
ces, the alleged victim of assassination by Atha-
nasius, was found alive to assist in deposing him.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

The Members of the Synod proceed from Tyre
to Jerusalem, and having celebrated the Dedi-
cation of the ' New Jerusalem,' irceive Arius
and his Followers into Communion.

Letters in the meantime were brought from
the emperor directing those who composed the
Synod to hasten to the New Jerusalem : ' having
therefore immediately left Tyre, they set forward
with all despatch to Jerusalem, where, after cel-
ebrating a festival in connection with the conse-
cration of the place, they readmitted Arius ^ and
his adherents into communion, in obedience, as
they said, to the wishes of the emperor, who had
signified in his communication to them, that he
was fully satisfied respecting the faith of Arius
and Euzoius. They moreover wrote to the
church at Alexandria,'' stating that all envy be-
ing now banished, the affairs of the church were
established in peace : and that since Arius had
by his recantation acknowledged the truth, it
was but just that, being thenceforth a mem-
ber of the church, he should also be henceforth
received by them, alluding to the banishment
of Athanasius [in their statement that ' all envy
was now banished ']. At the same time they
sent information of what had been done to the
emperor, in terms nearly to the same effect.
But whilst the bishops were engaged in these
transactions, other letters came unexpectedly
from the emperor, intimating that Athanasius
had fled to him for protection ; and that it was
necessary for them on his account to come to
Constantinople. This unanticipated communi-
cation from the emperor was as follows.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

7''he Emperor summons the Synod to himself by
Letter, in order that the Charges against
Athanasius might be carefully examined before
him.

Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to
the bishops convened at Tyre.

* See above, ch. 17.

' Arius, the originator of the Arian heresy, died before the council
at Jerusalem; hence Valesius infers that this Arius must be another
man of the same name mentioned in the encyclical of Alexander
of Alexandria as a partisan of the arch-heretic. Cf. ch. 6.

3 This letter is contained in Athanasius' de Synod, 21, and a
portion of it in Apol. contra Arian, 84.


I am indeed ignorant of the decisions which
have been made by your Council with so much
turbulence and storm : but the truth seems to
have been perverted by some tumultuous and
disorderly proceedings : because, that is to say,
in your mutual love of contention, which you
seem desirous of perpetuating, you disregard
the consideration of those things which are
acceptable to God. It will, however, I trust,
be the work of Divine Providence to dissipate
the mischiefs resulting from this jealous rivalry,
as soon as they shall have been detected ; and
to make it apparent to us, whether ye who have
been convened have had regard to tnith, and
whether your decisions on the subjects which
have been submitted to your judgment have
been made apart from partiality or prejudice.
Wherefore it is indispensable that you should
all without delay attend upon my piety, that
you may yourselves give a strict account of your
transactions. For what reason I have deemed
it proper to write thus, and to summon you
before me, you will learn from what follows.
As I was making my entry into the city which
bears our name, in this our most flourishing
home, Constantinople, — and it happened that
I was riding on horseback at the time, — sud-
denly the Bishop Athanasius, with certain eccle-
siastics whom he had around him, presented
himself so unexpectedly in our path, as to pro-
duce an occasion of consternation. Eor the
Omniscient God is my witness that at first sight
I did not recognize him until some of my at-
tendants, in answer to my enquiry, informed me,
as was very natural, both who he was, and what
injustice he had suffered. At that time indeed
I neither conversed, nor held any communica-
tion with him. But as he repeatedly entreated
an audience, and I had not only refused it, but
almost ordered that he should be removed from
my presence, he said with greater boldness, that
he petitioned for nothing more than that you
might be summoned hither, in order that in our
presence, he, driven by necessity to such a
course, might have a fair opportunity afforded
him of complaining of his wrongs. Wherefore
as this seems reasonable, and consistent with
the equity of my government, I willingly gave
instructions that these things should be written
to you. My command therefore is, that all, as
many as composed the Synod convened at Tyre,
should forthwith hasten to the court of our
clemency, in order that from the facts them-
selves you may make clear the purity and in-
tegrity of your decision in my presence, whom
you cannot but own to be a true servant of
God. It is in consequence of the acts of my
religious service towards God that peace is every-
where reigning ; and that the name of God is
sincerely had in reverence even among the bar-


1. 36.]


ARIANS DISOBEY THE EMPEROR. MARCELLUS.


33


barians themselves, who until now were ignorant
of the truth. Now it is evident that he who
knows not the truth, does not have a true
knowledge of God also : yet, as I before said,
even the barbarians on my account, who am a
genuine servant of God, have acknowledged and
learned to worship him, whom they have per-
ceived in very deed protecting and caring for
me everywhere. So that from dread of us
chiefly, they have been thus brought to the
knowledge of the true God whom they now
worship. Nevertheless we who pretend to have
a religious veneration for (I will not say who
guard) the holy mysteries of his church, we, I
say, do nothing but what tends to discord and
animosity, and to speak plainly, to the destruc-
tion of the human race. But hasten, as I have
already said, all of you to us as speedily as
possible : and be assured that I shall endeavor
with all my power to cause that what is con-
tained in the Divine Law may be preserved in-
violate, on which neither stigma nor reproach
shall be able to fasten itself; and this will come
to pass when its enemies, who under covert of
the sacred profession introduce numerous and
diversified blasphemies, are dispersed, broken
to pieces, and altogether annihilated.


CHAPTER XXXV.

The Synod not having come to the Emperor, the
Partisans of Eusebius accuse Athatiasius of
having threatened to divert the Corn supplied
to Constantifiople frotn Alexandria: the Em-
peror being exasperated at this banishes Atha-
nasius into Gaul}

This letter rendered those who constituted
the Synod very fearful, wherefore most of them
returned to their respective cities. But Euse-
bius, Theognis, Maris, Patrophilus, Ursacius,
and Valens, having gone to Constantinople,
would not permit any further enquiry to be in-
stituted concerning the broken cup, the over-
turned communion table, and the murder of
Arsenius ; but they had recourse to another
calumny, informing the emperor that Athanasius
had threatened to prohibit the sending of corn
which was usually conveyed from Alexandria to
Constantinople. They affirmed also that these
menaces were heard from the lips of Athanasius
by the bishops Adamantius, Anubion, Arbathion
and Peter, for slander is most prevalent when
the assertor of it appears to be a person worthy
of credit. Hence the emperor being deceived,
and excited to indignation against Athanasius

* Cf. Theodoret, H. E. I. 31. The ancient Gallia or Gaul in-
cluded the modern France, Belgium, Lombardy, and Sardinia.


by this charge, at once condemned him to exile,
ordering him to reside in the Gauls. Now some
affirm that the emperor came to this decision
with a view to the establishment of unity in the
church, since Athanasius was inexorable in his
refusal to hold any communion with Arius and
his adherents. He accordingly took up his
abode at Treves, a city of Gaul.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, and Asterius
the Sophist.

The bishops assembled at Constantinople de-
posed also Marcellus bishop of Ancyra, a city of
Galatia Minor, on this account. A certain rhet-
orician of Cappadocia named Asterius having
abandoned his art, and professed himself a con-
vert to Christianity, undertook the composition
of some treatises, which are still extant, in which
he commended the dogmas of Arius ; asserting
that Christ is the power of God, in the same
sense as the locust and the palmer-worm are
said by Moses to be the power of God,' with
other similar utterances. Now Asterius was in
constant association with the bishops, and es-
pecially with those of their number who did not
discountenance the Arian doctrine : he also
attended their Synods, in the hope of insinuating
himself into the bishopric of some city : but he
failed to obtain ordination, in consequence of
having sacrificed during the persection.^ Going
therefore throughout the cities of Syria, he read
in public the books which he had composed.
Marcellus being informed of this, and wishing to
counteract his influence, in his over- anxiety to
confute him, fell into the diametrically opposite
error; for he dared to say, as the Sarnosatene^
had done, that Christ was a mere man. When
the bishops then convened at Jerusalem had
intelligence of these things, they took no notice
of Asterius, because he was not enrolled even in
the catalogue of ordained priests ; but they in-
sisted that Marcellus, as a priest, should give an
account of the book which he had written.
Finding that he entertained Paul of Samosata's
sentiments, they required him to retract his

' Joel ii. 25.

2 In the persecution under Decius (249 A.D.). those who yielded
so far as to perform the heathen rites were branded with the title of
'the lapsed'; and a controversy arose later on the manner in which
they should be treated. One of the consequences of lapsing was
disqualification for high office in the church. See Neandcr, Hist.
cf Christ Ch. Vol. I. p. 226 seq.

3 Paul of Samosata, who has been sumamed in modem times
the Socinus of the third century, was deposed in 269 a.d. by a
council held at Antioch for unchristian character and unsound views.
His peculiarity in the lattar respect was his denial of the divinity of
Jesus Christ. For fuller information, see Eus. H. E. VII. 30; Epi-
phan. Hirr. LXVII.; Neander, Hist, of the Christ. Ch. Vol. I.
602 seq.; Gieselee, Hist, of the Ch. Vol. I. aoi ; Smith and Wace-
Diet, of Christ. Biog.


34


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[I. 36.


opinion ; and he being thoroughly ashamed of
himself, promised to burn his book. But the
convention of bishops being hastily dissolved by
the emperor's summoning them to Constanti-
nople, the Eusebians on their arrival at that
city, again took the case of Marcellus into con-
sideration ; and as Marcellus refused to fulfil his
promise of burning his untimely book, those
present deposed him, and sent Basil into Ancyra
in his stead. Moreover Eusebius wrote a refu-
tation of this work in three books, in which he
exposed its erroneous doctrine. Marcellus how-
ever was afterwards reinstated * in his bishopric
by the Synod at Sardica, on his assurance that
his book had been misunderstood, and that on
that account he was supposed to favor the Sa-
mosatene's views. But of this we shall speak
more fully in its proper place.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

After the BanisJunent of Athariasii/s, Arius hav-
ing been sent for by the Emperor, raises a
Disturbance against Alexatider Bishop of
Constantinople.

While these things were taking place, the
thirtieth year of Constantine's reign was com-
pleted. But Arius with his adherents having
returned to Alexandria, again disturbed the
whole city ; for the people of Alexandria were
exceedingly indignant both at the restoration of
this incorrigible heretic with his partisans, and
also because their bishop Athanasius had been
sent to exile. When the emperor was apprised
of the perverse disposition of Arius, he once
more ordered him to repair to Constantinople,
to give an account of the commotions he had
afresh endeavored to excite. It happened at
that time that Alexander, who had some time
before succeeded Metrophanes, presided over
the church at Constantinople. That this prelate
was a man of devoted piety was distinctly mani-
fested by the conflict he entered into with
Arius ; for when Arius arrived and the people
were divided into two factions and the whole
city was thrown into confusion : some insisting
that the Nicene Creed should be by no means
infringed on, while others contended that the
opinion of Arius was consonant to reason. In
this state of affairs, Alexander was driven to
straits : more especially since Eusebius of Nico-
media had violently threatened that he would
cause him to be immediately deposed, unless he
admitted Arius and his followers to communion.
Alexander, however, was far less troubled at the
thought of his own deposition as fearful of the
subversion of the principles of the faith, which

* See II. 20.


they were so anxious to effect : and regarding
himself as the constituted guardian of the doc-
trines recognized, and the decisions made by
the council at Nicsea, he exerted himself to the
utmost to prevent their being violated or de-
praved. Reduced to this extremity, he bade
farewell to all logical resources, and made Cod
his refuge, devoting himself to continued fasting
and never ceased from praying. Communicat-
ing his purpose to no one, he shut himself up
alone in the church called Irene : there going up
to the altar, and prostrating himself on the ground
beneath the holy communion table, he poured
forth his fervent prayers weeping ; and this he
ceased not to do for many successive nights and
days. What he thus earnestly asked from God,
he received : for his petition was such a one :
' If the opinion of Arius were correct, he might
not be permitted to see the day appointed for
its discussion ; but that if he himself held the
true faith, Arius, as the author of all these evils,
might suffer the punishment due to his impiety.*


CHAPTER XXX\TII.

The Death of Arius}

Such was the supplication of Alexander.
Meanwhile the emperor, being desirous of per-
sonally examining Arius, sent for him to the
palace, and asked him whether he would assent
to the determinations of the Synod at Nicaea.
He without hesitation replied in the affirmative,
and subscribed the declaration of the faith in
the emperor's presence, acting with duplicity.
The emperor, surprised at his ready compliance,
obliged him to confirm his signature by an oath.
This also he did with equal dissimulation. The
way he evaded, as I have heard, was this : he
wrote his own opinion on paper, and carried it
under his arm, so that he then swore truly that
he really held the sentiments he had written.
That this is so, however, I have written from
hearsay, but that he added an oath to his sub-
scription, I have myself ascertained, from an
examination of the emperor's own letters. The
emperor being thus convinced, ordered that he
should be received into communion by Alexan-
der, bishop of Constantinople. It was then
Saturday, and Arius was expecting to assemble
with the church on the day following : but divine
retribution overtook his daring criminalities. For
going out of the imperial palace, attended by a
crowd of Eusebian partisans like guards, he
paraded proudly through the midst of the city,
attracting the notice of all the people. As he


' For a reproduction of the circumstances related in this chapter,
together with a historical estimate of them based on additional evi-
dence, see Neander, Hist, o/the Christ. Ch. Vol. II. p. 384-388.


1. 40.]


DEATH AND FUNERAL OF CONSTANTINE.


35


approached the place called Constantine's Forum,
where the column of porphyry is erected, a ter-
ror arising from the remorse of conscience seized
Arius, and with the terror a violent relaxation of
the bowels : he therefore enquired whetlier there
was a convenient place near, and being directed
to the back of Constantine's Forum, he hastened
thither. Soon after a faintness came over him,
and together with the evacuations his bowels
protruded, followed by a copious hemorrhage,
and the descent of the smaller intestines : more-
over portions of his spleen and liver were brought
off in the effusion of blood, so that he almost
immediately died. The scene of this catastrophe
still is shown at Constantinople, as I have said,
behind the shambles in the colonnade : and by
persons going by pointing the finger at the place,
there is a perpetual remembrance preserved of
this extraordinary kind of death. So disastrous
an occurrence filled with dread and alarm the
party of Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia ; and
the report of it quickly spread itself over the city
and throughout the whole world. As the king
grew more earnest in Christianity and confessed
that the confession at Nicaea was attested by
God, he rejoiced at the occurrences. He was
also glad because of his three sons whom he had
already proclaimed Caesars ; one of each of
them having been created at every successive
decennial anniversary of his reign. To the eld-
est, whom he called Constantine, after his own
name, he assigned the government of the western
parts of the empire, on the completion of his
first decade. His second son Constantius, who
bore his grandfather's name, he constituted Caesar
in the eastern division, when the second decade
had been completed. And Constans, the young-
est, he invested with a similar dignity, in the
thirtieth year of his own reign.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

The Emperor falls sick and dies.

A YEAR having passed, the Emperor Constan-
tine having just entered the sixty-fifth year of
his age, was taken with a sickness ; he therefore
left Constantinople, and made a voyage to
Helenopolis, that he might try the effect of the
medicinal hot springs which are found in the
vicinity of that city. Perceiving, however, that
his illness increased, he deferred the use of the
baths ; and removing from Helenopolis to Nico-
media, he took up his residence in the suburbs,


and there received Christian baptism.' After
this he became cheerful ; and making his will,
appointed his three sons heirs to the empire,
allotting to each one of them his portion, in
accordance with the arrangements he had made
while living. He also granted many privileges
to the cities of Rome and Constantinople ; and
entrusting the custody of his wilP to that pres-
byter by whose means Arius had been recalled,
and of whom we have already made mention,
he charged him to deliver it into no one's hand,
except that of his son Constantius, to whom he
had given the sovereignty of the East. After
the making of his will, he survived a few days
and died. Of his sons none were present at
his death. A courier was therefore immedi-
ately despatched into the East, to inform Con-
stantius of his father's decease.


CHAPTER XL.

The Funeral of the Emperor Constantine.

The body of the emperor was placed in a
coffin of gold by the proper persons, and then
conveyed to Constantinople, where it was laid
out on an elevated bed of state in the palace,
surrounded by a guard, and treated with the
same respect as when he was alive, and this was
done until the arrival of one of his sons. When
Constantius was come out of the eastern parts
of the empire, it was honored with an imperial
sepulture, and deposited in the church called
The Apostles : which he had caused to be con-
structed for this very purpose, that the emperors
and prelates might receive a degree of venera-
tion but little inferior to that which was paid to
the rehcs of the apostles. The Emperor Con-
stantine lived sixty-five years, and reigned thirty-
one. He died in the consulate of Felician and
Tatian, on the twenty-second of May, in the
second year of the 278th Olympiad.^ This book,
therefore, embraces a period of thirty-one years.


' It was the belief of many in the earlier ages of the church that
baptism had a certain magical power purging away the sins previous
to it, but having no force as regards those that might follow; this led
many to postpone their baptism until disease or age warned them of
the nearness of death; such delayed baptism was called 'clinic
baptism,' and was discouraged by the more judicious and spiritual-
minded Fathers, some of whom doubted its validity and rebuked
those who delayed as actuated by selfishness and desire to indulge
in sin. The church, however, encouraged it in the cases of gross
ortenders. Cf. Bmgham, Ecc/. Antiq. IV. 3, and XI. 11, and Ben-
nett, Christian Archeology, pp. 407 and 409.

2 Cf. Euseb. Life 0/ Const. IV. 63, and Rufinus, H. E. I. n.
The story is, however, doubtful, as Valcsius observes. It is more
likely that some one of the lay officials of the government, or, as
Philostorgius says, Eusebius of Nicomedia, was entrusted with this
will, and not a mere presbyter. That it was probably Eusebius of
Nicomedia becomes the more probable when we consider that that
bishop also probably baptized Constantine.

' 337 A.D. The 22d of May that year was the day of Pentecost.


BOOK II.


CHAPTER I.

Introduction containing the Reason for the
Author's Revision of his First and Second
Books.

RuFiNUS, who wrote an Ecclesiastical History
in Latin, • has erred in respect to chronology.
For he supposes that what was done against
Athanasius occurred after the death of the Em-
peror Constantine : he was also ignorant of his
exile to the Gauls and of various other circum-
stances. Now we in the first place wrote the first
two books of our history following Rufmus ; but
in writing our history from the third to the
seventh, some facts we collected from Rufinus,
others from different authors, and some from
the narration of individuals still living. After-
ward, however, we perused the writings of Atha-
nasius, wherein he depicts his own sufferings
and how through the calumnies of the Eusebian
faction he was banished, and judged that more
credit was due to him who had suffered, and to
those who were witnesses of the things they
describe, than to such as have been dependent
on conjecture, and had therefore erred. More-
over, having obtained several letters of persons
eminent at that period, we have availed our-
selves of their assistance also in tracing out the
truth as far as possible. On this account we
were com|)elled to revise the first and second
books of this history, using, however, the testi-
mony of Rufinus where it is evident that he
could not be mistaken. It should also be ob-
served, that in our former edition, neither the
sentence of deposition which was passed upon
Arius, nor the emperor's letters were inserted.
but simply the narration or facts in order that
the history might not become bulky and weary
the readers with tedious matters of detail. But
in the present edition, such alterations and
additions have been made for your sake, O
sacred man of God, Theodore,- in order that
you might not be ignorant what the princes
wrote in their own words, as well as the decis-
ions of the bishops in their various Synods,

' Rufinus' Historia Ecclrsiastica, in two books, begins with
Arius and ends with Theodosius the Great. It is not very accurate,
but written largely from memory. It is dedicated to Ch/omatius,
bishop of Aquifeia, and translated into Creek by Gelasius and Cyril
of Jerusalem. On the edition used by .Socrates, see Introd. and I.
12, note I. Cf. also on his knowledge of Latin, II. 23, 30, and 37.

• u i(pe ToO Hfoi; acSpwirc tlco^iuipc, cf. Introd. p. x, also VI.
Introd. and VII. 48.


wherein they continually altered the confession
of faith. Wherefore, whatever we have deemed
necessary we have inserted in this later edition.
Having adopted this course in the first book,
we shall endeavor to do the same in the consec-
utive portion of our history, I mean the second.
On this let us now enter.


CHAPTER n.


/


Eusebius, Bishop of Nicotnedia, and his Party,
by again endeavoring to introduce the Arian
Heresy, create Disturbances iri the Churches.

After the death of the Emperor Constantine,
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis of
Nicaea, imagining that a favorable opportunity
had arisen, used their utmost efforts to expunge
the doctrine of homoousion, and to introduce
Arianism in its place. They, nevertheless, de-
spaired of effecting this, if Athanasius should
return to Alexandria : in order therefore to
accomplish their designs, they sought the assist-
ance of that presbyter by whose means Arius
had been recalled from exile a little before.
How this was done shall now be described. The
presbyter in question presented the will and the
request of the deceased king to his son Con-
stantius ; who finding those dispositions in it
which he was most desirous of, for the empire
of the East was by his father's will apportioned
to him, treated the presbyter with great con-
sideration, loaded him with favors, and ordered
that free access should be given him both to
the palace and to himself. This license soon
obtained for him familiar intercourse with the
empress, as well as with her eunuchs. There
was at that time a chief eunuch of the imperial
bed-chamber named Eusebius ; him the pres-
byter persuaded to adopt Arian's views, after
which the rest of the eunuchs were also pre-
vailed on to adopt the same sentiments. Not
only this but the empress also, under the in-
fluence of the eunuchs and the presbyters, be-
came favorable to the tenets of Arius ; and not
long after the subject was introduced to the
emperor himself. Thus it became gradually
diffused throughout the court, and among the
officers of the imperial household and guards,
until at length it spread itself over the whole
population of the city. The chamberlains in


H- 5-]


ATHANASIUS' RETURN TO ALEXANDRIA.


37


the palace discussed this doctrine with the
women ; and in the family of every citizen there
was a logical contest. Moreover, the mischief
quickly extended to other provinces and cities,
the controversy, like a spark, insignificant at
first, exciting in the auditors a spirit of conten-
tion : for every one who inquired the cause of
the tumult, found immediately occasion for dis-
puting, and determined to take part in the strife
at the moment of making the inquiry. By gen-
eral altercation of this kind all order was sub-
verted ; the agitation, however, was confined to
the cities of the East, those of Illyriclim and
the western parts of the empire meanwhile were
perfectly tranquil, because they would not annul
the decisions of the Council of Nicaea. As this
affair increased, going from bad to worse, Euse-
bius of Nicomedia and his party looked upon
popular ferment as a piece of good fortune.
For only thus they thought they would be enabled
to constitute some one who held their own
sentiments bishop of Alexandria. But the re-
turn of Athanasius at that time defeated their
purpose ; for he came thither fortified by a
letter from one of the Augusti, which the younger
Constantine, who bore his father's name, ad-
dressed to the people of Alexandria, from Treves,
a city in Gaul.^ A copy of this epistle is here
subjoined.


CHAPTER III.

Athanasius, encouraged by the Letter of Con-
stantine the Younger, returns to Alexandria.

Constantine Cesar to the members of the
Catholic Church of the Alexandrians.

It cannot, I conceive, have escaped the
knowledge of your devout minds, that Atha-
nasius, the expositor of the venerated law, was
sent for a while unto the Gauls, lest he should
sustain some irreparable injury from the per-
verseness of his blood-thirsty adversaries, whose
ferocity continually endangered his sacred life.
To evade this [perverseness], therefore, he was
taken from the jaws of the men who threatened
him into a city under my jurisdiction, where, as
long as it was his appointed residence, he has
been abundantly supplied with every necessity :
although his distinguished virtue trusting in
divine aid would have made light of the pres-
sure of a more rigorous fortune. And since our
sovereign, my father, Constantine Augustus of

• There is some difference of opinion as to the exact year of the
recall of Athanasius. Baronius and others allege that this took
place in 338 a.d., the year after the death of Constantine; but Va^p-
sius maintains that Athanasius was recalled the year preceding.
This he infers from the words of Athanasius {Afiol. c. Ariati, 61),
and the title of the letter which Constantine the younger addressed
to the church in Alexandria.


blessed memory, was prevented by death from
accomplishing his purpose of restoring this
bishop to his see, and to your most sanctified
piety, I have deemed it proper to carry his
wishes into effect, having inherited the task
from him. With how great veneration he has
been reg-irded by us, ye will learn on his arrival
among you ; 2ior need any one be surprised at
the honor I have put upon him, since I have
been alike influenced by a sense of what was
due to so excellent a personage, and the knowl-
edge of your affectionate solicitude respecting
him. May Divine Providence preserve you,
beloved brethren.

Relying on this letter, Athanasius came to
Alexandria, and was most joyfully received by
the people of the city. Nevertheless as many
in it as had embraced Arianism, combining
together, entered into conspiracies against him,
by which frequent seditions were excited, afford-
ing a pretext to the Eusebians for accusing him
to the emperor of having taken possession of
the Alexandrian church on his own responsi-
bility, in spite of the adverse judgment of a
general council of bishops. So far indeed did
they succeed. in pressing their charges, that the
emperor became exasperated, and banished him
from Alexandria. How indeed this came about
I shall hereafter explain.


CHAPTER IV.

On the Death of Eusebius Pamphilus , Acacius
succeeds to the Bishopric of Ccesarea.

At this time Eusebius, who was bishop of
Caesarea in Palestine, and had the surname of
Pamphilus, having died, Acacius, his disciple,
succeeded him in the bishopric. This individ-
ual published several books, and among others
a biographical sketch of his master.


CHAPTER V.

The Death of Constantine the Younger.

Not long after this the brother of the Em-
peror Constantius, Constantine the younger, who
bore his father's name, having invaded those
parts of the empire which were under the gov-
ernment of his younger brother Constans, en-
gaging in a conflict with his brother's soldiery,
was slain by them. This took place under the
consulship of Acindynus and Proclus.^


' 340 A.D.


38


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 6.


CH.APTKR VI.

Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, when at
the Point of Death proposes the Election either
of Paul or of Macedonius as his Successor.

About the same time another disturbance in
addition to those we have recorded, was raised
at Constantinople on the following account.
Alexander, who had presided over the churches
in that city, and had strenuously opposed Arius,
departed this life,' having occupied the bishop-
ric for twenty-three years and lived ninety-eight
years in all, without having ordained any one to
succeed him. But he had enjoined the proper
persons to choose one of the two whom he
named ; that is to say, if they desired one who
was competent to teach, and of eminent piety,
they should elect Paul, whom he had himself
ordained presbyter, a man young indeed in
years, but of advanced intelligence and pru-
dence ; but if they wished a man of venerable
aspect, and external show only of sanctity, they
might appoint Macedonius, who had long been
a deacon among them and was aged. Hence
there arose a great contest respecting the choice
of a bishop which troubled the church exceed-
ingly ; for ever since the people were divided
into two parties, one of which favored the tenets
of Arius, while the other held what the Nicene
Synod had defined, those who held the doctrine
of consubstantiality always had the advantage
during the life of Alexander, the Arians disagree-
ing among themselves and perpetually conflict-
ing in opinion. But after the death of that
prelate, the issue of the struggle became doubt-
ful, the defenders of the orthodox faith insisting
on the ordination of Paul, and all the Arian
party espousing the cause of Macedonius. Paul
therefore was ordained bishop in the church
called Jrene^ which is situated near the great
church of Sophia; whose election appeared
to be more in accordance with the suffrage of
the deceased.


CHAPTER VII.

The Emperor Constantius ejects Paul after his
Election to the Bishopric, and sending for
Eusebius of Nicornedia, invests him 7i<ith t/ie
Bishopric of Constantinople.

Not long afterwards the emperor having
arrived at Constantinople was highly incensed

' Socrates is undoubtedly mistaken in setting the date of Alex-
ander's death as late as 340 ad. The council convened to exam-
ine and confute the charges aeainst Athanasius met in 339 a.d.,
and the record at that date has it (see chap. 7) that tusebius
had taken possession of the see of Constantinople. Alexander must
therefore have died before 339.

' So called, not because there was a saint or eminent person of
that name, but on the same principle as the church called Sophia.


at the consecration [of Paul] ; and having con-
vened an assembly of bishops of Arian senti-
ments, he divested Paul of his dignity, aixi
translating Eusebius from the see of Nicomedia,
he appointed him bishop of Constantinople.
Having done this the emperor proceeded to
Antioch.

CHAPTER VIII.

Eusebius having convened Another Synod at
Antioch in Syria, causes a New Creed to be
promulgated.

Eusebius, however, could by no means remain
quiet, but as the saying is, left no stone un-
turned, in order to effect the purpose he had in
view. He therefore causes a Synod to be con-
vened at Antioch in Syria, under pretense
of dedicating the church which the father of
the Augusti had commenced, and which his
son Constantius had finished in the tenth year
after its foundations were laid, but with the
real intention of subverting and abolishing the
doctrine of the hotnoousion. There were present
at this Synod ninety bishops from various cities.
Maximus, however, bishop of Jerusalem,- who had
succeeded Macarius, did not attend, recollecting
that he had been deceived and induced to sub-
scribe the deposition of Athanasius. Neither
was Julius, bishop of the great Rome,' there, nor
had he sent a substitute, although an ecclesiasti-
cal canon ■'^ commands that the churches shall not
make any ordinances against the opinion of the
bishop of Rome. This Synod assembled at An-
tioch in presence of the emperor Constantius
in the consulate of Marcellus and Probinus,^
which was the fifth year after the death of Con-
stantine, father of the Augusti. Placitus, other-
wise called Flaccillus, successor to Euphronius,
at that time presided over the church at Antioch.
The confederates of Eusebius had previously
designed to calumniate Athanasius ; accusing
him in the first place of having acted contrary
to a canon which they then constituted, in
resuming his episcopal authority without the
license of a general council of bishops, inasmuch
as on his return from exile he had on his own
responsibility taken possession of the church ;
and then because a tumult had been excited
on his entrance and many were killed in the riot ;


For the history of the latter church, see Dehio and Bezold,
Die Kirchliche Baukuns dfs Abeiidlandes, I. p. 21.

' So called in distinction from the " New Rome." or Constanti-
nople. Cf. Canons of Council 0/ Chaicedon, XXVIII.

' The word ' canon ' here is evidently used in its general sense.
There is no record of any enactment requiring the consent of the
bishop of Rome to the decisions of the councils oefore ihey could be
considered valid. There may have been a general understanding to
that effect, having the force of an unwritten law. In any case the
use of the word by Socrates is quite singular, unless we assume that
he supposed there was such an enactment somewhere, as is implied
by its use ordinarily.

» 34' A.D.


II. lO.]


EUSEBIUS OF EMISA.


39


moreover that some had been scourged by him,
and others brought before the tribunals. Besides
they brought forward what had been deter-
mined against Athanasius at Tyre.


CHAPTER IX.


Of Eusebius of Emisa.


On the ground of such charges as these, they
proposed another bishop for the Alexandrian
church, and first indeed Eusebius surnamed
Emisenus. Who this person was, George, bishop
of Laodicea, who was present on this occasion,
informs us. For he says in the book which he
has composed on his life, that Eusebius was
descended from the nobility of Edessa in Mes-
opotamia, and that from a child he had studied
the holy Scriptures ; ^ that he was afterwards
instructed in Greek literature by a master resi-
dent at Edessa; and finally that the sacred
books were expounded to him by Patrophilus
and Eusebius, of whom the latter presided over
the church at Coesarea, and the former over that
at Scythopolis. Afterwards when he dwelt in
Antioch, it happened that Eustathius was de-
posed on the accusation of Cyrus of Beroea for
holding the tenets of Sabellius. Then again he
associated with Euphronius, successor of Eusta-
thius, and avoiding a bishopric, he retired to
Alexandria, and there devoted himself to the
study of philosophy. On his return to Antioch,
he formed an intimate acquaintance with Placi-
tus [or Flaccillus], the successor of Euphronius.
At length he was ordained bishop of Alexandria,
by Eusebius, bishop of Constantinople ; but did
not go thither in consequence of the attachment
of the people of that city to Athanasius, and
was therefore sent to Emisa. As the inhabitants
of Emisa excited a sedition on account of his ap-
pointment, — for he was commonly charged with
the study and practice of judicial astrology,^ —
he fled and came to Laodicea, to George, who
has given so many historical details of him.
George having taken him to Antioch, procured
his being again brought back to Emisa by Placi-
tus and Narcissus ; but he was afterwards charged
with holding the Sabellian views. George more
elaborately describes the circumstances of his
ordination and adds at the close that the em-
peror took him with him in his expedition
against the barbarians, and that miracles were

1 Sozom. H. E. IIT. 6. From the passage in Sozomen it appears
that it was customary in Edessa to teach the Scriptures tp boys, and
that many of them thus became quite familiar with the Bible, know-
ing many passages by heart.

I 2 ^adTj/xaTiiciji'. From its use in astronomy the science of mathe-

matics soon came to be identified with that counterfeit of asjj^nomy,

! — astrology. It is so used by Sextus Empiricus (6i6. 20; 728.20)
and by lamblichus, Myrt. 277. 2.


wrought by his hand. The information given
by George concerning Eusebius of Emisa may
be considered reproduced at sufficient length
by me here.

CHAPTER X.

The Bishops assembled at Antioch, on the Re-
fusal of Eusebius of Emisa to accept the
Bishopric of Alexandria, ordain Gregory,
and change the Language of the Nicene Creed.


Now at that time Eusebius having been pro-
posed and fearing to go to Alexandria, the
Synod at Antioch designated Gregory as bishop
of that church. This being done, they altered
the creed ; not as condemning anything in that
which was set forth at Nicsea, but in fact with a
determination to subvert and nullify the doctrine
of consubstantiaHty by means of frequent coun-
cils, and the publication of various expositions
of the faith, so as gradually to establish the Arian
views. How these things issued we will set
forth in the course of our narrative ; but the
epistle then promulgated respecting the faith
was as follows : ^

' We have neither become followers of Arius,
— for how should we who are bishops be guided
by a presbyter? — nor have we embraced any
other faith than that which was set forth from
the beginning. But being constituted examiners
and judges of his sentiments, we admit their
soundness, rather than adopt them from him :
and you will recognize this from what we are
about to state. We have learned from the
beginning to believe in one God of the Universe,
the Creator and Preserver of all things both those
thought of and those perceived by the senses :
and in one only-begotten Son of God, subsisting
before all ages, and co-existing with the Father
who begat him, through whom also all things
visible and invisible were made ; who in the last
days according to the Father's good pleasure,
descended, and assumed flesh from the holy
virgin, and having fully accomplished his Father's
will, that he should suffer, and rise again, and
ascend into the heavens, and sit at the right
hand of the Father ; and is coming to judge the
living and the dead, continuing King and God
for ever. We believe also in the Holy Spirit.
And if it is necessary to add this, we believe in
the resurrection of the flesh, and the life ever-
lasting.'

Having thus written in their first epistle, they
sent it to the bishops of every city. But after
remaining some time at Antioch, as if to con-
demn the former, they published another letter
in these words :


r


' Athanas. de Synodd. 22, 23.


40


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. lO.


Another Exposition of the Faith.

In conformity with evangelic and apostolic
tradition, we believe in one God the Father
Almighty, the Creator and Framer of the uni-
verse. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, his Son,
God the only-begotten, through whom all things
were made : begotten of the Father before all
ages, God of God, Whole of Whole, Only of
Only, Perfect of Perfect, King of King, Lord
of Lord ; the living Word, the Wisdom, the
Life, the True Light, the Way of Truth, the
Resurrection, the Shepherd, the Gate ; immu-
table and inconvertible ; the unaltering image
of the Divinity, Substance and Power, and Coun-
sel and Glory of the Father ; born ' before all
creation ' ; who was in the beginning with God,
God the Word, according as it is declared in
the Gospel,- and the Word was God, by whom
all things were made, and in whom all things
subsist : who in the last days came down from
above, and was born of the virgin according to
the Scriptures ; and was made man, the Mediator
between God and men, the Apostle of our Faith,
and the Prince of Life, as he says,^ * I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me.' Who suffered on our
behalf, and rose again for us on the third day,
and ascended into the heavens, and is seated at
the right hand of the Father ; and will come
again with glory and power to judge the living
and the dead. [We believe] also in the Holy
Spirit, who is given to believers for their conso-
lation, sanctification, and perfection ; even as
our Lord Jesus Christ commanded his disci-
ples, saying,* ' Go and teach all nations, bap-
tizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit ' ; that is
to say of the Father who is truly the Father, of
the Son who is truly the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit who is truly the Holy Spirit, these words
not being simply or insignificantly applied, but
accurately expressing the proper subsistence,
glory, and order, of each of these who are
named : so that there are three in person, but
one in concordance. Holding therefore this
faith in the presence of God and of Christ, we
anathematize all heretical and false doctrine.
And if any one shall teach contrary to the sound
and right faith of the Scriptures, affirming that
there is or was a period or an age before the
Son of God existed, let him be accursed. And
if any one shall say that the Son is a creature as
one of the creatures, or that he is offspring as
one of the offsprings, and shall not hold each of
the aforesaid doctrines as the Divine Scriptures
have delivered them to us : or if any one shall
teach or preach any other doctrine contrary to
that which we have received, let him be accursed.


John i.


* John vi. 38.


* Matt, xxvii


For we truly and unreservedly believe and follow
all things handed down to us from the sacred
Scriptures by the prophets and apostles.

Such was the exposition of the faith published
by those then assembled at Antioch, to which
Gregory also subscribed as bishop of Alexandria,
although he had not yet entered that city. The
Synod having done these things, and legislated
some other canons, was dissolved. At this time
it happened that public affairs also were dis-
turbed. The nation called Franks made incur-
sions into the Roman territories in Gaul, and at
the same time there occurred violent earthquakes
in the East, and especially at Antioch, which
continued to suffer concussions during a whole
year.

CHAPTER XL

On the Arrival of Gregory at Alexandria, at-
tended by a Military Escort, Athanasius flees.

After these things, Syrian, the military com-
mander, and the corps of heavy armed soldiers^
five thousand in number, conducted Gregory to
Alexandria ; and such of the citizens as were of
Arian sentiments combined with them. But it
will be proper here to relate by what means
Athanasius escaped the hands of those who
wished to apprehend him, after his expulsion
from the church. It was evening, and the peo-
ple were attending the vigil there, a service ' be-
ing expected. The commander arrived, and
posted his forces in order of battle on every
side of the church. Athanasius having observed
what was done, considered within himself how
he might prevent the people's suffering in any
degree on his account : accordingly having di-
rected the deacon to give notice of prayer, after
that he ordered the recitation of a psalm ; and
when the melodious chant of the psalm arose, all
went out through one of the church doors.
While this was doing, the troops remained in-
active spectators, and Athanasius thus escaped
unhurt in the midst of those who were chanting
the psalm, and immediately hastened to Rome.
Gregory then prevailed in the church : but the
people of Alexandria, being indignant at this
procedure, set the church called that of Diony-
sius on fire. Let this be sufficient on this sub-
ject. Now Eusebius, having thus far obtained
his object, sent a deputation to Julius, bishop of
Rome,^ begging that he would himself take cog-

' avva^euK:: literally 'congregation,' from <rvviyia; but later
applied to any service held in the church. In mod. Ivvaiipiov,
' Prayer-book.

' So also Sozom. III. 7. But according to Valesius, both Soc-
rates and Sozomcn are here mistaken, and Eusebius sent the depu-
"ore the council at Antioch, as is shown by the words of
in his Apot. contra Arian., 21.


II. 14.]


DISTURBANCES AT CONSTANTINOPLE.


41


nizance of the charges against Athanasius, and
order a .judicial investigation to be made in his
presence.^

CHAFFER XII.

The People of Consiaiitinople restore Paul to his
See after the Death of Eusebius, while the
Ariajis elect Macedonius.

Birr Eusebius did not live to learn the decis-
ion of Julius concerning Athanasius, for he died
a short time after that Synod was held. Where-
upon the people introduced Paul again into the
church of Constantinople : the Arians, however,
ordained Macedonius at the same time, in the
church dedicated to Paul. This those who had
formerly co-operated with Eusebius (that dis-
turber of the public peace) brought about, as-
suming all his authority. These were Theognis,
bishop of Niccea, Maris of Chalcedon, Theodore
of Heraclea in Thrace, Ursacius of Singidunum
in Upper Mysia, and Valens of Mursa in Upper
Pannonia. Ursacius and Valens indeed after-
ward altered their opinions, and presented a
written recantation of them to bishop Julius, so
that on subscribing the doctrine of consubstan-
tiability they were again admitted to commun-
ion ; but at that time they warmly supported
the Arian error, and were instigators of the most
violent conflicts in the churches, one of which
was connected with Macedonius at Constantino-
ple. By this intestine war among the Christians,
continuous seditions arose in that city, and many
lives were sacrificed in consequence of these
occurrences.


CHAPTER XIII.

Paul is again ejected from the Church by Con-
stantius, in consequence of the Slaughter of
Hermogenes, his General.

Intelligence of these proceedings reached
the ears of the Emperor Constantius, whose
residence was then at Antioch. Accordingly he
ordered his general Hermogenes, who had been
despatched to Thrace, to pass through Constan-
tinople on his way, and expel Paul from the
church. He, on arriving at Constantinople, threw
the whole city into confusion, attempting to cast
out the bishops ; for sedition immediately arose
from the people in their eagerness to defend the
bishop. And when Hermogenes persisted in
his efforts to drive out Paul by means of his
military force, the people became exasperated


' See Hammond, Canons 0/ the Church (notes on the Canons
of Nicaea) , for the prerogatives of the see of Rome recognized at
this time.


as is usual in such cases ; and making a desper-
ate attack upon him, they set his house on fire,
and after dragging through the city, they at last
put him to death. This took place in the con-
sulate ' of the two Augusti, — that is to say, the
third consulship, — Constantius, and the second
of Constans : at which time Constans, having
subdued the Franks, compelled them to enter
into a treaty of peace with the Romans. The
Emperor Constantius, on being informed of the
assassination of Hermogenes, set off on horse-
back from Antioch, and arriving at Constanti-
nople immediately expelled Paul, and then
punished the inhabitants by withdrawing from
them more than 40,000 measures of the daily
allowance of wheat which had been granted by
his father for gratuitous distribution among
them : for prior to this catastrophe, nearly
80,000 measures of wheat brought from Alex-
andria had been bestowed on the citizens.^ He
hesitated, however, to ratify^ the appointment
of Macedonius to the bishopric of that city,
being irritated against him not only because he
had been ordained without his own consent ;
but also because on account of the contests in
which he had been engaged with Paul, Hermo-
genes, his general, and many other persons had
been slain. But having given him permission
to minister in the church in which he had been
consecrated, he returned to Antioch.


CHAPTER XIV.

The Arians retnove Gregory from the See of
Alexandria, and appoint George in his Place}

About the same time the Arians ejected
Gregory from the see of Alexandria, on the
ground that he was unpopular and at the same
time because he had set a church ^ on fire, and did
not manifest sufficient zeal in promoting the
interests of their party .^ They therefore inducted
George into his see, who was a native of Cap-
padocia, and had acquired the reputation of
being an able advocate of their tenets.


' 342 A.D. This assassination of Hermogenes was evidently
recorded in that portion of Am. Marcellinus' work which has been
lost; at least a record of it is referred to in that author's /?<r>-K»«
Gesiarum, XIV. x. 2 (ed. Eyssenhart).

^ On the gratuitous distribution of grain or bread practised under
Constantine and later under Theodosius, see Cod. Theod. XIV. tit.
XVI., and cf. Eunap. Aedes. par. 22.

^ Cf. Bingham, Christ. Aitttq. IV. xi. 19, on the control over
the appointment of bishops by the emperor at this time.

1 There is an error here, repeated also by Sozomen (III. 7), but
corrected by Theodoret, H . E. II. 4 and 12, without the mention of
the names of his predecessors. The error consists in the statement
that Gregory was ejected at this time. It appears that he remained
in his position until the Council of Sardica, by which he was deposed
and excommunicated. He survived this council by six months.

^ That of Dionysius.

' This is the same Gregory that is mentioned in ch. 10 as vio-
lently put into possession of the sea of Alexandria by the Arians.
It is evident that they were disappointed in him.


42


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. IS.


CHAPTER XV.

Athanasius and PauP going to Rome, and hav-
ing obtained Letters from Bishop Julius, re-
cover their respective Dioceses.

Ath.^nasius, meanwhile, after a lengthened
journey, at last reached Italy. The western
division of the empire was then under the sole
power of Constans, the youngest of Constan-
tine's sons, his brother Constantine having been
slain by the soldiers, as was before stated. At
the same time also Paul, bishop of Constanti-
nople, Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of Ancyra,
a city of the Lesser Galatia, and Lucius of
Adrianople, having been accused on various
charges, and expelled from their several churches,
arrived at the imperial city. There each laid
his case before Julius, bishop of Rome. He on
his part, by virtue of the Church of Rome's
peculiar privilege, sent them back again into
the East, fortifying them with commendatory
letters ; and at the same time restored to each
his own place, and sharply rebuked those by
whom they had been deposed. Relying on the
signature of the bishop Julius, the bishops de-
parted from Rome, and again took possession
of their own churches, forwarding the letters to
the parties to whom they were addressed. These
persons considering themselves treated with in-
dignity by the reproaches of Julius, called a
council at Antioch, assembled themselves and
dictated a reply to his letters as the expression
of the unanimous feeling of the whole Synod.^
It was not his province, they said, to take cog-
nizance of their decisions in reference to any
whom they might wish to expel from their
churches ; seeing that they had not opposed
themselves to him, when Novatus was ejected
from the church. These things the bishops of
the Eastern church communicated to Julius,
bishop of Rome. But, as on the entry of Atha-
nasius into Alexandria, a tumult was raised by
the partisans of George the Arian, in conse-
quence of which, it is affirmed, many persons
were killed ; and since the Arians endeavor to
throw the whole odium of this transaction on
Athanasius as the author of it, it behooves us to
make a few remarks on the subject. God the
Judge of all only knows the true causes of these

' Julius, in his letter to the Eastern bishops {Ep. I. ad^i. Eute-
biattps, 4 and 5), menlions Athanasius and Marcellus, ex-bishop of
Ancyra, as with him at this time, but does not allude to Paul; from
which it has been inferred that Socrates is in error here in setting
the date o* Paul's visit to Rome at this time, as otherwise Julius
would have named him also with Athanasius and Marcellus. Sozo-
men, as usual, copies the mistake of Socrates; cf. Sozom. III. 15.

' It appears from this that there was no recognition of any spe-
cial prerogative or right belonging to the bishop of Rome as yet.
The position of that bishop during these agitations in the Eastern
church, when the Western church was in comparative peace, seems
to be that of an arbitrator voluntarily invoiced, rather than of an
official judge. Cf. Neander, Hist. 0/ the Christ. Church, Vol. II.
p. 171, 173.


disorders ; but no one of any experience can
be ignorant of the fact, that such fatal accidents
are for the most part concomitants of the fac-
tious movements of the populace. It is vain,
therefore, for the calumniators of Athanasius to
attribute the blame to him ; and especially
Sabinus,^ bishop of the Macedonian heresy. For
had the latter reflected on the number and
magnitude of the wrongs which Athanasius, in
conjunction with the rest who hold the doctrine
of consubstantiality, had suffered from the Arians,
or on the many complaints made of these things
by the Synods convened on account of Atha-
nasius, or in short on what that arch-heretic
Macedonius himself has done throughout all the
churches, he would either have been wholly
silent, or if constrained to speak, would have
spoken more plausible words, instead of these
reproaches. But as it is intentionally overlook-
ing all these things, he willfully misrepresents
the facts. He makes, however, no mention
whatever of the heresiarch, desiring by all means
to conceal the daring enormities of which he
knew him to be guilty. And what is still more
extraordinary, he has not said one word to the
disadvantage of the Arians, although he was
far from entertaining their sentiments. The or-
dination of Macedonius, whose heretical views
he had adopted, he has also passed over in
silence ; for had he mentioned it, he must neces-
sarily have recorded his impieties also, which
were most distinctly manifested on that occa-
sion. Let this suffice on this subject.


CHAPTER XVI.

The Emperor Constantius, through an Order
to Philip the Prcctorian Prefect, secures the
Exile of Paul, and the Installation of Mace-
donius in his See.

When the Emperor Constantius, who then
held his court at Antioch, heard that Paul had
again obtained possession of the episcopal throne,
he was excessively enraged at his presumption.
He therefore despatched a written order to
Philip, the Prsetorian Prefect, whose power ex-
ceeded that of the other governors of provinces,
and who was styled the second person from the
emperor,' to drive Paul out of the church again,
and introduce Macedonius into it in his place.
Now the prefect Philip, dreading an insurrec-
tionary movement among the people, used arti-
fice to entrap the bishop : keeping, therefore,
the emperor's mandate secret, he went to the


' i.e. in his Collection of Sy nodical Transactions, mentioned in
chap. 17.

' h(vrf(tQ<: fitra Ba<ri\'a; not only second in rank, but first after
him in power, ' his right-hand man.' Cf. Vergil's alter ab illo.
Eel. V. 49, and VIII. 39.


II. 17.]


PAUL, BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE, EXILED.


43


public bath called Zeuxippus, and on pretense
of attending to some ]niblic affairs, sent to Paul
with every demonstration of respect, requesting
his attendance there, on the ground that his
presence was indispensable. The bishop came ;
and as he came in obedience to this summons,
the prefect immediately showed him the em-
peror's order ; the bishop patiently submitted
condemnation without a hearing. But as Philip
was afraid of the violence of the multitude —
for great numbers had gathered around the
building to see what would take place, for their
suspicions had been aroused by current reports
— he commanded one of the bath doors to be
opened which communicated with the imperial
palace, and through that Paul was carried off,
put on board a vessel provided for the purpose,
and so sent into exile immediately. The pre-
fect directed him to go to Thessalonica, the
metropolis of Macedonia, whence he had de-
rived his origin from his ancestors ; command-
ing him to reside in that city, but granting him
permission to visit other cities of Illyricum,
while he strictly forbade his passing into any
portion of the Eastern empire. Thus was Paul,
contrary to his expectation, at once expelled
from the church, and from the city, and again
hurried off into exile. Philip, the imperial pre-
fect, leaving the bath, immediately proceeded
to the church. Together with him, as if thrown
there by an engine, Macedonius rode seated in
the same seat with the prefect in the chariot
seen by everybody, and a military guard with
drawn swords was about them. The multitude
was completely overawed by this spectacle, and
both Arians and Homoousians hastened to the
church, every one endeavoring to secure an
entrance there. As the prefect with Macedonius
came near the church, an irrational panic seized
the multitude and even the soldiers themselves ;
for as the assemblage was so numerous and no
room to admit the passage of the prefect and
Macedonius was found, the soldiers attempted
to thrust aside the people by force. But the
confined space into which they were crowded
together rendering it impossible to recede, the
soldiers imagined that resistance was offered,
and that the populace intentionally stopped the
passage ; they accordingly began to use their
naked swords, and to cut down those that stood
in their way. It is affirmed that about 3150
persons were massacred on this occasion ; of
whom the greater part fell under the weapons
of the soldiers, and the rest were crushed to
death by the desperate efforts of the multitude
to escape their violence. After such distin-
guished achievements, Macedonius, as if he had
not been the author of any calamity, but was
altogether guiltless of what had been perpetrated,
was seated in the episcopal chair by the prefect.


rather than by the ecclesiastical canon. Thus,
then, by means of so many murders in the
church, Macedonius and the Arians grasped the
supremacy in the churches. About this period
the emperor built the great church calleti Sophia,
adjoining to that named Irene, which being
originally of small dimensions, the emperor's
father had considerably enlarged and adorned.
In the present day both are seen within one
enclosure, and have but one appellation.


CHAPTER XVII.

Aihanasius, intimidated by the Emperor's
Threats, returns to Rome again.

At this time another accusation was concocted
against Athanasius by the Arians, who invented
this pretext for it. The father of the August!
had long before granted an allowance of corn to
the church of the Alexandrians for the relief of
the indigent. This, they asserted, had usually
been sold by Athanasius, and the proceeds con-
verted to his own advantage. The emperor,
giving credence to this slanderous report, threat-
ened Athanasius with death, as a penalty ; who,
becoming alarmed at the intimation of this
threat, took to flight, and kept himself con-
cealed. When Julius, bishop of Rome, was ap-
prised of these fresh machinations of the Arians
against Athanasius, and had also received the
letter of the then deceased Eusebius, he invited
the persecuted x^thanasius to come to him, hav-
ing ascertained where he was secreted. The
epistle also of the bishops who had been some
time before assembled at Antioch, just then
reached him ; and at the same time others from
the bishops in Egypt, assuring him that the en-
tire charge against Athanasius was a fabrication.
On the receipt of these contradictory communi*
cations, Julius first replied to the bishops who
had written to him from Antioch, complaining
of the acrimonious feeling they had evinced in
their letter, and charging them with a violation
of the canons, because they had not requested
his attendance at the council,' seei.ig that the
ecclesiastical law required that the churches
should pass no decisions contrary to the views
of the bishop of Rome : he then censured them
with great severity for clandestinely attempting
to pervert the faith ; in addition, that their for-
mer proceedings at Tyre were fraudulent, be-
cause the investigation of what had taken place
at Mareotes was on one side of the question
only ; not only this, but that the charge respect-


1 Sozom. X. 3 follows Socrates. The contents of the letter writ-
ten by Julius to the Eu'sebians, found in Athanasius' Apologia
contra Aria>ws, c. 20, are different from those here given by Socra-
tes. Julius there complains of their ignoring his invitation to the
synod at Rome, but says nothing of any canon such as is mentioned
here. Cf. ch. 8, note 2.


44


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 17.


ing Arsenius had plainly been proved a false
charge. Such and similar sentiments did Julius
write in his answer to the bishops convened at
Antioch ; we should have inserted here at length,
these as well as those letters which were addressed
to Julius, did not their prolixity interfere with
our purpose. But Sabinus, the advocate of the
Macedonian heresy, of whom we have before
spoken, has not incorporated the letters of
Julius in his Collection of Synodical Transac-
tions ; - although he has not omitted that which
the bishops of Antioch sent to Julius. This,
however, is usual with him ; he carefully intro-
duces such letters as make no r.eference to, or
wholly repudiate the term homoousion ; while
he purposely passes over in silence those of a
contrary tendency. This is sufficient on this
subject. Not long after this, Paul, pretending to
make a journey from Thessalonica to Corinth,
arrived in Italy : upon which both the bishops '*
made an appeal to the emperor of those parts,
laying their respective cases before him.


CHAI^ER XVIII.

The Emperor of the West requests his Brother
to send him Three Persons ivho could give an
Account of the Deposition of Athanasius and
Paul. Those who are sent publish Another
Form of the Creed.

When the Western emperor ' was informed of
their affairs, he sympathized with their sufferings ;
and wrote to his brother [Constantius], begging
him to send three bishops who should explain
to him the reason for the deposition of Athana-
sius and Paul. In compliance with this request,
Narcissus the Cilician, Theodore the Thracian,
Maris of Chalcedon, and Mark the Syrian, were
deputed to execute this commission ; who on
their arrival refused to hold any communication
with Athanasius or his friends, but suppressing
the creed which had been promulgated at An-
tioch, presented to the Emperor Constans another
declaration of faith composed by themselves, in
the following terms :

Another Exposition of the Faith.

We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom
the whole family in heaven and upon earth is
named ; " and in his only-begotten Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, who was begotten of the
Father before all ages ; (iod of God ; Light of
Light ; through whom all things in the heavens
and upon the earth, both visible and invisible.


* See above, ch. 15.


' Athanasius and Paul.


' see atxjve, en. ij. • Atnanasius a

rLitulVJ ' Gt>n9tanttt»«-»he-¥o»nger. See I. 38, end.
* Eph. iii. 15.


were made : who is the Word, and Wisdom,
and Power, and Life, and true Light : who in
the last days for our sake was made man, and
was born of the holy virgin ; was crucified, and
died ; was buried, arose again from the dead on
the third day, ascended into the heavens, is
seated at the right hand of the Father, and shall
come at the consummation of the ages, to judge
the living and the dead, and to render to every
one according to his works : whose kingdom
being perpetual, shall continue to infinite ages ;
for he shall sit at the right hand of the Father,
not only in this age, but also in that which is to
come. [We believe] in the Holy Spirit, that is,
in the Comforter, whom the Lord, according to
his promise, sent to his apostles after his ascen-
sion into the heavens, to teach them, and bring
all things to their remembrance : by whom also
the souls of those who have sincerely believed
on him shall be sanctified ; and those who assert
that the Son was made of things which are not,
or of another substance, and not of God, or that
there was a time when he did not exist, the
Catholic Church accounts as aliens.

Having delivered this creed to the emperor,
and exhibited it to many others also, they de-
parted without attending to anything besides.
But while there was yet an inseparable commun-
ion between the Western and Eastern churches,
there sprang up another heresy at Sirmium, a
city of Illyricum ; for Photinus, who presided
over the churches in that district, a native of
the Lesser Galatia, and a disciple of that Mar-
cellus who had been deposed, adopting his
master's sentiments, asserted that the Son of
God was a mere man. We shall, however,
enter into this matter more fully in its proper
place.'

CHAPTER XIX.

Of the Creed sent by the Eastern Bishops to
those in Italy, called the Lengthy Creed}

After the lapse of about three years from the
events above recorded, the Eastern bishops again
assembled a Synod, and having composed an-
other form of faith, they transmitted it to those
in Italy by the hands of Eudoxius, at that time
bishop of Germanicia, and Martyrius, and Mace-
donius, who was bishop of Mopsuestia^ in Cilicia.
This expression of the Creed, being written in
more 'engthy form, contained many additions to

' See below, ch. 29.

' Th«s creed was called >i<ucpd<rTixo? from its length, and the
date of its promulgation must be put after the. Council of Sardica,
according to Hcfele. Sec Hefele, History of the Church Councils,
Vol. II. p. 85, 89, and 180 (ed. T. & T. Clark).

2 Moj/ou itTTia, lit. ' the hearth of Mopsus,' son of Apollo and
Manto, daughter of Tiresias, according to the Greek mythology.
Mopsuestia has become famous in the history of the church through
its great citizen, Theodore. Cf. Smith and Wace, Diet, of Christ.
Biog.


II. 19.]


THE MACROSTICH CREED.


45


those which had preceded it, and was set forth
in these words :

' We believe in one God, the P'ather Almighty,
the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom
the whole family in heaven and upon earth is
named ; and in his only-begotten Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, who was begotten of the Father
before all ages ; God of God ; Light of Light ;
through whom all things in the heavens and
upon the earth, both visible and invisible, were
made : who is the Word, and Wisdom, and
Power, and Life, and true Light : who in the
last days for our sake was made man, and was
born of the holy virgin ; who was crucified, and
died, and was buried, and rose again from the
dead on the third day, and ascended into heaven,
and is seated at the right hand of the Father,
and shall come at the consummation of the ages,
to judge the living and the dead, and to render
to every one according to his works : whose
kingdom being perpetual shall continue to in-
finite ages ; for he sits at the right hand of the
Father, not only in this age, but also in that
which is to come. We believe also in the Holy
Spirit, that is, in the Comforter, whom the Lord
according to his promise sent to his apostles
after his ascension into heaven, to teach them
and bring all things to their remembrance,
through whom also the souls of those who sin-
cerely believe on him are sanctified. But those
who assert that the Son was made of things not
in being, or of another substance, and not
of God, or that there was a time or age when
he did not exist,^ the holy catholic Church
accovmts as aliens. The holy and catholic
Church likewise anathematizes those also who
say that there are three Gods, or that Christ
is not God before all ages, or that he is
neither Christ, nor the Son of God, or that the
same person is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, or
that the Son was not begotten, or that the Father
begat not the Son by his own will or desire.
Neither is it safe to affirm that the Son had his
existence from things that were not, since this
is nowhere declared concerning him in the
divinely inspired Scriptures. Nor are we taught
that he had his being from any other pre-exist-
ing substance besides the Father, but that he
was truly begotten of God alone ; for the Divine
word teaches that there is one unbegotten princi-
ple without beginning, the Father of Christ. But
those who unauthorized by Scripture rashly as-
sert that there was a time when he was not,
ought not to preconceive any antecedent inter-
val of time, but God only who without time
begat him ; for both times and ages were made
through him. Yet it must not be thought that

^ This is the end of the first creed adopted at Antioch, as given
in the preceding chapter; it is couched in almost identical terms in
both these versions. The rest of the version here given is the addi-
tion that constitutes the characteristic of the ' Lengthy Creed.'


the Son is co-inoriginate,* or co-unbegotten'
with the Father : for there is properly no father
of the co-inoriginate or co-unbegotten. But we
know that the Father alone being inoriginate
and incomprehensible," has ineffably and incom-
prehensibly to all begotten, and that the Son
was begotten before the ages, but is not unbe-
gotten like the Father, but has a beginning, viz.
the Father who begat him, for " the head of
Christ is God."^ Now although according to
the Scriptures we acknowledge three things or
persons, viz. that of the -Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, we do not on that ac-
count make three Gods : since we know that
that there is but one God perfect in himself,
unbegotten, inoriginate, and invisible, the God
and Father of the only-begotten, who alone has
existence from himself, and alone affords exist-
ence abundantly to all other things. But neither
while we assert that there is one God, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten, do
we therefore deny that Christ is God before
the ages, as the followers of Paul of Samosata
do, who affirm that after his incarnation he
was by exaltation deified, in that he was by
nature a mere man. We know indeed that
he was subject to his God and Father : never-
theless he was begotten of God, and is by
nature true and perfect God, and was not
afterwards made God out of man ; but was
for our sake made man out of God, and has
never ceased to be God. Moreover we execrate
and anathematize those who falsely style him
the mere unsubstantial word of God, having
existence only in another, either as the word to
which utterance is given, or as the word con-
ceived in the mind : and who pretend that
before the ages he was neither the Christ, the
Son of God, the Mediator, nor the Image of
God ; but that he became the Christ, and the
Son of God, from the time he took our flesh
from the virgin, about four hundred years ago.^
For they assert that Christ had the beginning of
his kingdom from that time, and that it shall
have an end after the consummation of all
things and the judgment. Such persons as these
are the followers of Marcellus and Photinus, the
Ancyro-Galatians, who under pretext of estab-
lishing his sovereignty, like the Jews set aside

* a-vvavapxov. It has been thought advisable to retain the above
uncouth rendering of this word, as also of one or two others immedi-
ately following, on the ground that the etymological precision at
which they aim compensates for their non-classical ring.


{TvvayiuvrjToi',


'^ di't'^iKTor,


' I Cor. xi.


t^or. XI. T.
* ' There has arisen in our days a certain Marcellus of Galatia,
the most execrable of all heretics, who with a sacrilegious mind and
impious mouth and wicked argument will needs set bounds to the
perpetual, eternal, and timeless kingdom of our Lord Christ, saying
that he began to reign four hundred years since, and shall end at the
dissolution of the present world.' This is the description given of
the heresy here hmted at by the synodical letter of the Oriental
bishops at Sardica. On Marcellus and the various opinions con-
cerning him, see Zahn, Afarce!/»s von Aitcyra, Go\.h3, 1867; also
monographs on Marcellus by Rettberg (1794) and by Klose (1837
and 1859). Cf. Neander, Hist, of Chr. CM. Vol. IL p. 394.


46


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 19.


the eternal existence and deity of Christ, and
the perpetuity of his kingdom. But we know
him to be not simply the word of God by utter-
ance or mental conception, but God the living
Word subsisting of himself; and Son of God
and Christ ; and who did, not by presence
only, co-exist and was conversant with his
Father before the ages, and ministered to him
at the creation of all things, whether visible or
invisible, but was the substantial Word of the
Father, and God of God : for this is he to whom
the Father said, " Let us make man in our
image, and according to our likeness : " who in
his own person appeared to the fathers, gave
the law, and spake by the prophets ; and being
at last made man, he manifested his Father to
all men, and reigns to endless ages. Christ has
not attained any new .dignity ; but we believe
that he was perfect from the beginning, and like
his Father in all things ; and those who say that
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the same
person, impiously supposing the three names to
refer to one and the same thing and person, we
deservedly expel from the church because by
the incarnation they render the Father, who is
incomprehensible and insusceptible of suffering,
subject to comprehension and suffering. Such
are those denominated Patropassians * among
the Romans, and by us Sabellians. For we know
that the Father who sent, remained in the proper
nature of his own immutable deity ; but that
Christ who was sent, has fulfilled the economy
of the incarnation. In like manner those who
irreverently affirm that Christ was begotten not
by the will and pleasure of his Father ; thus
attributing to God an involuntary necessity not
springing from choice, as if he begat the Son by
constraint, we consider most impious and stran-
gers to the truth because they have dared to
determine such things respecting him as are
inconsistent with our common notions of God,
and are contrary indeed to the sense of the
divinely-inspired Scripture. For knowing that
God is self-dependent and Lord of himself we
devoutly maintain that of his own volition and
pleasure he begat the Son. And while we rev-
erentially believe what is spoken concerning
him ; '" " The Lord created me the beginning of
his ways on account of his works " : yet we do
not suppose that he was made similarly to the
creatures or works made by him. For it is im-
pious and repugnant to the church's faith to
compare the Creator with the works created by
him ; or to imagine that he had the same man-
ner of generation as things of a nature totally
different from himself: for the sacred Scriptures

• Cf. Tertull. Adv. Prax. i. and ii.: Epiph. H<rr. LVII.

'" Prov. vili. 11. The ancient bishops quote the LXX ver-
batim. The Enehsh versions (Authorized and Revised) follow the
Hebrew, ' The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
before his works of old.


teach us that the alone only-begotten Son was
really and truly begotten. Nor when we say
that the Son is of himself, and lives and subsists
in like manner to the Father, do we therefore
separate him from the Father, as if we supposed
them dissociated by the intervention of space
and distance in a material sense. For we be-
lieve that they are united without medium or
interval, and that they are incapable of separa-
tion from each other : the whole Father embos-
oming the Son ; and the whole Son attached to
and eternally reposing in the Father's bosom.
Believing, therefore, in the altogether perfect
and most holy Trinity, and asserting that the
Father is God, and that the Son also is God, we
do not acknowledge two Gods, but one only, on
account of the majesty of the Deity, and the
perfect blending and union of the kingdoms :
the Father ruling over all things universally, and
even over the Son himself ; the Son being sub-
ject to the Father, but except him, ruling over
all things which were made after him and by
him ; and by the Father's will bestowing abun-
dantly on the saints the grace of the Holy Spirit,
For the Sacred Oracles inform us that in this
consists the character of the sovereignty which
Christ exercise":.

' We have been compelled, since the publi-
cation of our- former epitome, to give this more
ample exposition of the creed ; not in order to
gratify a vain ambition, but to clear ourselves
from all strange suspicion respecting our faith
which may exist among those who are ignorant
of our real sentiments. And that the inhabitants
of the West may both be aware of the shameless
misrepresentations of the heterodox party ; and
also know the ecclesiastical opinion of the
Eastern bishops concerning Christ, confirmed
by the unwrested testimony of the divinely-
inspired Scriptures, among all those of unper-
verted minds.'


CHAPTER XX.

Of the Council at Sardica.

The Western prelates on account of their
being of another language, and not understand-
ing this exposition, would not admit of it ; say-
ing that the Nicene Creed was sufficient, and
that they would not waste time on anything
beyond it. But when the emperor had again
written to insist on the restoration to Paul and
Athanasius of their respective sees, but without
effect in consequence of the continual agitation
of the people — these two bishops demanded
that another Synod should be convened, so that

' Cf. Sozom. HI. II : Theodoret, H. E. H. 7; also Hefele, Hitt.
ef the Church Councils, Vol. H. p. 87-176.


II. 21.]


COUNCIL OF SARDICA. EUSEBIUS PAMPHILUS.


47


their case, as well as other questions in relation
to the faith might be settled by an ecumenical
council, for they made it obvious that their
deposition arose from no other cause than that
the faith might be the more easily perverted.
Another general council was therefore sum-
moned to meet at Sardica, — a city of Illyricum,
— by the joint authority of the two emperors;
the one requesting by letter that it might be so,
and the other, of the East, readily acquiescing
in it. It was the eleventh year after the death
of the father of the two Augusti, during the
consulship of Rufmus and Eusebius,^ that the
Synod of Sardica met. According to the
statement of Athanasius ^ about 300 bishops
from the western parts of the empire were
present ; but Sabinus says there came only
seventy from the eastern parts, among whom
was Ischyras of Mareotes,* who had been or-
dained bishop of that country by those who
deposed Athanasius. Of the rest, some pre-
tended infirmity of body ; others complained
of the shortness of the notice given, casting the
blame of it on Julius, bishop of Rome, although
a year and a half had elapsed from the time of
its having been summoned : in which interval
Athanasius remained at Rome awaiting the as-
sembling of the Synod. When at last they
were convened at Sardica, the Eastern prelates
refused either to meet or to enter into any con-
ference with those of the West, unless they first
excluded Athanasius and Paul from the conven-
tion. But as Protogenes, bishop of Sardica, and
Hosius, bishop of Cordova, a city in Spain,
would by no means permit them to be absent,
the Eastern bishops immediately withdrew, and
returning to PhilippopoliS in Thrace, held a sepa-
rate council, wherein they openly anathematized
the term homoousios ; and having introduced
the Anomoian ^ opinion into their epistles, they
sent them in all directions. On the other hand,
those who remained at Sardica, condemning in
the first place their departure, afterwards divested
the accusers of Athanasius of their dignity ; then
confirming the Nicene Creed, and rejecting the
term anomoio?i, they more distinctly recog-
nized the doctrine of consubstantiality, which
they also inserted in epistles addressed to all
the churches. Both parties believed they had
acted rightly : those of the East, because the
Western bishops had countenanced those whom
they had deposed ; and these again, in conse-
quence not only of the retirement of those who

2 347 A. D.

3 Athanasius' statement is that those who were present at the
Council of Sardica, together with those who afterwards subscribed
the Synodical Epistle sent to them and those who before the council
had written in his behalf out of P^rygia, Asia, and Isauria, were
in all about three hundred and forty. So in his A/iol. contra
Arianos, c. $0. \i\h\?i E/>. ad Solitar. c. 15, he gives the number of
those who met at Sardica as about one hundred and seventy, — no
more.

* Cf. I. 27. S avoij-oiov, 'different,' ' unlike.'


had deposed them before the matter had been
examined into, but also because they themselves
were the defenders of the Nicene faith, which
the other party had dared to adulterate. They
therefore restored to Paul and Athanasius their
sees, and also Marcellus of Ancyra in Lesser
Calatia, who had been deposed long before, as
we have stated in the former book.*' At that
time indeed he exerted himself to the utmost
to procure the revocation of the sentence pro-
nounced against him, declaring that his being
suspected of entertaining the error of Paul of
Samosata arose from a misunderstanding of
some expressions in his book. It must, how-
ever, be noticed that Eusebius Pamphilus wrote
three entire books against Marcellus,^ in which
he quotes that author's own words to prove
that he asserts with Sabellius the Libyan, and
Paul of Samosata, that the Lord [Jesus] was a
mere man.

CHAPTER XXI.

Defense of Eusebius Pamphilus.

But since some have attempted to stig-
matize even Eusebius Pamphilus himself as
having favored the Arian views in his works, it
may not be irrelevant here to make a few re-
marks respecting him. In the first place then
he was both present at the council of Nicaea,
which defined the doctrine of the ho?noousion
and gave his assent to what was there deter-
mined. And in the third book of the Life of
Constantine, he expressed himself in these
words : ^ 'The emperor incited all to unanimity,
until he had rendered them united in judgment
on those points on which they were previously
at variance ; so that they were quite agreed at
Nicaea in matters of faith.' Since therefore
Eusebius, in mentioning the Nicene Synod, says
that all differences were removed, and that all
came to unity of sentiment, what ground is there
for assuming that he was himself an Arian?
The Arians are also certainly deceived in sup-
posing him to be a favorer of their tenets. But
some one will perhaps say that in his discourses
he seems to have adopted the opinions of Arius,
because of his frequently saying through Christ,^
to whom we should answer that ecclesiastical
writers often use this mode of expression and
others of a similar kind denoting the econ-
omy of our Saviour's humanity : and that before

« I- 36.

' There are two works of Eusebius extant against Marcellus.
The one described here is de EccUsiastica Theologia adversus
Marcelliiin, in three books; the other is entitled contra Marcel-
liiin, and consists of two books. As there is no mention of the
latter, it is doubtful whether Socrates had ever seen them. At
the end of the second book, Eusebius asserts that he bad written at
the request of the bishops who had excommunicated Marcellus.

» Life of Const. III. 13.

' Eusebius was accustomed to end his sermons with the formula
' Glory be to the unborn God through his only-begotten Son,' &c.
So also at the end of his contra Sabell. I.


48


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 21.


all these the apostle ' made use of such expres-
sions, and never has been accounted a teacher
of false doctrine. Moreover, inasmuch as Arius
has dared to say that the Son is a creature, as
one of the others, observe what Eusebius says
on this subject, in his first book against Mar-
cellus : ■•

' He alone, and no other, has been declared
to be, and is the only-begotten Son of God ;
whence any one could justly censure those who
have presumed to affirm that he is a Creature
made of nothing, like the rest of the creatures ;
for how then would he be a Son? and how
could he be God's only-begotten, were he as-
signed the same nature as the other creatures
. . . and were he one of the many created
things, seeing that he, like them, would in that
case be partaker of a creation from nothing?
But the Sacred Scriptures do not thus instruct
us.' He again adds a little afterwards: 'Who-
ever then defines the Son as made of things
that are not, and as a creature produced from
nothing pre-existing, forgets that while he con-
cedes the name of Son, he denies him to be a
Son in reality. For he that is made of nothing,
cannot truly be the Son of God, any more than
the other things which have been made ; but
the true Son of God, forasmuch as he is begot-
ten of the Father, is properly denominated the
only-begotten and beloved of the Father. For
this reason also, he himself is God ; for what
can the offspring of God be, but the perfect
resemblance of him who begat him? A sov-
ereign indeed builds a city, but does not beget
it ; and is said to beget a son, not to build one.
An artificer, also, may be called the framer, but
not the father of his work ; while he could by
no means be styled the framer of him whom
he had begotten. So also the God of the Uni-
verse is the Father of the Son ; but might be
fitly termed the Framer and Maker of the world.
And although it is once said in Scripture,^ "The
Lord created me the beginning of his ways on
account of his works," yet it becomes us to
consider the import of this phrase, which I
shall hereafter explain ; and not, as Marcellus
has done, from a single passage to jeopardize
the most important doctrine of the church.'

These and many other such expressions Euse-
bius Pamphilus has given utterance to in the
first book against Marcellus ; and in his third
book,* declaring in what sense the term creature
is to be taken, he says :

' Accordingly, these things being thus estab-
lished, it follows that in the same sense as that
which preceded, the words, " The Lord created
me the beginning of his ways, on account of


' I Cor. i.; Eph. iii. 9.

* De Eccl. Theol. I. 8, 9, and 10.

' Prov. viii. 22.


« De Eccl. Thiol. III. 2.


his works," must have been spoken. For al-
though he says that he was created, it is not as
if he should say that he had arrived at existence
from what was not, nor that he himself also was
made of nothing like the rest of the creatures,
which some have erroneously supposed ; but as
subsisting, living, pre-existing, and being before
the constitution of the whole world ; and hav-
ing been appointed to rule the universe by his
Lord and Father : the word created being here
used instead of ordained or constituted. Cer-
tainly the apostle^ expressly called the rulers
and governors among men creature, when he
said, " Submit yourselves to every human crea-
ture for the Lord's sake ; whether to the king as
supreme, or to governors as those sent by him."
The prophet also * when he says, " Prepare,
Israel, to invoke thy God. For behold he who
confirms the thunder, creates the Spirit, and
announces his Christ unto men " : . . . has not
used the word "he who creates" in the sense
of makes out of nothing. For God did not
then create the Spirit, when he declared his
Christ to all men, since ^ " There is nothing new
under the sun " ; but the Spirit existed, and had
being previously : but he was sent at what time
the apostles were gathered together, when like
thunder " There came a sound from heaven as
of a rushing mighty wind ; and they were filled
with the Holy Spirit." ^° And thus they declared
unto all men the Christ of God, in accordance
with that prophecy which says,'^ " Behold he
who confirms the thunder, creates the Spirit,
and announces his Christ unto men " : the word
" creates " being used instead of " sends down,"
or appoints ; and thunder in another figure im-
plying the preaching of the Gospel. Again he
that says, " Create in me a clean heart, O
God," '- said not this as if he had no heart ;
but prayed that his mind might be purified.
Thus also it is said,'* " That he might create
the two into one new man," instead of unite.
Consider also whether this passage is not of the
same kind,'* " Clothe yourselves with the new
man, which is created according to God " ; and
this,^'* " If, therefore, any one be in Christ, he is
a new creature " ; and whatever other expres-
sions of a similar nature any one may find who
shall carefully search the divinely inspired Scrip-
ture. Wherefore, one should not be surprised
if in this passage, "The Lord created me the
beginning of his ways," the term " created " is
used metaphorically, instead of " appointed " or
constituted.'

Such words Eusebius uses in his work against


' 1 Pet. ii. 13.

• Amos iv. 12, 13 (LXX).

» Eccl. i. 9.
'" Acts ii. 2, 4.
" Amos iv. 13.


" Psalms Ii. 10 (LXX).
" Eph. ii. 15.
" Eph. iv. 34.
" 2 Cor. V. 17.


II. 23.J


RESTORATION OF PAUL AND ATHANASIUS.


49


Marcellus ; we have quoted them on account of
those who have slanderously attempted to tra-
duce and criminate him. Neither can they
prove that Eusebius attributes a beginning of
subsistence to the Son of God, although they
may find him often using the expressions by
accomodation ; and especially so, because he
was an emulator and admirer of the works of
Origen, in which those who are able to compre-
hend the depth of Origen's writings, will per-
ceive it to be everywhere stated that the Son
was begotten of the Father. These remarks
have been made in passing, in order to refute
those who have misrepresented Eusebius.


CHAPTER XXII.

The Cou7icil of Sardica restores Paul and Atha-
nasius to their Sees ; and on the Eastern
Emperor's Refusal to admit them, the Em-
peror of the West threatens him with War.

Those convened at Sardica, as well as those
who had formed a separate council at Philippop-
olis in Thrace, having severally performed what
they deemed requisite, returned to their respec-
tive cities. From that time, therefore, the West-
ern church was severed from the Eastern ; ^ and
the boundary of communion between them was
the mountain called Soucis,^ which divides the
Illyrians from the Thracians. As far as this
mountain there was indiscriminate communion,
although there was a difference of faith ; but
beyond it they did not commune with one
another. Such was the perturbed condition of
the churches at that period. Soon after these
transactions, the emperor of the Western parts
informed his brother Constantius of what had
taken place at Sardica, and begged him to re-
store Paul and Athanasius to their sees. But as
Constantius delayed to carry this matter into
effect, the emperor of the West again wrote to
him, giving him the choice either of re-estab-
lishing Paul and Athanasius in their former
dignity, and restoring their churches to them ;
or, on his failing to do this, of regarding him as
his enemy, and immediately expecting war. The
letter which he addressed to his brother was as
follows :

' Athanasius and Paul are here with me ; and
I am quite satisfied after investigation, that they
are persecuted for the sake of piety. If, there-
fore, you will pledge yourself to reinstate them
in their sees, and to punish those who have so


1 This separation was only temporary and must be distinguished
from the great schism, which grew slowly and culminated with the
adoption of the expression '/ilioque' into the Apostles' Creed by
the Western church in the eleventh century. On the various de-
grees of unitv and communion recognized in the ancient church, see
Bingham, £^c/. Antiq. Bk. XVI. i.

' Tio-o{i<cts.


unjustly injured them, I will send them to you ;
but should you refuse to do this, be assured,
that I will myself come thither, and restore them
to their own sees, in spite of your opposition.'

CHAPTER XXIII.

Constantius, being Afraid of his Brother's
Threats, recalls Athanasius by Letter, and
sends him to Alexandria.

On receiving this communication the emperor
of the East fell into perplexity ; and imme-
diately sending for the greater part of the East-
ern bishops, he acquainted them with the choice
his brother had submitted to him, and asked
what ought to be done. They rephed, it was
better to concede the churches to Athanasius,
than to undertake a civil war. Accordingly the
emperor, urged by necessity, summoned Atha-
nasius and his friends to his presence. Mean-
while the emperor of the West sent Paul to
Constantinople, with two bishops and other
honorable attendance, having fortified him with
his own letters, together with those of the Synod.
But while Athanasius was still apprehensive, and
hesitated to go to him, — for he dreaded the
treachery of his calumniators, — the emperor of
the East not once only, but even a second and
a third time, invited him to come to him \ this
is evident from his letters, which, translated from
the Latin tongue, are as follows :

Epistle of Constantius to Athanasius}

Constantius Victor Augustus to Athanasius the
bishop.

Our compassionate clemency cannot permit
you to be any longer tossed and disquieted as
it were by the boisterous waves of the sea. Our
unwearied piety has not been unmindful of you
driven from your native home, despoiled of your
property, and wandering in pathless solitudes.
And although I have too long deferred acquaint-
ing you by letter with the purpose of my mind,
expecting your coming to us of your own accord
to seek a remedy for your troubles ; yet since
fear perhaps has hindered the execution of your
wishes, we therefore have sent to your reverence
letters full of indulgence, in order that you may
fearlessly hasten to appear in our presence,
whereby after experiencing our benevolence,
you may attain your desire, and be re-estab-
lished in your proper position. For this reason
I have requested my Lord and brother Constans
Victor Augustus to grant you permission to
come, to the end that by the consent of us both
you may be restored to your country, having
this assurance of our favor.

' Athan. Apol. c. Arian. 51.


50


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 23.


Another Epistle to Athanasius.

Constantius Victor Augiistus to the bishop
Athanasius.

Although we have abundantly intimated in a
former letter that you might confidently come
to our court," as we are extremely anxious to
reinstate you in your proper place, yet we have
again addressed this letter to your reverence.
We therefore urge you, without any distrust or
apprehension, to take a public vehicle and hasten
to us, in order that you may be able to obtain
what you desire.

Another Epistle to Athanasius.

Constantius Victor Augustus to the bishop
Athanasius.

While we were residing at Edessa, where your
presbyters were present, it pleased us to send
one of them to you, for the purpose of hasten-
ing your arrival at our court, in order that after
having been introduced to our presence, you
might forthwith proceed to Alexandria. But
inasmuch as a considerable time has elapsed
since you received our letter, and yet have not
come, we now therefore hasten to remind you
to speedily present yourself before us, that so
you may be able to return to your country, and
obtain your desire. For the more ample assur-
ance of our intention, we have despatched to
you Achetas the deacon, from whom you will
learn both our mind in regard to you, and that
you will be able to secure what you wish ; viz.,
our readiness to facilitate the objects you have
in view.

When Athanasius had received these letters at
Aquileia, — for there he abode after his depart-
ure from Sardica, — he immediately hastened to
Rome ; and having shown these communications
to Julius the bishop, he caused the greatest joy
in the Roman Church. For it seemed as if
the emperor of the East also had recognized
their faith, since he had recalled Athanasius.
Julius then wrote to the clergy and laity of
Alexandria on behalf of Athanasius as follows :

Epistle of Julius^ Bishop of Rome, to those at
Alexandria?

Julius, the bishop, to the presbyters, deacons,
and people inhabiting Alexandria, brethren be-
loved, salutations in the Lord.

I also rejoice with you, beloved brethren,
because you at length see before your eyes the
fruit of your faith. For that this is really so, any
one may perceive in reference to my brother

' <co(iiToToi' = Lat. comitatus; by analogy of the New Test,
words Ki\vao<i KovaruiSia, triKKovKatutp, &c., and frequently in By-
zantine Greek Ko^pivtvtia <rov<hpa.yioi', &c.

' Athan. j4po/. c. Arian. 52.


and fellow-prelate Athanasius, whom God has
restored to you, both on account of his purity of
life, and in answer to your prayers. From this
it is evident that your supplications to God have
unceasingly been offered pure and abounding
with love ; for mindful of the divine promises
and of the charity connected with them, which
ye learned from the instruction of my brother,
ye knew assuredly, and according to the sound
faith which is in you clearly foresaw that your
bishop would not be separated from you for
ever, whom ye had in your devout hearts as
though he were ever present. Wherefore it is
unnecessary for me to use many words in ad-
dressing you, for your faith has already antici-
pated whatever I could have said ; and the
common prayer of you all has been fulfilled
according to the grace of Christ. I therefore
rejoice with you, and repeat that ye have pre-
served your souls invincible in the faith. And
with my brother Athanasius I rejoice equally;
because, while suffering many afflictions, he has
never been unmindful of your love and desire ;
for although he seemed to be withdrawn from
you in person for a season, yet was he always
present with you in spirit. Moreover, I am
convinced, beloved, that every trial which he
has endured has not been inglorious ; since both
your faith and his has thus been tested and
made manifest to all. But had not so many
troubles happened to him, who would have
believed, either that you had so great esteem
and love for this eminent prelate, or that he
was endowed with such distinguished virtues,
on account of which also he will by no means
be defrauded of his hope in the heavens? He
has accordingly obtained a testimony of confes-
sion in every way glorious both in the present
age and in that which is to come. For having
suffered so many and diversified trials both by
land and by sea, he has trampled on every
machination of the Arian heresy ; and though
often exposed to danger in consequence of
envy, he despised death, being protected by
Almighty God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, ever
trusting that he should not only escape the plots
[of his adversaries], but also be restored for
your consolation, and bring back to you at the
same time greater trophies from your own con-
science. By which means he has been made
known even to the ends of the whole earth as
glorious, his worth having been approved by
the purity of his life, the firmness of his pur-
pose, and his steadfastness in the heavenly doc-
trine, all being attested by your unchanging
esteem and love. He therefore returns to you,
more illustrious now than when he departed
from you. For if the fire tries the precious
metals (I speak of gold and silver) for purifica-
tion, what can be said of so excellent a man


11. 23.]


LETTERS REGARDING ATHANASIUS.


51


proportionate to his worth, who after having
overcome the fire of so many calamities and
dangers, is now restored to you, being declared
innocent not only by us, but also by the whole
Synod? Receive therefore with godly honor
and joy, beloved brethren, your bishop Athana-
sius, together with those who have been his
companions in tribulation. And rejoice in hav-
ing attained the object of your prayers, you who
have supplied with meat and drink, by your
supporting letters, your pastor hungering and
thirsting, so to speak, for your spiritual welfare.
And in fact ye were a comfort to him while he
was sojourning in a strange land ; and ye cher-
ished him in your most faithful affections when
he was plotted against and persecuted. As for
me, it makes me happy even to picture to my-
self in imagination the delight of each one of
you at his return, the pious greetings of the
populace, the glorious festivity of those assem-
bled to meet him, and indeed what the entire
aspect of that day will be when niy brother shall
be brought back to you again ; when past troubles
will be at an end, and his prized and longed-for
return will unite all hearts in the warmest ex-
pression of joy. This feeling will in a very high
degree extend to us, who regard it as a token
of divine favor that we should have been privi-
leged to become acquainted with so eminent a
person. It becomes us therefore to close this
epistle with prayer. May God Almighty and
his Son our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
afford you this grace continually, thus rewarding
the admirable faith which ye have manifested in
reference to your bishop by an illustrious testi-
mony : that the things most excellent wTiich
* Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man ; even the things
which God has prepared for them that love
him,' * may await you and yours in the world to
come, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through
whom be glory to God Almighty for ever and
ever, Amen. I pray that ye may be strength-
ened, beloved brethren.

Athanasius, relying on these letters, arrived at
the East. The Emperor Constantius did not at
that time receive him with hostility of feeling ;
nevertheless at the instigation of the Arians he
endeavored to circumvent him, and addressed
him in these words : * You have been reinstated
in your see in accordance with the decree of the
Synod, and with our consent. But inasmuch as
some of the people of Alexandria refuse to hold
communion with you, permit them to have one
church in the city.' To this demand Athanasius
promptly replied : ' You have the power, my
sovereign, both to order, and to carry into effect,


I Cor.


11. 9.


whatever you may please. I also, therefore,
would beg you to grant me a favor.' The em-
peror having readily promised to acquiesce,
Athanasius immediately added, that he desired
the same thing might be conceded to him, which
the emperor had sought from him, viz. : that
in every city one church should be assigned to
those who might refuse to hold communion with
the Arians. The Arians perceiving the purpose
of Athanasius to be inimical to their interests,
said that this affair might be postponed to
another time : but they suffered the emperor
to act as he pleased. He therefore restored
to Athanasius, Paul, and Marcellus their respec-
tive sees ; as also to Asclepas, bishop of Gaza,
and Lucius of Adrianople. For these, too, had
been received by the Council of Sardica : As-
clepas, because he showed records from which
it appeared that Eusebius Pamphilus, in con-
junction with several others, after having inves-
tigated his case, had restored him to his former
rank ; and Lucius, because his accusers had fled.
Hereupon the emperor's edicts were despatched
to their respective cities, enjoining the inhabi-
tants to receive them readily. At Ancyra
indeed, when Basil was ejected, and Marcellus
was introduced in his stead, there was a consid-
erable tumult made, which afforded his enemies
■an occasion of calumniating him : but the people
of Gaza willingly received Asclepas. Macedonius
at Constantinople, for a short time gave place
to Paul, convening assemblies by himself sepa-
rately, in a separate church in that city. More-
over the emperor wrote on behalf of Athanasius
to the bishops, clergy, and laity, in regard to
receiving him cheerfully : and at the same time
he ordered by other letters, that whatever had
been enacted against him in the judicial courts
should be abrogated. The communications
respecting both these matters were as follows :

T/ie Epistle of Constantius in Behalf of
Athanasius?

Victor Constantius Maximus Augustus, to the
bishops and presbyters of the Catholic Church.

The most reverend bishop Athanasius has not
been forsaken by the grace of God. But al-
though he was for a short time subjected to
trial according to men, yet has he obtained from
an omniscient Providence the exoneration which
was due to him ; having been restored by the
will of God, and our decision, both to his coun-
try and to the church over which by divine
permission he presided. It was therefore suit-
able that what is in accordance with this should
be duly attended to by our clemency : so that
all things which have been heretofore deter-
mined against those who held communion with


^ .\than. Apol. c. Arian. 54.


52


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 23.


him should now be rescinded ; that all suspicion
against him should henceforward cease ; and
that the immunity which those clergymen who
are with him formerly enjoyed, should be, as it
is meet, confirmed to them. Moreover, we
thought it just to add this to our grace toward
him, that the whole ecclesiastical body should
understand that protection is extended to all who
have adhered to him, whether bishops or other
clergymen : and union with him shall be a suf-
ficient evidence of each person's right intention.
Wherefore we have ordered, according to the
similitude of the previous providence, that as
many as have the wisdom to enroll themselves
with the sounder judgment and party and to
choose his communion, shall enjoy that indul-
gence which we have now granted in accordance
with the will of God.

Another Epistle sent to the Alexandrians?

Victor Constantius Maximus Augustus, to the
people of the Catholic Church at Alexandria.

Setting before us as an aim your good order
in all respects, and knowing that you have long
since been bereft of episcopal oversight, we
thought it just to send back to you again Atha-
nasius your bishop, a man known to all by the
rectitude and sanctity of his life and manners.
Having received him with your usual and be-
coming courtesy, and constituted him the assist-
ant of your prayers to God, exert yourselves
to maintain at all times, according to the eccle-
siastical canon, harmony and peace, which will
be alike honorable to yourselves, and grateful
to us. For it is unreasonable that any dissension
or faction should be excited among you, hostile
to the prosperity of our times ; and we trust
that such a misfortune will be wholly removed
from you. We exhort you, therefore, to assidu-
ously persevere in your accustomed devotions,
by his assistance, as we before said : so that
when this resolution of yours shall become gen-
erally known, entering into the prayers of all,
even the pagans, who are still enslaved in the
ignorance of idolatrous worship, may hasten to
seek the knowledge of our sacred religion, most
beloved Alexandrians. Again, therefore, we
exhort you to give heed to these things : heartily
welcome your bishop, as one appointed you by
the will of God and our decree ; and esteem
him worthy of being embraced with all the af-
fections of your souls. For this becomes you,
and is consistent with our clemency. But in
order to check all tendency to seditions and
tumult in persons of a factious disposition,
orders have been issued to our judges to give
up to the severity of the laws all whom they
may discover to be seditious. Having regard,


« Athan. Apol. c. A rian, 55.


therefore, to our determination and God's,^ as
well as to the anxiety we feel to secure harmony
among you, and remembering also the punish-
ment that will be inflicted on the disorderly,
make it your especial care to act agreeably to
the sanctions of our sacred religion, with all
reverence honoring your bishop ; that so in
conjunction with him you may present your
supplications to the God and Father of the uni-
verse, both for yourselves, and for the orderly
government of the whole human race.

An Epistle respecting the Rescinding of the En-
actments against Athanasius.

Victor Constantius Augustus to Nestorius, and
in the same terms to the governors of Augus-
tamnica, Thebais, and Libya.

If it be found that at any time previously
any enactment has been passed prejudicial and
derogatory to those who hold communion with
Athanasius the bishop, our pleasure is that it
should now be wholly abrogated ; and that his
clergy should again enjoy the same immunity
which was granted to them formerly. We en-
join strict obedience to this command, to the
intent that since the bishop Athanasius has been
restored to his church, all who hold communion
with him may possess the same privileges as
they had before, and such as other ecclesiastics
now enjoy : that so their affairs being happily
arranged, they also may share in the general
prosperity.

CHAPTER XXIV. /

Athanasius, passing through Jerusalem on his
Return to Alexandria, is received into Com-
inunion by Maximus : and a Synod of Bishops,
coni'ened in that City, confirms the Nicene
Creed.

Athanasius the bishop being fortified with
such letters as these, passed through Syria, and
came into Palestine. On arriving at Jerusalem
he acquainted Maximus the bishop both with
what had been done in the Council of Sardica,
and also that the Emperor Constantius had
confirmed its decision : he then proposed that a
Synod of the bishops there should be held.
Maximus,' therefore, without delay sent for cer-
tain of the bishops of Syria and Palestine, and
having assembled a council, he restored Atha-
nasius to communion, and to his former dignity.
After which the Synod communicated by letter^

' ToO icofiTOfOt; cf. I. 7, and note.

' The bishop of Jerusalem was under the jurisdiction of the
metropolitan bishop of Caesarea, and according to later usage and
canon, hid no ri^ht to call a synod without the permission of the
metropolitan. Evidently usaee had not yet become fixed into uni-
formity in this respect.

' Cf. Athan. Apol. c. Arian. 57.


II. 26.]


USURPATIONS OF MAGNENTIUS AND VETRANIO.


53


to the Alexandrians, and to all the bishops of
Egypt and Libya, what had been determined
respecting Athanasius. Whereupon the adver-
saries of Athanasius exceedingly derided Maxi-
mus, because having before assisted in his depo-
sition, he had suddenly changed his mind, and
as if nothing had previously taken place, had
voted for his restoration to communion and
rank. When Ursacius and Valens, who had
been fiery partisans of Arianism, ascertained
these things, condemning their former zeal, they
proceeded to Rome, where they presented their
recantation to Julius the bishop, and gave their
assent to the doctrine of consubstantiality : they
also wrote to Athanasius, and expressed their
readiness to hold communion with him in future.
Thus Ursacius and Valens were at that time
subdued by the good fortune of Athanasius and
induced to recognize the orthodox faith. Atha-
nasius passed through Pelusium on his way to
Alexandria, and admonished the inhabitants of
every city to beware of the Arians, and to re-
ceive those only that professed the Homoousian
faith. In some of the churches also he per-
formed ordination ; which afforded another
ground of accusation against him, because of
his undertaking to ordain in the dioceses of
others.^ Such was the progress of affairs at that
period in reference to Athanasius.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the Usiirpers Magnentius and Vetranio.

About this time an extraordinary commotion
shook the whole state, of the principal heads,
of which we shall give a brief account, deeming
it necessary not to pass over them altogether.
We mentioned in our first book,^ that after the
death of the founder of Constantinople, his
three sons succeeded him in the empire : it
must now be also stated, that a kinsman of
theirs, Dalmatius, so named from his father,
shared with them the imperial authority. This
person after being associated with them in the
sovereignty for a very little while, the soldiers put
to death," Constantius having neither commanded
his destruction, nor forbidden it. The manner
in which Constantine the younger was also killed
by the soldiers, on his invading that division of
the empire which belonged to his brother, has
already been recorded '^ more than once. After

' Cf. Apost. Cann. XXXV. ' Let not a bishop dare to ordain
beyond his limits, in cities and places not subject to him.' It fol-
lows, therefore, that the whole of Egypt was not under the bishop
of Alexandria; otherwise no such charge as is here mentioned could
have been made against Athanasius. That these ordinations were
made in Egypt is evident from the mention of Pelusium, which
Athanasius had already passed through.

1 I. 38.

* The same account is given by Eunap. X.9, and by Zosimus,
II. 40. 3 Ch. 5^ above.


his death, the Persian war was raised against
the Romans, in which Constantius did nothing
prosperously : for in a battle fought by night on
the frontiers of both parties, the Persians had
to some slight extent the advantage, .^nd this at
a time when the affairs of the Christians became
no less unsettled, there being great disturbance
throughout the churches on account of Atha-
nasius, and the term homoousion. Affairs hav-
ing reached this pass, there sprang up a tyrant
in the western parts called Magnentius,* who by
treachery slew Constans, the emperor of the
western division of the empire, at that time
residing in the Gauls. This being done, a furi-
ous civil war arose, and Magnentius made him-
self master of all Italy, reduced Africa and
Libya under his power, and even obtained pos-
session of the Gauls. But at the city of Sir-
mium in Illyricum, the military set up another
tyrant whose name was Vetranio ; ^ while a fresh
trouble threw Rome itself into commotion. For
there was a nephew of Constantine's, Nepotian
by name, who, supported by a body of gladia-
tors, there assumed the sovereignty. He was,
however, slain by some of the officers of Mag-
nentius, who himself invaded the western prov-
inces, and spread desolation in every direction.


CHAPTER XXVI.

After the Death of Constans, the Western Em-
peror, Paul ajid Athanasius are again ejected
from their Sees : the Former on his Way into
Exile is slain ; but the Latter escapes by Flight.

The conflux of these disastrous events occurred
during a short space of time ; for they happened
in the fourth year after the council at Sardica,
during the consulate of Sergius and Nigrinian.^
When these circumstances were published, the
entire sovereignty of the empire seemed to de-
volve on Constantius alone, who, being accord-
ingly proclaimed in the East sole Autocrat, made
the most vigorous preparations against the usurp-
ers. Hereupon the adversaries of Athanasius,
thinking a favorable crisis had arisen, again
framed the most calumnious charges against
him, before his arrival at Alexandria ; assuring
the Emperor Constantius that he was subverting
all Egypt and Libya. And his having under-
taken to ordain out of the limits of his own
diocese, tended not a little to accredit the accu-
sations against him. Meanwhile in this conjunc-
ture, Athanasius entered Alexandria ; and having
convened a council of the bishops in Egypt, they

* Magnentius was governor of the provinces of Rhoetia, and
assassinated Constans, as above. Cf. Zosimus, II. 43.

■'' This whole affair is treated extensively in Zosimus, II. 43-48.
1 350 A.D.


54


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 26.


confirmed by their unanimous vote, what had
been determined in the Synod at Sardica, and
that assembled at Jerusalem by Maximps. But
the emperor, who had been long since imbued
with Arian doctrine, reversed all the indulgent
, proceedings he had so recently resolved on.
1 And first of all he ordered that Paul, bishop of
j Constantinople, should be sent into exile ; whom
those who conducted strangled, at Cucusus in
Cappadocia. Marcellus was also ejected, and
Basil again made ruler of the church at Ancyra.
Lucius of Adrianople, being loaded with chains,
died in prison. The reports which were made
concerning .Athanasius so wrought on the em-
peror's mind, that in an ungovernable fury he
commanded him to be put to death wherever
he might be found : he moreover included
Theodulus and Olympius, who presided over
churches in Thrace, in the same proscription.
Athanasius, however, was not ignorant of the
intentions of the emperor ; but learning of them
he once more had recourse to flight, and so
escaped the emperor's menaces. The Arians
denounced this retreat as criminal, particularly
Narcissus, bishop of Neronias in Cilicia, George
of Laodicsea, and Leontius who then had the
oversight of the church at Antioch. This last
person, when a presbyter, had been divested of
his rank,- because in order to remove all suspi-
cion of illicit intercourse with a woman named
Eustolium, with whom he spent a considerable
portion of his time, he had castrated himself,
and thenceforward lived more unreservedly with
her, on the ground that there could be no longer
any ground for evil surmises. Afterwards how-
ever, at the earnest desire of the Emperor Con-
stantius, he was created bishop of the church at
Antioch, after Stephen, the successor of Placitus.
So much respecting this.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Macedonius having possessed himself of the See
of Constantinople inflicts much Injury on
those who differ from him.

At that time Paul having been removed in
the manner described, Macedonius became ruler
of the churches in Constantinople ; who, acquir-


' Cf. Apost. Canii. XXII. and XXIII.; according to these any
cleric was to be deposed if found guilty of such a crime. The Council
of Nicia also passed a canon on the subject which is as follows: ' If
a man has been mutilated by physicians during sickness, or by bar-
barians, he m.iy remain among the clergy: but if a man in good
health has mutilated himself, he must resipn his post after the matter
has been proved among the clercy, and in future no one who has
thus acted should be ordained. But as it is evident that what has
just been said only concerns those who have thus acted with inten-
tion, and have dared to mutilate themselves, those who have been
made eunuchs by barbarians or by their masters will be allowed,
conformably to the canon, to remam among the clergy, if in other
respects they are worthy.' Canon I. See Hefele, Hisl. 0/ the
CounciU, Vol. I. p. 375, 376.


ing very great ascendancy over the emperor,
stirred up a war among Christians, of a no less
grievous kind than that which the usurpers them-
selves were waging. For having prevailed on
his sovereign to co-operate with him in devastat-
ing the churches, he procured that whatever
pernicious measures he determined to pursue
should be ratified by law. .And on this account
throughout the several cities an edict was pro-
claimed, and a military force appointed to carry
the imperial decrees into effect. Accordingly
those who acknowledged the doctrine of con-
substantiality were expelled not only from the
churches, but also from the cities. Now at first
they were satisfied with expulsion ; but as the
evil grew they resorted to the worse extremity
of inducing compulsory communion with them,
caring but little for such a desecration of the
churches. Their violence indeed was scarcely
less than that of those who had formerly obliged
the Christians to worship idols ; for they applied
all kinds of scourgings, a variety of tortures,
and confiscation of property. Many were pun-
ished with exile ; some died under the torture ;
and others were put to death while they were
being led into exile. These atrocities were
exercised throughout all the eastern cities, but
especially at Constantinople ; the internal strife
which was but slight before was thus savagely
increased by Macedonius, as soon as he obtained
the bishopric. The cities of Greece, however,
and Illyricum, with those of the western parts,
still enjoyed tranquillity ; inasmuch as they pre-
served harmony among themselves, and con-
tinued to adhere to the rule of faith promulgated
by the council of Nicaea.


CHAFFER XXVIII.

Athanasius^ Account of the Deeds of Violence
committed at Alexandria by George the Arian.

What cruelties George perpetrated at Alex-
andria at the same time may be learned from
the narration of Athanasius, who both suffered
in and witnessed the occurrences. In his ' Apol-
ogy for his flight,' ^ speaking of these transac-
tions, he thus expresses himself:

' Moreover, they came to Alexandria, again
seeking to destroy me : and on this occasion
their proceedings were worse than before ; for
the soldiery having suddenly surrounded the
church, there arose the din of war, instead of
the voice of prayer. Afterwards, on his arrival
during Lent,- George, sent from Cappadocia,
added to the evil which he was instructed to


' Athan. A/>ol. de Fuga, 6.

' Te<r<j-opaKoaT>), lit. = ' forty days' fast,' formed by mistaken
analogy to ■aivn\KO<rff^.


II. 28.]


ATROCITIES OF ARIANS IN ALEXANDRIA.


55


work. When Easter-week ' was passed, the
virgins were cast into prison, the bishops were
led in chains by the miUtary, and the dwelHngs
even of orphans and widows were forcibly
entered and their provisions pillaged. Christians
were assassinated by night ; houses were sealed ;''
and the relatives of the clergy were endangered
on their account. Even these outrages were
dreadful ; but those that followed were still
more so. For in the week after the holy Pente-
cost, the people, having fasted, went forth to the
cemetery to pray, because all were averse to
communion with George : that wickedest of
men being informed of this, instigated against
them Sebastian, an officer who was a Manichaean.
He, accordingly, at the head of a body of troops
armed with drawn swords, bows, and darts,
marched out to attack the people, although it was
the Lord's day : finding but few at prayers, —
as the most part had retired because of the late-
ness of the hour, — he performed such exploits
as might be expected from them. Having
kindled a fire, he set the virgins near it, in
order to compel them to say that they were of
the Arian faith : but seeing they stood their
ground and despised the fire, he then stripped
them, and so beat them on the face, that for a
long time afterwards they could scarcely be
recognized. Seizing also about forty men, he
flogged them in an extraordinary manner : for
he so lacerated their backs with rods fresh cut
from the palm-tree, which still had their thorns
on, that some were obliged to resort repeatedly
to surgical aid in order to have the thorns ex-
tracted from their flesh, and others, unable to
bear the agony, died under its infliction. All
the survivors with one virgin they banished to
the Great Oasis.^ The bodies of the dead they
did not so much as give up to their relatives,
but denying them the rites of sepulture they
concealed them as they thought fit, that the
evidences of their cruelty might not appear.
They did this acting as madmen. For while
the friends of the deceased rejoiced on ac-
count of their confession, but mourned because
their bodies were uninterred, the impious in-
humanity of these acts was sounded abroad
the more conspicuously. For soon after this
they sent into exile out of Egypt and the
two Libyas the following bishops : Ammonius,


' Suspending, i.e., all violence during the period of festivity at-
tendins; the observ.ince of Easter.

* Houses are often sealed by state and municipal officials in the
East, even at the present time, when their contents are to be con-
fiscated, or for any other reason an inventory is to be made by the
authorities. The sealing consists in fastening and securing the locks
and bolts and attaching the impression of tne official seal to some
sealing-wax whicli is put over them. In this case the object of the
sealing was apparently the confiscation of the contents.

^ The modern El-Onah or El-Kharjeh, situated west of the
Nile, .seven days' jiurney from Thebes, contains several small
streams, and abounds in vegetation, including palm-trees, orange
and citron groves, olive orchards, &c. See Smith, Diet, of Geogr.


Thmuis, CaVus, Philo, Hermes, Pliny, Psenosiris,
Nilammon, Agatho, Anagamphus, Mark, Am-
monius, another Mark, Dracontius, Adelphius,
and Athenodorus ; and the presbyters Hierax
and Discorus. And so harshly did they treat
them in conducting them, that some expired
while on their journey, and others in the place
of banishment. In this way they got rid of
more than thirty bishops, for the anxious desire
of the Arians, like Ahab's, was to exterminate
the truth if possible.'

Such are the words of Athanasius in regard
to the atrocities perpetrated by George at Alex-
andria. The emperor meanwhile led his army
into Illyricum. For there the urgency of public
affairs demanded his presence ; and especially
the proclamation of Vetranio® as emperor by
the military. On arriving at Sirmium, he came
to a conference with Vetranio during a truce ;
and so managed, that the soldiers who had
previously declared for him changed sides, and
saluted Constantius alone as Augustus and sov-
ereign autocrat. In the acclamations, there-
fore, no notice was taken of Vetranio. Vetranio,
perceiving himself to be abandoned, immedi-
ately threw himself at the feet of the emperor;
Constantius, taking from him his imperial crown
and purple, treated him with great clemency,
and recommended him to pass the rest of his
days tranquilly in the condition of a private
citizen : observing that a life of repose at his
advanced age was far more suitable than a
dignity which entailed anxieties and care. Ve-
tranio's affairs came to this issue ; and the em-
peror ordered that a liberal provision out of the
public revenue should be given him. Often after-
wards writing to the emperor during his resi-
dence at Pmsa in Bithynia, Vetranio assured
him that he had conferred the greatest blessing
on him, by liberating him from the disquietudes
which are the inseparable concomitants of sov-
ereign power. Adding that he himself did not
act wisely in depriving himself of that happi-
ness in retirement, which he had bestowed upon
him. Let this suffice on this point. After
these things, the Emperor Constantius having
created Gallus his kinsman Csesar, and given
him his own name," sent him to Antioch in
Syria, providing thus for the guarding of the
eastern parts. When Gallus was entering this
city, the Saviour's sign appeared in the East : *
for a pillar in the form of a cross seen in the
heavens gave occasion of great amazement to
the spectators. His other generals the emperor


^ Sozomen (IV. 4) calls him OvfTipa.viiav\ cf. also Zosimus, II.
44, on the way in which he was elevated and soon afterwards
reduced.

' See I. I, and note on the name of Eusebius Pamphilus; cf.
Smith and Cheetham, Did. 0/ Christ. A tit. Names.

" .Similar to the appearance mentioned in I. 2. See note on that
passage.


56


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 28.


despatched against Magnentius with consider-
able forces, and he himself remained at Sir-
mium, awaiting the course of events.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Of the Heresiarch Photinus.

During this time Photinus/ who then presided
over the church in that city, more openly avowed
the creed he had devised ; wherefore a tumult
being made in consequence, the emperor ordered
a Synod of bishops to be held at Sirmium. There
were accordingly convened there of the Oriental
bishops,^ Mark of Arethusa, George of Alexan-
dria, whom the Arians sent, as I have before
said, having placed him over that see on the
removal of Gregory, Basil who presided over the
church at Ancyra after Marcellus was ejected,
Pancratius of Pelusium, and Hypatian of He-
raclea. Of the Western bishops there were
present Valens of Mursa, and the then cele-
brated Hosius of Cordova in Spain, who attended
much against his wnll. These met at Sirmium,
after the consulate of Sergius and Nigrinian,^ in
which year no consul celebrated the customary
inaugural* solemnities, in consequence of the
tumults of war ; and having met and found that
Photinus held the heresy of Sabellius the Libyan,
and Paul of Samosata, they immediately deposed
him. This decision was both at that time and
afterwards universally commended as honorable
and just ; but those who continued there, sub-
sequently acted in a way which was by no means
so generally approved.


CHAPTER XXX.


4


Creeds published at Sirmium in Presence of tiie
Emperor Constantius.

As if they would rescind their former deter-
minations respecting the faith, they published
anew other expositions of the creed, viz. : one
which Mark of Arethusa composed in Greek ;
and others in Latin, which harmonized neither
in expression nor in sentiment with one another,
nor with that dictated by the bishop of Arethusa.
I shall here subjoin one of those drawn up in
Latin, to that prepared in Greek by Mark : the


> A disciple of Marcellus (see ch. 18). See Hilar, de Synod.
61, Cave on Photinus,

' The bishops here mentioned, according to Valcsius, took part
not in this council, but in another held at the same place nine years
later, under the consuls Eusebius and Hypatius.

' 351 AD. So also Sozomen, IV. 6.

« The Ludi circensti, consisting of five games, leaping, wrest-
ling, boxing, racing, and hurling, — called in Greek -nivraOkov, —
witn scenic representations and spectacles of wild beasts at the
amphitheatre; with these the consuls entertained the people at their
entrance on the consulate. Alluded to by Tacilus {Ann. I. a)
and Juvenal {_Sat. X. i). Cf. Smith, Diet, of Greek and Rom.
A ntiq.


Other, which was afterwards recited at Sirmium,*
will be given when we describe what was done
at Ariminum. It must be understood, however,
that both the Latin forms were translated into
Greek. The declaration of faith set forth by
Mark, was as follows : ■

' We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom
the whole family in heaven and on earth is
named,' and in his only begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, who was begotten of the Father
before all ages, God of God, Light of Light, by
whom all things visible and invisible, which are in
the heavens and upon the earth, were made : who
is the Word, and the Wisdom, and the true Light,
and the Life ; who in the last days for our
sake was made man and born of the holy virgin,
and was crucified and died, and was buried, and
rose again from the dead on the third day, and
was received up into heaven, and sat at the
right hand of the Father, and is coming at the
completion of the age to judge the living and
the dead, and to requite every one according
to his works : whose kingdom being everlasting,
endures into infinite ages ; for he will be seated
at the Father's right- hand, not only in the pres-
ent age, but also in that which is to come,
[We believe] also in the Holy Spirit, that is to
say the Comforter, whom, having promised to
his apostles after his ascension into the heavens,
to teach them, and bring all things to their re-
membrance, he sent ; by whom also the souls
of those who have sincerely believed in him are
sanctified. But those who affirm that the Son
is of things which are not, or of another sub-
stance, and not of God, and that there was a
time or an age when he was not, the holy and
catholic Church recognizes to be aliens. We
therefore again say, if any one affirms that the
Father and Son are two Gods, let him be
anathema. And if any one admits that Christ
is God and the Son of God before the ages, but
does not confess that he ministered to the
Father in the formation of all things, let him
be anathema. If any one shall dare to assert
that the Unbegotten, or a part of him, was
born of Mary, let him be anathema. If any
one should say that the Son was of Mary
according to foreknowledge, and not that he
was with God, begotten of the Father before
the ages, and that all things were not made by
him, let him be anathema. If any one affirms
the essence of God to be dilated or contracted,
let him be anathema. If any one says that the
dilated essence of God makes the Son, or shall

• There were three councils held at Sirmium: one in 351, as al-
ready indicated in note 3, ch. 29; another in 357, in which Hosius
and rotamius composed their blasphemy; and one in 359. It was in
this last council that that creed was drawn up which was recited in
Ariminum. The confusion of Socrates on this point has been alluded
to in the Introd.

' Athan. de Synod. 27. * Eph. iii. 15.


ir. 30.]


CREEDS OF SIRMIUM.


57


term the Son the dilatation of his essence, let
him be anathema. If any one calls the Son of
God the internal or uttered word, let him be
anathema. If any one declares that the Son
that was born of Mary was man only, let him
be anathema. If any man affirming him that
was born of Mary to be God and man, shall
imply the unbegotten God himself, let him be
anathema. If any one shall understand the
text, " I am the first, and I am the last, and
besides me there is no God," ■* which was spoken
for the destruction of idols and false gods, in
the sense the Jews do, as if it were said for the
subversion of the only-begotten of God before
the ages, let him be anathema. If any one
hearing "the Word was made flesh,"* should
imagine that the Word was changed into flesh,
or that he underwent any change in assuming
flesh, let him be anathema. If any one hearing
that the only-begotten Son of God was crucified,
should say that his divinity underwent any cor-
ruption, or suffering, or change, or diminution,
or destruction, let him be anathema.. If any
one should affirm that the Father said not to
the Son, " Let us make man,"® but that God
spoke to himself, let him be anathema. If any
one says that it was not the Son that was seen
by Abraham, but the unbegotten God, or a part
of him, let him be anathema. If any one says
that it was not the Son that as man wrestled
with Jacob, but the unbegotten God, or a part
of him, let him be anathema. If any one shall
understand the words, " The Lord rained from
the Lord," '^ not in relation to the Father and
the Son, but shall say that he rained from him-
self, let him be anathema : for the Lord the
Son rained from the Lord the Father. If any
one hearing " the Lord the Father, and the
Lord the Son," shall term both the Father and
the Son Lord, and saying " the Lord from the
Lord " shall assert that there are two Gods, let
him be anathema. For we do not co-ordinate
the Son with the Father, but [conceive him to
be] subordinate to the Father. For he neither
came down to the body* without his Father's
will ; nor did he rain from himself, but from
the Lord (i.e. the Father) who exercises supreme
authority : nor does he sit at the Father's right
hand of himself, but in obedience to the Father
saying, " Sit thou at my right hand " ^ [let him
be anathema]. If any one should say that the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one person,
let him be anathema. If any one, speaking of
the Holy Spirit the Comforter, shall call him the
unbegotten God, let him be anathema. If any


* Isa. xliv. 6. ^ John i. 14. * Gen. i. 26.

' Gen. xix. 24: 'Then the Lord . . . rained brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of heaven.'

* Athanasius reads eirl 2o5o/ia, not ei? o-diua. If this be the true
reading, we should translate ' came down to Sodom," &c.

» Ps. cix. I (LXX).


one, as he hath taught us, shall not say that the
Comforter is other than the Son, when he has
himself said, " the Father, whom I will ask,
shall send you another Comforter," '° let him
be anathema. If any one affirm that the Spirit
is part of the Father and of the Son, let him be
anathema. If any one say that the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit are three Gods, let him be
anathema. If any one say that the Son of God
was made as one of the creatures by the will
of God, let him be anathema. If any one shall
say that the Son was begotten without the
Father's will, let him be anathema : for the
Father did not, as compelled by any natural
necessity, beget the Son at a time when he was
unwilling ; but as soon as it pleased him, he
has declared that of himself without time and
without passion, he begat him. If any one
should say that the Son is unbegotten, and with-
out beginning, intimating that there are two
without beginning, and unbegotten, so making
two Gods, let him be anathema : for the Son
is the head and beginning of all things ; but
"the head of Christ is God."" Thus do we
devoutly trace up all things by the Son to one
source of all things who is without beginning.
Moreover, to give an accurate conception of
Christian doctrine, we again say, that if any one
shall not declare Christ Jesus to have been the
Son of God before all ages, and to have min-
istered to the Father in the creation of all
things ; but shall affirm that from the time only
when he was born of Mary, was he called the
Son and Christ, and that he then received the
commencement of his divinity, let him be anath-
ema, as the Samosatan.' '^

Another Exposition of the Faith set forth at
Sirmiiim in Latin, atici afterwards translated
into Greek}^

Since it appeared good that some dehberation
respecting the faith should be undertaken, all
points have been carefully investigated and dis-
cussed at Sirmium, in presence of Valens, Ur-
sacius, Germinius, and others.

It is evident that there is one God, the Father
Almighty, according as it is declared over the
whole world ; and his only-begotten Son Jesus
Christ, our Lord, God, and Saviour, begotten of
him before the ages. But we ought not to say
that there are two Gods, since the Lord himself
has said ' I go unto my Father and your Father,
and unto my God and your God.' " Therefore
he is God even of all, as the apostle also taught,
' Is he the God of the Jews only ? Is he not

"" John xiv. 16, 26. 1' I Cor. xi. 3.

" Paul of Samosata, see I. 36, note 3.

" Athan. de Synod. 28, and Hilar. V; Synod, calls this creed
' The blasphemy composed at Sirmium by Hosius and Potamius.'
'* John XX. 17.


58


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 30.


also of the Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles also;
seeing that it is one God who shall justify the
circumcision by faith."* And in all other mat-
ters there is agreement, nor is there any ambi-
guity. But since it troubles very many to
understand about that which is termed sub-
stantia in Latin, and ousia in Greek ; that is to
say, in order to mark the sense more accurately,
the word homoousion '® or honioiousion,^'' it is alto-
gether desirable that none of these terms should
be mentioned : nor should they be preached on
in the church, for this reason, that nothing is
recorded concerning them in the holy Scriptures ;
and because these things are above the knowl-
edge of mankind and human capacity, and that
no one can explain the Son's generation, of
which it is written, ' And who shall declare his
generation?"* It is manifest that the Father
only knows in what way he begat the Son ; and
again the Son, how he was begotten by the
Father. But no one can doubt that the Father
is greater in honor, dignity, and divinity, and
in the very name of Father ; the Son himself
testifying ' My Father who hath sent me is greater
than I.' '" And no one is ignorant that this is
also catholic doctrine,^ that there are two per-
sons of the Father and Son, and that the Fath ;r
is the greater : but that the Son is subject, to-
gether with all things which the Father has
subjected to him. That the Father had no
beginning, and is invisible, immortal, and im-
passible : but that the Son was begotten of the
Father, God of God, Light of Light ; and that
no one comprehends his generation, as was
before said, but the Father alone. That the
Son himself, our Lord and God, took flesh or
a body, that is to say human nature, according
as the angel brought glad tidings : and as the
whole Scriptures teaches, and especially the apos-
tle who was the great teacher of the Gentiles,
Christ assumed the human nature through which
he suffered, from the Virgin Mary. But the sum-
mary and confirmation of the entire faith is,
that [the doctrine of] the Trinity should be
always maintained, according as we have read
in the gospel, ' Go ye and disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.' " Thus the
number of the Trinity is complete and perfect.
Now the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, sent by
the Son, came according to his promise, in
order to sanctify and instnict the apostles and
all believers.

They endeavored to induce Photinus, even
after his deposition, to assent to and subscribe
these things, promising to restore him his bish-


•' Rom. iii. 29, 30.
1' Of the same substance.
" Of similar substance.
*' Isa. liii. 5.


'» John xiv. a8.
" KaSoKiKov, ' universally ac-
cepted.'
" Matt, xxviii. 19.


opric, if by recantation he would anathematize
the dogma he had invented, and adopt their
opinion. But he did not accept their proposal,
and on the other hand he challenged them to a
disputation : ^ and a day being appointed by
the emperor's arrangement, the bishops who
were there present assembled, and not a few of
the senators, whom the emperor had directed
to attend to the discussion. In their presence,
Basil, who at that time presided over the church
at Ancyra, was appointed to oppose Photinus,
and short- hand writers took down their respec-
tive speeches. The conflict of arguments on
both sides was extremely severe ; but Photinus
having been worsted, was condemned, and spent
the rest of his life in exile, during which time
he composed treatises in both languages — for
he was not unskilled in Latin — against all here-
sies, and in favor of his own views. Concerning
Photinus let this suffice.

Now the bishops who were convened at Sir-
mium, were afterwards dissatisfied with that
form of the creed which had been promul-
gated by them in Latin ; for after its publi-
cation, it appeared to them to contain many
contradictions. They therefore endeavored to
get it back again from the transcribers ; but
inasmuch as many secreted it, the emperor by
his edicts commanded that the version should
be sought for, threatening punishment to any
one who should be detected concealing it.
These menaces, however, were incapable of sup-
pressing what had already fallen into the hands
of many. Let this suffice in regard to these
affairs.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Of Hosius, Bishop of Cordova.

Since we have observed that Hosius the Span-
iard was present [at the council of Sirmium]
against his will, it is necessary to give some
brief account of him. A short time before he
had been sent into exile by the intrigues of the
Arians : but at the earnest solicitation of those
convened at Sirmium, the emperor summoned
him thither, wishing that by persuasion, or by
compulsion he should give his sanction to their
proceedings ; for if this could be effected, they
considered it would give great authority to their
sentiments. On this ground, therefore, as I
have said, he was most unwillingly obliged to
be present : and when he refused to concur with
them, stripes and tortures were inflicted on the
old man. Wherefore he was constrained by

" ' Epiphanius relates that Photinus, after he had been condemned
and deposed in the synod of Sirmium, went to Constantius, and re-
quested that he might dispute concerning the faith before judges
nominated by him; and that Constantius enjoined Basilius, bishop
of Ancyra, to undertake a disputation with Photinus, and gave leave
that Thalassiuss, Datianus, Cerealis, and Taurus should be arbiters '
(Valesius).


11. 34-]


AFFAIRS OF THE EMPIRE; EAST AND WEST.


59


force to acquiesce in and subscribe to their expo-
sition of the faith. Such was the issue of affairs
at that time transacted at Sirmium. Ikit the
emperor Constantius after these things still con-
tinued to reside at that place, awaiting there the
result of the war against Magnentius.

CHAFl^ER XXXII.

Overthrow of the Usurper Magnentius.

Magnentius in the meanwhile having made
himself master of the imperial city Rome, put
to death many members of the senatorial coun-
cil, as well as many of the populace. But as
soon as the commanders under Constantius had
collected an army of Romans, and commenced
their march against him, he left Rom'e, and re-
tired into the Gauls. There several battles were
fought, sometimes to the advantage of one party,
and sometimes to that of the other : but at last
Magnentius having been defeated near Mursa —
a fortress of Gaul — was there closely besieged.
In this place the following remarkable incident
is said to have occurred. Magnentius desiring
to reassure the courage of his soldiers who were
disheartened by their late overthrow, ascended
a lofty tribunal for this purpose. They, wishing
to give utterance to the usual acclamation with
which they greet emperors, contrary to their in-
tention simultaneously all shouted the name,
not of Magnentius, but of Constantius Augustus.
Regarding this as an omen unfavorable to him-
self, Magnentius immediately withdrew from the
fortress, and retreated to the remotest parts of
Gaul. Thither the generals of Constantms has-
tened in pursuit. An engagement having again
taken place near Mount Seleucus,' Magnentius
was totally routed, and fled alone to Lyons, a
city of Gaul, which is distant three days' jour-
ney from the fortress at Mursa. Magnentius,
having reached this city, first slew his own
mother ; then having killed his brother also,
whom he had created Caesar, he at last com-
mitted suicide by falling on his own sword.
This happened in the sixth consulate of Con-
stantius, and the second of Constantius Gallus,
on the fifteenth ^ day of August. Not long after,
the other brother of Magnentius, named I)ecen-
tius, put an end to his own life by hanging him-
self. Such was the end of the enterprises of
Magnentius. The affairs of the empire were
not altogether quieted ; for soon after this an-
other usurper arose whose na|ne was Silvanus :
but the generals of Constantius speedily put
him also out of the way, whilst raising disturb-
ances in Gaul.

1 So in the Allat. MS., with the variant reading in other MSS.
MiATOfffAeuicos.

* 353 A.D.; but the date is given differently in Idatius' Fasti.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

0/ the Jews inhabiting Dio- Ccesarea in Palestine.

Ahout the same time there arose another in-
testine commotion in the P3ast : for the Jews
who inhabited Dio-Caesarea in Palestine took
up arms against the Romans, and began to
ravage the adjacent places. But (iallus who was
also called Constantius, whom the emperor, after
creating Caesar, had sent into the East, de-
spatched an army against them, and completely
vanquished them : after which he ordered that
their city Dio-Caesarea should be razed to the
foundations.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of Gallus Ccesar.

Gallus, having accomplished these things,
was unable to bear his success with moderation ;
but forthwith attempted innovations against the
authority of him who had constituted him Caesar,
himself aspiring to the sovereign power. His
purpose was, however, soon detected by Con-
stantius : for he had dared to put to death, on
his own responsibility, Domitian, at that time
Praetorian prefect of the East, and Magnus the
quaestor, not having disclosed his designs to the
emperor. Constantius, extremely incensed at
this conduct, summoned Gallus to his presence,
who being in great terror went very reluctantly ;
and when he arrived in the western parts, and
had reached the island of Flanona, Constantius
ordered him to be slain. But not long after he
created Julian, the brother of Gallus, Caesar,
and sent him against the barbarians in Gaul.
It was in the seventh consulate^ of the emperor
Constantius that Gallus, who was surnamed
Constantius, was slain, when he himself was a
third time consul : and Julian was created Caesar
on the 6th of November in the following year,
when Arbetion '^ and Lollian were consuls ; of
him we shall make farther mention in the next
book.^ When Constantius was thus relieved
from the disquietudes which had occupied him,
his attention was again directed to ecclesiastical
contentions. Going therefore from Sirmium to
the imperial city Rome, he again appointed a
synod of bishops, summoning some of the east-
ern prelates to hasten into Italy,* and arranging \
for those of the west to meet them there, \\hile
preparations were making in the east for this
purpose, Julius bishop of Rome died, after hav-
ing presided over the church in that place fifteen
years, and was succeeded in the episcopal dig-
nity by Liberius.

1 354 A.D. ' 355 A.D, ' See III. i.

* So rightly in the Allat. MS. ; the variant roAAioi' is inconsis-
tent with the context.


6o


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[n. 35-


CHAFFER XXXV.

Of A'itius the Syrian, Teacher of Eunomius.

At Antioch in Syria another heresiarch sprang
up, Aetius, surnamed Atheus. He agreed in
doctrine with Arius, and maintained the same
opinions : but separated himself from the Arian
party because they had admitted Arius into
communion. For Arius, as I have before re-
lated,' entertaining one opinion in his heart,
professed another with his Hps ; having hypo-
critically assented to and subscribed the form of
faith set forth at the council of Nicsea, in order
to deceive the reigning emperor. On this ac-
count, therefore, Aetius separated himself from
the Arians. He had, however, previously been
a heretic, and a zealous advocate of Arian views.
After receiving some very scanty instruction at
Alexandria, he departed thence, and arrived at
Antioch in Syria, which was his native place,
was ordained deacon by Leontius, who was then
bishop of that city. Upon this he began to
astonish those who conversed with him by the
singularity of his discourses. And this he did
in dependence on the precepts of Aristotle's
Categories ; there is a book of that name, the
scope of which he neither himself perceived, nor
had been enlightened on by' intercourse with
learned persons : so that he was little aware that
he was framing fallacious arguments to perplex
and deceive himself. For Aristotle had com-
posed this work to exercise the ingenuity of his
young disciples, and to confound by subtle
arguments the sophists who affected to deride
philosophy. Wherefore the Ephectic academi-
cians,' who expound the writings of Plato and
Plotinus, censure the vain subtlety which Aris-
totle has displayed in that book : but Aetius, who
never had the advantage of an academical pre-
ceptor, adhered to the sophisms of the Cate-
gories. For this reason he was unable to
comprehend how there could be generation
without a beginning, and how that which was
begotten can be co-eternal with him who begat.
In fact, Aetius was a man of so superficial at-
tainments, and so little acquainted with the
sacred Scriptures, and so extremely fond of
caviling, a thing which any clown might do,
that he had never carefully studied those an-
cient writers who have interpreted the Christian
oracles ; wholly rejecting Clemens and Africa-


> 1. 26.

'Diogenes Laertius, Proem. XI (16), says: 'Philosophers
•were generally divided into two classes, — the dogmatics, who spoke
of things as they might be comprehended; and the ephectics, who
refused to define anything, and disputed so as to make the under-
standing of them impossible.' The word 'ephectic' is derived
from the verb iitixui, ' to hold back,' and was used by the philoso-
phers to whom it is applied as a title because they claimed to hold
back their judgment, being unable to reach a conclusion. Cf. also
the name ' skeptic,' from <7ic<irTo»iat. See Zeller, Stoics, Epi-
cureans, and Skeptics, p. 525.


nus and Origen, men eminent for their infor-
mation in every department of literature and
science. But he composed epistles both to the
emperor Constantius, and to some other persons,
wherein he interwove tedious disputes for the
purpose of displaying his sophisms. He has
therefore been surnamed Atheus. But although
his doctrinal statements were similar to those of
the Arians, yet from the abstruse nature of his
syllogisms, which they were unable to compre-
hend, his a-ssociates in .Arianism pronounced
him a heretic. Being for that reason expelled
from their church, he pretended to have sepa-
rated himself from their communion. Even in
the present day there are to be found some who
from him were formerly named Aetians, but now
Eunomians. For some time later Eunomius,
who had been his amanuensis, having been
instructed by his master in this heretical mode
of reasoning, afterwards became the head of
that sect. But of Eunomius we shall speak
more fully in the proper place.^

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Of the Synod at Milan.

Now at that time the bishops met in Italy,
very few indeed from the East, most of them
being hindered from coming either by the in-
firmities of age or by the distance ; but of the
West there were more than three hundred.^ It
was a command of the emperor that they should
be assembled at Milan. On meeting, the East-
ern prelates opened the Synod by calling upon
those convened to pass a unanimous sentence
of condemnation against Athanasius ; with this
object in view, that he might thenceforward be
utterly shut out from Alexandria. But Paulinus,
bishop of Treves in Gaul, and Dionysius, of
whom the former was bishop of Alba,^ the
metropolis of Italy, and Eusebius of Vercellae,
a city of Liguria in Italy, perceiving that the
Eastern bishops, by demanding a ratification of
the sentence against Athanasius, were intent on
subverting the faith, arose and loudly exclaimed
that ' this proposition indicated a covert plot
against the principles of Christian truth. For
they insisted that the charges against Athana-
sius were unfounded, and merely invented by
his accusers as a means of corrupting the faith.*

' IV. 7.

' So also Sozomcn, IV. 9: but the number appears exorbitant.
Valcsius conjectures that the texts of Socrates and Sozomen are cor-
rupted, and that we must read thirty instead of three hundred.
The smaller number agrees ex.icily witri the list given in the epistle
of this council to Eusebius of Vercellac; in this list thirty bishops
arc named as agreeing to the condemnation of Athanasius, Marcel-
lus, and Photinus. Cf. Baronius, Anna!, year 355.

' Sozomen (IV. o) agrees here also witn Socrates; but Athana-
sius, in Epist. ad Soliiar., and after him Baronius and Valesius,
make Milan and not Alba, the metropolis of Italy, and Dionysius
bishop of Milan, and not of Alba.


TI- 37-]


SYNOD OF ARIMINUM.


6i


Having made this protest with much vehemence
of manner, the congress of bishops was then
dissolved.


CHAPTER XXXVn.


V


Of the Synod at Arifninum, and the Creed there
published}


The emperor on being apprised of what had
taken place, sent these three bishops into ex-
ile ; and determined to convene an ecumenical
council, that by drawing all the Eastern bishops
into the West, he might if possible bring them
all to agree. But when, on consideration, the
length of the journey seemed to present serious
obstacles, he directed that the Synod should
consist of two divisions ; permitting those pres-
ent at Milan to meet at Ariminum in Italy : but
the Eastern bishops he instnicted by letters to
assemble at Nicomedia in Bithynia. The em-
peror's object in these arrangements was to
effect a general unity of opinion ; but the issue
-was contrary to his expectation. For neither
of the Synods was in harmony with itself, but
each was divided into opposing factions : for
those convened at Ariminum could not agree
with one another ; and the Eastern bishops
assembled at Seleucia in Isauria made another
schism. The details of what took place in both
we will give in the course of our history,' but
we shall first make a few observations on Eudox-
ius. About that time Leontius having died,
who had ordained the heretic Aetius ^ as deacon,
Eudoxius bishop of Germanicia — this city is in
Syria — who was then at Rome, thinking no
time was to be lost, speciously represented to
the emperor that the city over which he pre-
sided was in need of his counsel and care, and
requested permission to return there imme-
diately. This the emperor readily acceded to,
having no suspicion of a clandestine purpose :
Eudoxius having some of the principal officers
of the emperor's bedchamber as coadjutors, de-
serted his own diocese, and fraudulently installed
himself in the see of Antioch. His first desire
was to restore Aetius ; accordingly he convened
a council of bishops for the purpose of reinvest-
ing Aetius with the dignity of the diaconate.
But this could in no way be brought about, for
the odium with which Aetius was regarded was
more prevalent than the exertions of Eudoxius
in his favor. When the bishops were assembled

1 Cf. Sozomen, III. 19; IV. 15-19: Theodoret, H. E. II. 18-21;
Rufin. II. 21; Philostorgius, IV. 10. Also Hefele, Hist. 0/ the
■Ch. Councils, Vol. II. p. 246-271.

2 Ch. 39.

3 According to Theodoret (//. E. II. 19) Aetius was promoted to
the diacorate under Leontius at Antioch; but Leontius, on being
censured by Flavian and Diodorus for ordaining one who was notori-
ous for his blasphemous utterances, divested him of his diaconate.
Hence, later, Eudoxius attempted to restore him, as is here said.


at Ariminum, those from the East declared that
they were willing to pass in silence the case of
Athanasius : a resolution that was zealously sup-
ported by Ursacius and Valens, who had formerly
maintained the tenets of Arius ; but, as I have
already stated, had afterwards presented a re-
cantation of their opinion to the bishop of
Rome, and publicly avowed their assent to the
doctrine of consubstantiality. For these men
always inclined to side with the dominant party.
Germinius, Auxentius, Demophilus and Gains
made the same declaration in reference to Atha-
nasius. When therefore some endeavored to
propose one thing in the convocation of bishops,
and some another, Ursacius and Valens said
that all former draughts of the creed ought to
be considered as set aside, and the last alone,
which had been prepared at their late conven-
tion at Sirmium, regarded as authorized. They
then caused to be read a paper which they held
in their hands, containing another form of the
creed : this had indeed been drawn up at Sir-
mium, but had been kept concealed, as we have
before observed, until their present pubhcation
of it at Ariminum. It has been translated from
the Latin into Greek, and is as follows : *

'The catholic faith was expounded at Sirmium
in presence of our lord Constantius,^ in the con-
sulate ^ of the most illustrious Flavius Eusebius,
and Hypatius, on the twenty-third of May.

' We believe in one only and true God, the
Father Almighty, the Creator and Framer of all
things: and in one only-begotten Son of God,
before all ages, before all beginning, before all
conceivable time, and before all comprehensible
thought, begotten without passion : by whom
the ages were framed, and all things made : who
was begotten as the only-begotten of the Father,
only of only, God of God, like to the Father who
begat him, according to the Scriptures : whose
generation no one knows, but the Father only
who begat him. We know that this his only-
begotten Son came down from the heavens by
his Father's consent for the putting away of sin,
was born of the Virgin Mary, conversed witK
his disciples, and fulfilled every dispensation
according to the Father's will : was crucified
and died, and descended into the lower parts
of the earth, and disposed matters there ; at the
sight of whom the (door-keepers of Hades


•• Athan. de Synod. 8; but Athanasius does not say that this
creed was translated from Latin, as he docs whenever he pro-
duces any document put into Greek from Latin; whence it appears,
accordmg to Valesius, that this is the form drawn up in Greek by
Marcus of Arethusa, and submitted to the third Sirmium council in
359, but read at Ariminum as here said (cf. ch. 30, and note). The
argument is not considered conclusive by Re.iding as far as it re-
gards the original language of the creed; that it was written by
iSIarcus of Arethusa, however, seems to be proved.

'> The title of the emperor in Athanasius' version is' ' The most
pious and victorious emperor Constantius Augustus, eternal Augus-
tus,' &c., which agrees with the representations of the ancients on
the vainglory of Constantius. Cf. Amm. Marcellin. Rerum Gesta-
ru»t, XVI. 10. 2, 3 (ed. Eyssenhardt).

» 359 A.D.


62


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Cn. 37-


trembled') : having arisen on the third day, he
again conversed with his disciples, and after
forty days were completed he ascended into the
heavens, and is seated at the Father's right
hand ; and at the last day he will come in his
Father's glory to render to every one according
to his works. [We believe] also in the Holy
Spirit, whom the only-begotten Son of God
Jesus Christ himself promised to send to the
human race as the Comforter, according to that
which is written:* "I go away to my Father,
and will ask him, and he will send you another
Comforter, the Spirit of truth. He shall receive
of mine, and shall teach you, and bring all things
to your remembrance." As for the term "sub-
stance," which was used by our fathers for the
sake of greater simplicity, but not being under-
stood by the people has caused offense on ac-
count of the fact that the Scriptures do not con-
tain it, it seemed desirable that it should be
wholly abolished, and that in future no mention
should be made of substance in reference to
God, since the divine Scriptures have nowhere
spoken concerning the substance of the Father
and the Son. But we say that the Son is in all
things like the Father, as the Holy Scriptures
affirm and teach.'

These statements having been read, those
who were dissatisfied with them rose and said :
' We came not hither because we were in want
of a creed ; for we preserve inviolate that which
we received from the beginning ; but we are
here met to repress any innovation upon it
which may have been made. If therefore what
has been recited introduces no novelties, now
openly anathematize the Arian heresy, in the
same manner as the ancient canon of the church
has rejected all heresies as blasphemous : for it
is evident to the whole world that the impious
dogma of Arius has excited the disturbances of
the church, and the troubles which exist until
now.' This proposition, which was not accepted
by Ursacius, Valens, Germinius, Auxentius, De-
mophilus, and Gaius, rent the church asunder
completely : for these prelates adhered to what
had then been recited in the Synod of Arimi-
num ; while the others again confirmed the
Nicene Creed. They also ridiculed the super-
scription of the creed that had been read ; and
especially Athanasius, in a letter which he sent
to his friends, wherein he thus expresses him-
self:^

' What point of doctrine was wanting to the
piety of the catholic church, that they should
now make an investigation respecting the faith,
and prefix moreover the consulate of the present
times to their published exposition of it? For


Ursacius, Valens, and Germinius have done what
was neither done, nor even heard of, at any time
before among Christians : having composed a
creed such as they themselves are willing to
believe, they prefaced it with the consulate,
month, and day of the present time, in order to
prove to all discerning persons that theirs is not
the ancient faith, but such as was originated
under the reign of the present emperor Con-
stantius."' Moreover they have written all things
with a view to their own heresy : and besides
this, pretending to write respecting the Lord,
they name another " Lord " as theirs, even Con-
stantius, who has countenanced their impiety, so
that those who deny the Son to be eternal, have
styled him eternal emperor. Thus are they
proved to be the enemies of Christ by their
profanity. But perhaps the holy prophets'
record of time afforded them a precedent for
[noticing] the consulate ! Now even if they
should presume to make this pretext, they would
most glaringly expose their own ignorance.
The prophecies of these holy men do indeed
mark the times. Isaiah and Hosea lived in the
days of Uzziah, Joatham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah ; "
Jeremiah in the time of Josiah ; *^ Ezekiel and
Daniel in the reign of Cyms and Darius ; and
others uttered their predictions in other times.
Yet they did not then lay the foundations of
religion. That was in existence before them,
and always was, even before the creation of the
world, God having prepared it for us in Christ.
Nor did they designate the commencement of
their own faith ; for they were themselves men
of faith previously : but they signified the times
of the promises given through them. Now the
promises primarily referred to our Saviour's ad-
vent ; and all that was foretold respecting the
course of future events in relation to Israel and
the Gentiles was collateral and subordinate.
Hence the periods mentioned indicated not
the beginning of their faith, as I before obsers'ed,
but the times in which these prophets lived and
foretold such things. But these sages of our
day, who neither compile histories, nor predict
future events, after writing, "The Catholic
Faith was published," immediately add the
consulate, with the month and the day :
and as the holy prophets wrote the date of
their records and of their own ministration, so
these men intimate the era of their own faith.
And would that they had written concerning
their own faith only — since they have now
begun to believe — and had not undertaken to
write respecting the Catholic faith. For they
have not written, "Thus we believe"; but.


' Job xxxviii. 17 (LXX).
9 Athan. de Synod. 8.


' John xiv. 16; xvi. 14.


>" This appeal 10 .nntiquity, as the test of truth, is very common
with the earlier Fathers: cf. Eiisebius' treatment of the Scriptures
of the New Testament, H. E. III. 3, 24, 25. et al.

" Isa. i. a; Hos. i. i. " Jer. i. 2.


II. 37] CREED OF ARIMINUM AND LETTER TO THE EMPEROR. 63


"The Catholic Faith was pubUshed." The
temerity of purpose herein manifested argues
their ignorance ; while the novelty of expression
found in the document they have concocted
shows it to be the same as the Arian heresy.
By writing in this manner, they have declared
when they themselves began to believe, and
from what time they wish it to be understood
their faith was first preached. And just as when
the evangelist Luke says,'^ " A decree of enrol-
ment was published," he speaks of an edict which
was not in existence before, but came into opera-
tion at that time, and was published by him who
had written it ; so these men by writing " The
faith has now been published," have declared
that the tenets of their heresy are of modern in-
vention, and did not exist previously. But since
they apply the term "Catholic" to it, they seem
to have unconsciously fallen into the extravagant
assumption of the Cataphrygians, asserting even
as they did, that " the Christian faith was first
revealed to us, and commenced with us." And
as those termed Maximilla and Montanus, so
these style Constantius their Lord, instead of
Christ. But if according to them the faith had
its beginning from the present consulate, what
will the fathers and the blessed martyrs do?
Moreover what will they themselves do with
those who were instructed in religious princi-
ples by them, and died before this consulate?
By what means will they recall them to life, in
order to obliterate from their minds what they
seemed to have taught them, and to implant in
its stead those new discoveries which they have
published? So stupid are they as to be only
capable of framing pretenses, and these such as
are unbecoming and unreasonable, and carry
with them their own refutation.'

Athanasius wrote thus to his friends : and the
interested who may read through his whole epistle
will perceive how powerfully he treats the sub-
ject ; but for brevity's sake we have here inserted
a part of it only. The Synod deposed Valens,
Ursacius, Auxentius, Germinius, Gaius, and De-
mophilus for refusing to anathematize the Arian
doctrine ; who being very indignant at their
deposition, hastened directly to the emperor,
carrying with them the exposition of faith which
had been read in the Synod. The council also
acquainted the emperor with their determina-
tions in a communication which translated from
the Latin into Greek, was to the following
effect : "


w Luke ii. I. ,.,...

1* Athan. de Synod. lo. The Latin original which is given in
Hilar. Fragm. 8, was adopted by Valesius in this place, and subse-
quently also by the English translators. We have followed the
Greek of Socrates, giving the most important differences in the fol-
lowing four notes; viz. 15, 16, 17, and 18. How these variations
originated it is impossible to tell with assurance; but it is not improb-
able that they may represent two drafts, of which one was originally
tentative.


Epistle of the Synod of Ariminum to the Em-
peror Constantius.

We believe that it was by the appointment of
God, as well as at the command of your piety,
that the decrees formerly published have been
executed. Accordingly we Western bishops
came out of various districts to Ariminum, in
order that the faith of the catholic church might
be made manifest, and that those who held con-
trary views might be detected. For on a con-
siderate review by us of all points, our decision
has been to adhere to the ancient faith which
the prophets, the gospels, and the apostles have
revealed through our Lord Jesus Christ, the
guardian of your empire, and the protector of
your person, which faith also we have always
maintained. We conceived that it would be
unwarrantable and impious to mutilate any of
those things which have been justly and rightly
ratified, by those who sat in the Nicene council
with Constantine of glorious memory, the father
of your piety. Their doctrine and views have
been infused into the minds and preached in
the hearing of the people, and found to be
powerfully opposed, even fatal, to the Arian
heresy. And not only this heresy, but also all
others have been put down by it. Should there-
fore anything be added to or taken away from
what was at that time established, it would
prove perilous; for if either of these things
should happen, the enemy will have boldness to
do as they please.^^

Wherefore Ursacius and Valens being hereto-
fore suspected of entertaining Arian sentiments,
were suspended from communion : but in order
to be restored to it they made an apology, and
claimed that they had repented of their short-
coming, as their written recantation attests :
they therefore obtained pardon and complete
absolution.

The time when these things occurred was
when the council was in session at Milan, when
the presbyters of the church of Rome were
also present.

At ^^ the same time, having known that Con-
stantine, who even after his death is worthy
of honorable mention, exposed the faith with
due precision, but being born of men was
baptized and departed to the peace due to him
as his reward, we have deemed it improper to
innovate after him disregarding so many holy

J' The Latin original here contains the following paragraph not
reproduced by Socrates: 'These matters having been strictly in-
vestigated and the creed drawn up in the presence of Constantine,
who after being baptized, departed to God's rest in the faith of it,
we regard as an abomination any infringement thereon, or any
attempt to invalidate the authority of so many saints, confessors,
and successors of the martyrs, who assisted at that council, and
themselves preserved inviolate all the determinations of the ancient
writers of the catholic church: whose faith has remained unto these
times in which your piety has received from God the Father, through
Jesus Christ our God and Lord, the power of ruling the world.

»« The Latin original omits the following paragraph, ending witn
the words ' over our portion of the world.'


64


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


["• 37-


confessors and martyrs, who also were authors
of this confession, and persevered in their faith
in the ancient system of the cathoHc church.
Their faith God has perpetuated down to the
years of your own reign through our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whose grace it also became pos-
sible for you to so strengthen your dominion as
to rule over one portion of the world.

Yet have these infatuated and wretched per-
sons, endued with an unhappy disposition, again
had the temerity to declare themselves the propa-
gators of false doctrine, and even endeavor to
subvert the constitution of the Church. For when
the letters of your piety had ordered us to as-
semble for the examination of the faith, they laid
bare their intention, stripped of its deceitful
garb. For they attempted with certain craft
and confusion to propose innovations, having
in this as allies Germinius, Auxentius,'' and
Gaius, who continually cause strife and dissen-
sion, and their single teaching has surpassed
the whole body of blasphemies. But when they
perceived that we had not the same disposition
or mind as they in regard to their false views,
they changed their minds during our council,
and said another expression of belief should be
put forth. And short indeed was the time which
convinced them of the falsity of their views.

In order, therefore, that the affairs of the
Church may not be continually brought into
the same condition, and in order that trouble
and tumult may not continually arise and con-
fuse all things, it appeared safe to preserve the
previously determined views firm and unalter-
able, and to separate from our communion the
persons above named ; for which reason we
have despatched to your clemency delegates
who will communicate the opinion of the coun-
cil to you. And to our delegates we have given
this commission above all, that they should
accredit the truth taking their motive from the
ancient and right decisions. They will inform
your holiness that peace will not be established
as Ursacius and Valens say when some point
of the right be overturned. For how can those
be at peace who destroy peace? Rather will
strife and tumult be occasioned by these things
in the church of Rome also, as in the other
cities. Wherefore, now, we beseech your clem-
ency that you should look upon our delegation
with a calm eye and listen to it with favor, and
not allow that anything' should be changed, thus
bringing insult to the deceased, but permit us
to continue in those things which have been
defined and legislated by our ancestors ; who,
we should say, acted with shrewdness and wisdom
and with the Holy Spirit. For the innovations
they introduce at present fill the believing with


" The Latin original in Hilar, omits the name of Auxentius.


distrust and the unbelieving with cruelty.^* We
further implore you to instruct that the bishops
who dwell in foreign parts, whom both the in-
firmity of age and the ills of poverty harass
should be assisted to return easily and speedily
to their own homes, so that the churches may
not remain bereft of their bishops. Still further
we beg of you this also, that nothing be stricken
off, nor anything be added, to the articles [of
faith] remaining over from the times of your
jjious father even until now ; but that these may
continue inviolate. Permit us not to toil and
suffer longer, nor to be separated from our
dioceses, but that together with our own peoples
we may in peace have time to offer prayers and
thanksgiving, supplicating for your safety and
continuance in the dominion, which may the
divinity grant unto you perpetually. Our dele-
gates bear the signatures and greetings of the
bishops. These [delegates] will from the
Divine Scriptures themselves instruct your piety.

The Synod then thus wrote and sent their
communications to the emperor by the bishops
[selected for that purpose]. But the partisans
of Ursacius and Valens having arrived before
them, did their utmost to calumniate the coun-
cil, exhibiting the exposition of the faith which
they had brought with them. The emperor,
prejudiced beforehand towards Arianism, be-
came extremely exasperated against the Synod,
but conferred great honor on Valens and Ur-
sacius and their friends. Those deputed by the
council were consequently detained a consider-
able time, without being able to obtain an
answer : at length, however, the emperor replied
through those who had come to him, in the
manner following :

' Constantius Victor and Triumphator Augus-
tus to all the bishops convened at Ariminum.

'That our especial care is ever exercised re-
specting the divine and venerated law even your
sanctity is not ignorant. Nevertheless we have
hitherto been unable to give an audience to the
twenty bishops sent as deputation from you, for
an expedition against the barbarians has become
necessary. And since, as you will admit, mat-
ters relative to the divine law ought to be en-
tered on with a mind free from all anxiety ; I
have therefore ordered these bishops to await
our return to Adrianople ; that when all public
business shall have been duly attended to, we
may be able then to hear and consider what
they shall propose. In the meanwhile let it not
seem troublesome to your gravity to wait for
their return ; since when they shall convey to


" Instead of the Greek words here translated, ' fill the believing
with distrust and the unbelieving with cruelty,' the Latin origi-
nal reads ' verum etiam infideUs ad credulitatem vetantur
accede re.'


II. 38.]


END OF^ THE COUNCIL AT ARIMINUM.


65


you our resolution, you will be prepared to
carry into effect such measures as may be most
advantageous to the welfare of the catholic
church.'

The bishops on receipt of this letter wrote
thus in reply : '^

' We have received your clemency's letter, sov-
ereign lord, most beloved of God, in which you
inform us that the exigencies of state affairs have
hitherto prevented your admitting our delegates
to your presence : and you bid us await their
return, until your piety shall have learnt from
them what has been determined on by us in
conformity with the tradition of our ancestors.
But we again protest by this letter that we can
by no means depart from our primary resolu-
tion ; and this also we have commissioned our
deputies to state. We beseech you therefore,
both with serene countenance to order this
present epistle of our modesty to be read ; and
also to listen favorably to the representations
with which our delegates have been charged.
Your mildness doubtless perceives, as well as
we, to how great an extent grief and sadness
prevail, because of so many churches being
bereft of their bishops in these most blessed
times of yours. Again therefore we entreat
your clemency, sovereign lord most dear to
God, to command us to return to our churches,
if it please your piety, before the rigor of winter ;
in order that we may be enabled, in conjunc-
tion with the people, to offer up our accustomed
prayers to Almighty God, and to our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, his only-begotten Son, for
the prosperity of your reign, as we have always
done, and even now do in our prayers.'

The bishops having waited together some
time after this letter had been despatched, inas-
much as the emperor deigned no reply, they
departed to their respective cities. Now the
emperor had long before intended to dissemi-
nate Aiian doctrine throughout the churches;
and was anxious to give it the pre-eminence ;
hence he pretended that their departure was an
act of contumely, declaring that they had treated
him with contempt by dissolving the council
in opposition to his wishes. He tlierefore
gave the partisans of Ursacius unbounded li-
cense to act as they pleased in regard to the
churches : and directed that the revised form
of creed which had been read at Ariminum
should be sent to the churches throughout
Italy ; ordering that whoever would not sub-
scribe it should be ejected from their sees, and
that others should be substituted in their place.^
And first Liberius, bishop of Rome, having re-
fused his assent to that creed, was sent into

>9 Cf. Theodoret, H. E. II. 20.
2" Cf. Theodoret. H. E. II. 16.


exile ; the adherents of Ursacius appointing
Felix to succeed him, who had been a deacon
in that church, but on embracing the Arian
heresy was elevated to the episcopate. Some
however assert that he was not favorable to that
opinion, but was constrained by force to receive
the ordination of bishop. After this all parts of
the West were filled with agitation and tumult,
some being ejected and banished, and others
established in their stead. These things were
effected by violence, on the authority of the
imperial edicts, which were also sent into the
eastern parts. Not long after indeed Liberius
was recalled, and reinstated in his see ; for the
people of Rome having raised a sedition, and
expelled Felix from their church, the emperor
even though against his wish consented. The
partisans of Ursacius, quitting Italy, passed
through the eastern parts ; and arriving at Nice,
a city of Thrace, they dwelt there a short time
and held another Synod, and after translating
the form of faith which was read at Ariminum
into Greek, they confirmed and published it
afresh in the form quoted above, giving it the
name of the general council, in this way attempt-
ing to deceive the more simple by the similarity
of names, and to impose upon them as the creed
promulgated at Nicsea in Bithynia, that which
they had prepared at Nice in Thrace.-' But
this artifice was of little advantage to them ; for
it was soon detected, they became the object of
derision. Enough now has been said of the
transactions which took place in the West : we
must now proceed to the narrative of what was
done in the East at the same time.


CHAPTER XXXVIIL

Cruelty of Macedonius, and Tutriults raised
by him.

The bishops of the Arian party began to as-
sume greater assurance from the imperial edicts.
In what manner they undertook to convene a
Synod, we will explain somewhat later. Let us
now briefly mention a few of their previous acts.
Acacius and Patrophilus having ejected Maxi-
mus, bishop of Jerusalem, installed Cyril in his
see. Macedonius subverted the order of things
in the cities and provinces adjacent to Constan-
tinople, promoting to ecclesiastical honors his
assistants in his intrigues against the churches.^

=1 Hilar. Fragm. 8; Hefele, Hist. 0/ Ch. Councils, Vol. II.
p. 257.

' From this place it plainly appears, as Valesius remarks, that
the authority of the see of Constantinople was acknowledged, even
before the council of Constantinople, throughout the region of the
Hellespont and Bith\Miia, which conclusion is also confirmed by the
acts of Kudoxius, bishop of Constantinople, who made Eunomiiis
bishop of Cyzicus. Two causes co-operated to secure this authority,
viz. (t) the official establishment of the city as the capital of the
empire by Constantine, and (2) the transference to it of Eusebius


66


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 38.


He ordained Eleusius bishop of Cyzicus, and
Marathonius, bishop of Nicomedia : the latter
had before been a deacon under Macedonius
himself, and proved very active in founding
monasteries both of men and women. But we
must now mention in what way Macedonius
desolated the churches in the cities and prov-
inces around Constantinople. This man, as I
have already said,^ having seized the bishopric,
inflicted innumerable calamities on such as were
unwilling to adopt his views. His persecutions
were not confined to those who were recognized
as members of the catholic church, but ex-
tended to the Novatians also, inasmuch as he
knew that they maintained the doctrine of the
homoousion; they therefore with the others
underwent the most intolerable sufferings, but
their bishop, Angelius by name, effected his
escape by flight. Many persons eminent for
their piety were seized and tortured, because
they refused to communicate with him : and
after the torture, they forcibly constrained the
men to be partakers of the holy mysteries, their
mouths being forced open with a piece of wood,
and then the consecrated elements thrust into
them. Those who were so treated regarded
this as a punishment far more grievous than all
others. Moreover they laid hold of women ^nd
children, and compelled them to be initiated
[by baptism] ; and if any one resisted or
otherwise spoke against it, stripes immediately
followed, and after the stripes, bonds and im-
prisonment, and other violent measures. I
shall here relate an instance or two whereby the
reader may form some idea of the extent of the
harshness and cruelty exercised by Macedonius
and those who were then in power. They first
pressed in a box, and then sawed off, the breasts
of such women as were unwilling to communi-
cate with them. The same parts of the persons
of other women they burnt partly with iron, and
partly with eggs intensely heated in the fire.
This mode of torture which was unknown even
among the heathen, was invented by those who
professed to be Christians. These facts were
related to me by the aged Auxanon, the presby-
ter in the Novatian church of whom I spoke in
the first book.'^ He said also that he had him-
self endured not a few severities from the Arians,
prior to his reaching the dignity of presbyter ;
having been thrown into prison and beaten with
many stripes, together with Alexander the Paph-
lagonian, his companion in the monastic life. He
added that he had himself been able to sustain
these tortures, but that Alexander died in prison
from the effects of their infliction. He is now
buried on the right of those sailing into the bay of

of Nicomedia, a most vigorous and acgressive bishop, who missed
no opportunity for enlarging and consolidating the power of his see.
* See above, ch. 16. ' I. 13.


Constantinople which is called Ceras, close by
the rivers, where there is a church of the Nova-
tians named after Alexander. Moreover the
Arians, at the instigation of Macedonius, demol-
ished with many other churches in various cities,
that of the Novatians at Constantinople near
Pelargus. Why I particularly mention this
church, will be seen from the extraordinary cir-
cumstances connected with it, as testified by the
same aged Auxanon. The emperor's edict and
the violence of Macedonius had doomed to
destruction the churches of those who main-
tained the doctrine of consubstantiality ; the
decree and violence reached this church, and
those also who were charged with the execution
of the mandate were at hand to carry it into
effect. I cannot but admire the zeal displayed
by the Novatians on this occasion, as well as the
sympathy they experienced from those whom
the Arians at that time ejected, but who are now
in peaceful possession of their churches. For
when the emissaries of their enemies were
urgent to accomplish its destruction, an immense
multitude of Novatians, aided by numbers of
others who held similar sentiments, having as-
sembled around this devoted church, pulled it
down, and conveyed the materials of it to an-
other place : this place stands opposite the city,
and is called Sycae, and forms the thirteenth
ward of the town of Constantinople. This re-
moval was effected in a very short time, from
the extraordinary ardor of the numerous persons
engaged in it : one carried tiles, another stones, a
third timber ; some loading themselves with one
thing, and some with another. Even women and
children assisted in the work, regarding it as the
realization of their best wishes, and esteeming it
the greatest honor to be accounted the faithful
guardians of things consecrated to God. In
this way at that time was the church of the
Novatians transported to Sycse. Long after-
wards when Constantius was dead, the emperor
Julian ordered its former site to be restored,
and permitted them to rebuild it there. The
people therefore, as before, having carried back
the materials, reared the church in its former
position ; and from this circumstance, and its
great improvement in structure and ornament,
they not inappropriately called it Anasiasia.
The church as we before said was restored after-
wards in the reign of Julian. But at that time
both the Catholics and the Novatians were alike
subjected to persecution : for the former abomi-
nated offering their devotions in those churches
in which the Arians assembled, but frequented
the other three * — for this is the number of the


* Accordind to Valesius it appears incredible that the Catholics
should have done what Socrates says they did. ' For there is
nothing more contrary to ecclesiastical discipline than to communi-
cate wkh heretics either in the sacraments or in prayer.' Hence
' Socrates was probably imposed upon by the aged Auxano, who


n. 39]


MISDEEDS OF MACEDONIUS.


67


churches which the Novatians have in the city
— and engaged in divine service with them.
Indeed they would have been wholly united,
had not the Novatians refused from regard to
their ancient precepts. In other respects how-
ever, they mutually maintained such a degree
of cordiality and affection, as to be ready to
lay down their lives for one another : both
parties were therefore persecuted indiscrim-
inately, not only at Constantinople, but also in
other provinces and cities. At Cyzicus, Eleu-
sius, the bishop of that place, perpetrated the
same kind of enormities against the Christians
there, as Macedonius had done elsewhere, harass-
ing and putting them to flight in all directions ;
and [among other things] he completely demol-
ished the church of the Novatians at Cyzicus.
But Macedonius consummated his wickedness
in the following manner. Hearing that there
was a great number of the Novatian sect in the
province of Paphlagonia, and especially at Man-
tinium, and perceiving that such a numerous
body could not be driven from their homes by
ecclesiastics alone, he caused, by the emperor's
permission, four companies of soldiers to be
sent into Paphlagonia, that through dread of
the military they might receive the Arian opin-
ion. But those who inhabited Mantinium, ani-
mated to desperation by zeal for their religion,
armed themselves with long reap-hooks, hatchets,
and whatever weapon came to hand, and went
forth to meet the troops ; on which a conflict
ensuing, many indeed of the Paphlagonians
were slain, but nearly all the soldiers were
destroyed. I learnt these things from a Paph-
lagonian peasant who said that he was present
at the engagement ; and many others of that
province corroborate this account. Such were
the exploits of Macedonius on behalf of Chris-
tianity, consisting of murders, battles, incarcera-
tions, and civil wars : proceedings which ren-
dered him odious not only to the objects of his
persecution, but even to his own party. He
became obnoxious also to the emperor on these
accounts, and particularly so from the circum-
stance I am about to relate. The church where
the coffin lay that contained the relics of the
emperor Constantine threatened to fall. On
this account those that entered, as well as those
who were accustomed to remain there for devo-
tional purposes, were in much fear. Mace-
donius, therefore, wished to remove the em-
peror's remains, lest the coffin should be injured
by the ruins. The populace getting intelligence


fixed upon all the Catholics what was perhaps done by some few
Christians who were less cautiovis.' But Socrates' own attitude
towards the Novatians (cf. Introd. p. x.) shows that the difference
between them and the Catholics (oi rn? (KK\-q<Tia<;) was not univer-
sally regarded as an absolute schism forbidding communication even
during such times of trial as these described here, which might cer-
tainly have drawn together parties already as near to one another
as the Novatians and Catholics.


of this, endeavored to prevent it, insisting
' that the emperor's bones should not be dis-
turbed, as such a disinterment would be equiva-
lent, to their being dug up ' : many however
affirmed that its removal could not possibly
injure the dead body, and thus two parties were
formed on this question ; such as held the
doctrine of consubstantiality joining with those
who opposed it on the ground of its impiety.
Macedonius, in total disregard of these preju-
dices, caused the emperor's remains to be trans-
ported to the church where those of the martyr
Acacius lay. Whereupon a vast multitude rushed
toward that edifice in two hostile divisions, which
attacked one another with great fury, and great
loss of life was occasioned, so that the church-
yard was covered with gore, and the well also
which was in it overflowed with blood, which
ran into the adjacent portico, and thence even
into the very street. When the emperor was
informed of this unfortunate occurrence, he was
highly incensed against Macedonius, both on
account of the slaughter which he had occa-
sioned, and because he had dared to move his
father's body without consulting him. Having
therefore left the Caesar Julian to take care of
the western parts, he himself set out for the
east. How Macedonius was a short time after-
wards deposed, and thus suffered a most inade-
quate punishment for his infamous crimes, I
shall hereafter relate.*


CHAPTER XXXIX.

0/ the Synod at Seleiicia, in Isauria.

But I must now give an account of the other
Synod, which the emperor's edict had convoked
in the east, as a rival to that of Ariminum. It
was at first determined that the bishops should
assemble at Nicomedia in Bithynia ; but a great
earthquake having nearly destroyed that city,
prevented their being convened there. This
happened in the consulate ' of Tatian and
Cerealis, on the 28th day of August.^ They
were therefore planning to transfer the council
to the neighboring city of Nicaea : but this plan
was again altered, as it seemed more convenient
to meet at Tarsus in Cilicia. Being dissatisfied
with this arrangement also, they at last assembled
themselves at Seleucia, surnamed Aspera,'' a city
of Isauria. This took place in the same year
[in which the council of Ariminum was held],


5 See below, ch. 42.

1 358 A.D.

- In this calamity Cecropius, the bishop of Nicomedia, perished,
and the splendid cathedral of the city was ruined: both of which
misfortunes were attributed by the heathen to the wrath of their
gods. See Sozom. IV. 16/

» Tpaxfia, on account of the neighboring steep mountains.
This Seleucia was the capital of Isauria.


68


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[n. 39-


under the consulate of Eusebius and Hypatius/
the number of those convened being about
1 60. There was present on this occasion
Leonas, an officer of distinction attached to the
imperial househokl, before whom the emperor's
edict had enjoinetl that the discussion respect-
ing the faith should be entered into. Lauricius
also, the commander-in-chief of the troops in
Isauria, was ordered to be there, to serve the
bishops in such things as they might require.
In the presence of these personages therefore,
the bishops were there convened on the 27th
of the month of September, and immediately
began a discussion on the basis of the public
records, shorthand writers being present to write
down what each might say. Those who desire
to learn the particulars of the several speeches,
will find copious details of them in the collec-
tion of Sabinus ; but we shall only notice the
more important heads. On the first day of their
being convened, Leonas ordered each one to
propose what he thought fit : but those present
said that no question ought to be agitated in
the absence of those prelates who had not yet
arrived ; for Macedonius, bishop of Constanti-
nople, Basil of Ancyra, and some others who
were apprehensive of an impeachment for their
misconduct, had not made their appearance.
Macedonius pleaded indisposition, and failed to
attend ; Patrophilus said he had some trouble
with his eyes, and that on this account it was
needful for him to remain in the suburbs of
Seleucia ; and the rest offered various pretexts to
account for their absence. When, however,
Leonas declared that the subjects which they
had met to consider must be entered on, not-
withstanding the absence of these persons, the
bishops replied that they could not proceed to
the discussion of any question, until the'life and
conduct of the parties accused had been inves-
tigated : for Cyril of Jerusalem, Eustathius of
Sebastia in Armenia, and some others, had been
charged with misconduct on various grounds
long' before. A sharp contest arose in conse-
quence of this demur ; some affirming that
cognizance ought first to be taken of all such
accusations, and others denying that anything
whatever should have precedence of matters of
faith. The emperor's orders contributed not a
little to augment this dispute, inasmuch as let-
ters of his were produced urging now this and
now that as necessary to be considered first.
The dispute having arisen on this subject, a
schism was thus made, and the Seleucian coun-
cil was divided into two factions, one of which
was headed by Acacius of Caesarea in Palestine,
George of Alexandria, Uranius of Tyre, and
Eudoxius of Antioch, who were supported by

* 3S9 A.D. See, on this double council of Ariminum and Seleu-
cia, Hefele, Hist, of the Ch. Councils, Vol. 11. p. 346-371.


only about thirty-two other bishops. Of the
opposite party, which was by far the more nu-
merous, the principal were George of Laodicea
in Syria, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis in Paphla-
gonia, and Eleusius of Cyzicus. It being de-
termined by the majority to examine doctrinal
matters first, the party of Acacius openly op-
posed the Nicene Creed, and wished to intro-
duce another instead of it. The other faction,''
which was considerably more numerous, con-
curred in all the decisions of the council of
Nicaea, but criticised its adoption of the term
Jiomoousiou. Accordingly they debated on this
point, much being said on each side, until late
in the evening, when Silvanus, who presided
over the church at Tarsus, insisted with much
vehemence of manner, ' that there was no need
of a new exposition of the faith ; but that it was
their duty rather to confirm that which was
published at Antioch,^ at the consecration of
the church in that place.' On this declaration,
Acacius and his partisans privately withdrew
from the council ; while the others, producing
the creed composed at Antioch, read it, and
then separated for that day. Assembling in the
church of Seleucia on the day following, after
having closed the dcors, they again read the
same creed, and ratified it by their signatures.
At this time the readers and deacons present
signed on behalf of certain absent bishops, who
had intimated their acquiescence in its form..


CHAPTER XL.

Acacius, Bishop of C(Fsarea, dictates a new
ForfU of Creed in the Synod at Seleucia.

Acacius and his adherents criticised what was
done : because, that is to say, they closed the
church doors and thus affixed their signatures ;
declaring that ' all such secret transactions were
justly to be suspected, and had no validity what-
ever.' These objections he made because he
was anxious to bring forward another exposition
of the faith drawn up by himself, which he had
already submitted to the governors Leonas and
Lauricius, and was now intent on getting it alone
confirmed and established, instead of that which
had been subscribed. The second day was thus
occupied with nothing else but exertions on his
part to effect this object. On the third day
Leonas endeavored to produce an amicable
meeting of both parties ; Macedonius of Con-
stantinople, and also Basil of Ancyra, having ar-
rived during its course. But when the Acacians
found that both the parties had come to the
same position, they refused to meet ; saying

* Cf. Athan. de Synodd. 12.
■ See chaps. 8 and 10.


II. 40.]


CREED COMPOSED BY ACACIUS.


69


that not only those who had before been de-
posed, but also such as were at present under
any accusation, ought to be excluded from the
assembly.' And as after much cavilling on both
sides, this opinion prevailed ; those who lay
under any charge went out of the council, and
the party of Acacius entered in their places.
Leonas then said that a document had been put
into his hand by Acacius, to which he desired
to call their attention : but he did not state that
it was the draught of a creed, which in some
particulars covertly, and in others unequivocally
contradicted the former. When those present
became silent, thinking that the document con-
tained something else besides an exposition of a
creed, the following creed composed by Acacius,
together with its preamble, was read.

'We having yesterday assembled by the em-
peror's command at Seleucia, a city of Isauria,
on the 27th day of September, exerted ourselves
to the utmost, with all moderation, to preserve
the peace of the church, and to determine doc-
trinal questions on prophetic and evangelical
authority, so as to sanction nothing in the ec-
clesiastic confession of faith at variance with
the sacred Scriptures, as our Emperor Constan-
tius most beloved of God has ordered. But
inasmuch as certain individuals in the Synod
have acted injuriously toward several of us, pre-
venting some from expressing their sentiments,
and excluding others from the council against
their wills ; and at the same time have intro-
duced such as have been deposed, and persons
who were ordained contrary to the ecclesias-
tical canon, so that the Synod has presented a
scene of tumult and disorder, of which the most
illustrious Leonas, the Comes, and the most emi-
nent Lauricius, governor of the province, have
been eye-witnesses, we are therefore under the
necessity of making this declaration. That we
do not repudiate the faith which was ratified at
the consecration of the church at Antioch ; ' for
we give it our decided preference, because it
received the concurrence of our fathers who
were assembled there to consider some con-
troverted points. Since, however, the terms
homoousion and hotnoiousion have in time
past troubled the minds of many, and still con-
tinue to disquiet them ; and moreover that a
new term has recently been coined by some who
assert the anomoion of the Son to the Father :
we reject the first two, as expressions which are
not found in the Scriptures ; but we utterly
anathematize the last, and regard such as coun-
tenance its use, as alienated from the church.
We distinctly acknowledge the homoion of the
Son to the Father, in accordance with what the

^ Athanas. {de Synodd. 29) gives the following portion of this
creed apparently as the only declaration made by the council.


apostle has declared concerning him,^ " Who is
the image of the invisible God."

' We confess then, and believe in one Ciod
the Father Almighty, the Maker of heaven and
earth, and of things visible and invisible. We
believe also in his Son our Lord Jesus Christ,,
who was begotten of him without passion before
all ages, God the Word, the only-begotten of
God, the Light, the Life, the Truth, the Wisdom :
through whom all things were made which are in
the heavens and upon the earth, whether visible
or invisible. We believe that he took flesh of
the holy Virgin Mary, at the end of the ages, in
order to abolish sin ; that he was made man,
suffered for our sin, and rose again, and was
taken up into the heavens, to sit at the right
hand of the Father, whence he will come again
in glory to judge the living and the dead. We
believe also in the Holy Spirit, whom our Lord
and Saviour has denominated the Comforter,
and whom he sent to his disciples after his
departure, according to his promise : by whom
also he sanctifies all believers in the church, who
are baptized in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Those who
preach anything contrary to this creed, we re-
gard as aliens from the catholic church.'

This was the declaration of faith proposed by
Acacius, and subscribed by himself and as many
as adhered to his opinion, the number of whom
we have already given. When this had been
read, Sophronius bishop of Pompeiopolis in
Paphlagonia, thus expressed himself : ' If to ex-
press a separate opinion day after day,« be
received as the exposition of the faith, we shall
never arrive at any accurate understanding of
the truth.' These were the words of Sophro-
nius. And I firmly believe, that if the pred-
ecessors of these prelates, as well as their
successors, had entertained similar sentiments in
reference to the Nicene creed, all polemical
debates would have been avoided ; nor would the
churches have been agitated by such violent and
irrational disturbances. However let those judge
who are capable of understanding how these
things are. At that time after many remarks on
all sides had been made both in reference to
this doctrinal statement,, and in relation to the
parties accused, the assembly was dissolved.
On the fourth day they all again met in the
same place, and resumed their proceedings in
the same contentious spirit as before. On this
occasion Acacius expressed himself in these
words : ' Since the Nicene creed has been al-
tered not once only, but frequently, there is no
hindrance to our publishing another at this
time.' To which Eleusius bishop of Cyzicus,

= Col. i. 15.


70


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 40.


replied : * The Synod is at present convened
not to learn what it had no previous knowledge
of, nor to receive a creed which it had not as-
sented to before, but to confirm the faith of the
fathers, from which it should, never recede,
either in life or death.' Thus Eleusius oppos-
ing Acacius spoke meaning by ' the faith of the
fathers,' that creed which had been promulgat-
ed at Antioch. But surely he too might have
been fairly answered in this way : ' How is it,
O P>leusius, that you call those convened at
Antioch " the fathers," seeing that you do not
recognize those who were their fathers? The
framers of the Nicene creed, by whom the ho-
moousian faith was acknowledged, have a far
higher claim to the title of" the fathers " ; both
as having the priority in point of time, and also
because those assembled at Antioch were by
them invested with the sacerdotal office. Now
if those at Antioch have disowned their own
fathers, those who follow them are unconsciously
following parricides. Besides how can they
haVe received a legitimate ordination from those
whose faith they pronounce unsound and im-
pious? If those, however, who constituted the
Nicene Synod had not the Holy Spirit which is
imparted by the imposition of hands,^ those at
Antioch have not duly received the priesthood :
for how could they have received it from those
who had not the power of conferring it? ' Such
considerations as these might have been sub-
mitted to Eleusius in reply to his objections.
But they then proceeded to another question,
connected with the assertion made by Acacius
in Uis exposition of the faith, ' that the Son was
like the Father ' ; enquiring of one another in
what this resemblance consisted. The Acacian
party affirmed that the Son was like the Father
as it respected his will only, and not his ' sub-
stance ' or ' essence ' ; but the rest maintained
that the likeness extended to both essence and
will. In altercations on this point, the whole
day was consumed ; and Acacius, being con-
futed by his own published works, in which he
had asserted that ' the Son is in all things like
the Father,' his opponents asked him ' how do
you now deny the likeness of the Son to the
Father as to his " essence " ? ' Acacius in reply
said, that ' no author, ancient or modern, was
ever condemned out of his own writings.' .•Xs
they kept on their discussion on this matter to
a most tedious extent, with much acrimonious
feeling and subtlety of argument, but without
any approach to unity of judgment, Leonas
arose and dissolved the council : and this was
the conclusion of the Synod at Seleucia. For
on the following day [Leonas] being urged


' See Chrysostom, Homiliri 9 and 27, on Acts, and Horn, i, oh
2 Tim., for the belief of the ancient Church in the descent of the
Holy Spirit on the ordained in and through ordination.


to do so would not again meet with them. ' I
have been deputed by the emperor,' said he,
' to attend a council where unanimity was ex-
pected to prevail : but since you can by no
means come to a mutual understanding, I
can no longer be present : go therefore to the
church, if you please, and indulge in vain bab-
bling there.' The Acacian faction conceiving
this decision to be advantageous to themselves,
also refused to meet with the others. The ad-
verse party left alone met in the church and
requested the attendance of those who followed
Acacius, that cognizance might be taken of the
case of Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem : for that prel-
ate had been accused long before, on what
grounds however I am unable to state. He had
even been deposed, because owing to fear, he
had not made his appearance during two whole
years, after having been repeatedly summoned
in order that the charges against him might be
investigated. Nevertheless, when he was de-
posed, he sent a written notification to those
who had condemned him, that he should appeal
to a higher jurisdiction : and to this appeal the
emperor Constantius gave his sanction. Cyril
was thus the first and indeed only clergyman
who ventured to break through ecclesiastical
usage, by becoming an appellant, in the way
commonly done in the secular courts of judica-
ture : * and he was now present at Seleucia,
ready to be put upon his trial ; on this account
the other bishops invited the Acacian party to
take their places in the assembly, that in a gen-
eral council a definite judgment might be pro-
nounced on the case of those who were ar-
raigned : for they cited others also charged with
various misdemeanors to appear before them at
the same time, who to protect themselves had
sought refuge among the partisans of Acacius.
\Vhen therefore that faction persisted in their
refusal to meet, after being repeatedly sum-
moned, the bishops deposed Acacius himself,
together with George of Alexandria, Uranius of
Tyre, Theodulus of Chaeretapi in Phrygia, The-
odosius of Philadelphia in Lydia, Evagrius of the
island of Mytilene, Leontius of Tripolis in Lydia,
and Eudoxius who had formerly been bishcp of
Germanica, but had afterwards insinuated him-
self into the bishopric of Antioch in Syria. 1 hey
also deposed Patrophilus for contumacy, in not
having presented himself to answer a charge
preferred against him by a presbyter narred
Dorotheus. These they deposed : they also
excommunicated Asterius, Eusebius, AVgams,
Basilicus, Phoebus, Fidelis, Eutychius, Mrgnus,
and Eustathius ; determining that they should

* He was the only one, inasmuch as the General Synod of Con-
stantinople (381 A.D.) expressly forbnde all appeals from the ec-
clesiastical to the civil courts, attaching severe penalties to the
violation of its canon on this subject. Cf- Canon 6 of Council of
Constantinople. Hefele, Hisl. o/tht Cft. Councils, Vol. H. p. 364.


II. 41.]


CREED OF ARIMINUM MODIFIED.


71


not be restored to communion, until they made
such a defense as would clear them from the
imputations under which they lay. This being
done, they addressed explanatory letters to each
of the churches whose bishops had been de-
posed. Anianus was then constituted bishop of
Antioch instead of Eudoxius : but the Acacians
having soon after apprehended him, he was de-
livered into the hands of Leonas and Lauricius,
by whom he was sent into exile. The bishops
who had ordained him being incensed on this
account, lodged protests against the Acacian
party with Leonas and Lauricius, in which they
openly charged them with having violated the
decisions of the Synod. Finding that no redress
could be obtained by this means, they went to
Constantinople to lay the whole matter before
the emperor.

CHAPTER XLI.

On the Emperor'' s Return from the West, the
Acacians assemble at Constaritinople, and
confirm the Creed of Arimtnum, after mak-
ing Some Additiofis to it.

And now the emperor returned from the
West and appointed a prefect over Constanti-
nople, Honoratus by name, having abolished the
office of proconsul.^ But the Acacians being
beforehand with the bishops, calumniated them
to the emperor, persuading him not to admit
the creed which they had proposed. This so
annoyed the emperor that he resolved to dis-
perse them ; he therefore published an edict,
commanding that such of them as were subject
to fill certain public offices should be no longer
exempted from the performance of the duties
attached to them. For several of them were
liable to be called on to occupy various official
departments,^ connected both with the city
magistracy, and in subordination to the presi-
dents and governors of provinces.^ While these
were thus harassed the partisans of Acacius re-
mained for a considerable time at Constantino-
ple and held another Synod. Sending for the
bishops at Bithynia, about fifty assembled on
this occasion, among whom was Maris, bishop of
Chalcedon : these confirmed the creed read at
Ariminum to which the names of the consuls
had been prefixed.* It would have been un-

^ On the distinction between the prefect and proconsul and the
different functions of each, see Smith, Diction, of Greek and Ro-
man Ant. The statement of Socrates here that Constantius first
put Constantinople under a prefect is borne out by Athanasius' men-
tion of Donatus as proconsul of Europe, with Constantinople as
chief city.

* The General Synod of Chalcedon, 451 a.d., in its seventh
canon forbade, under pain of anathema, the mixing of the clerical
office with political and worldly matters.

^ The Tdfei? here mentioned were classes of officials appointed
under a sort of military law, to serve for a given length of time as
agents of the presidents and governors of provinces. Of. Justin.
■Cod. 12, tit. 52-59.

* Cf. chap. 37.


necessary to repeat it here, had there not been
some additions made to it ; but since that was
done, it may be desirable to transcribe it in its
new form.*

' We believe in one God the Father Almighty,
of whom are all things. And in the only-begot-
ten Son of God, begotten of God before all ages,
and before every beginning ; through whom all
things visible and invisible were made : who is
the only-begotten born of the Father, the only
of the only, God of God, like to the Father who
begat him, according to the Scriptures, and
whose generation no one knows but the Father
only that begat him. We know that this only-
begotten Son of God, as sent of the Father,
came down from the heavens, as it is written,
for the destruction of sin and death : and that
he was born of the Holy Spirit, and of the Vir-
gin Mary according to the flesh, as it is written,
and conversed with his disciples ; and that after
every dispensation had been fulfilled according
to his Father's will, he was crucified and died",
and was buried and descended into the lower
parts of the earth, at whose presence hades
itself trembled : who also arose from the dead
on the third day, again conversed with his dis-
ciples, and after the completion of forty days
was taken up into the. heavens, and sits at the
right hand of the Father, whence he will come
in the last day, the day of the resurrection, in
his Father's glory, to requite every one accord-
to his works. [We believe] also in the Holy
Spirit, whom he himself the only-begotten of
God, Christ our Lord and God, promised to
send to mankind as the Comforter, according as
it is written,*' " the Spirit of truth " ; whom he
sent to them after he was received into the
heavens. But since the term ousia \_substance
or essence"], which was used by the fathers in
a very simple and intelligible sense, but not
being understood by the people, has been a
cause of offense, we have thought proper to re-
ject it, as it is not contained even in the sacred
writings ; and that no mention of it should be
made in future, inasmuch as the holy Scriptures
have nowhere mentioned the substance of the
Father and of the Son. Nor ought the " sub-
sistence " of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit to be even named. But we
affirm that the Son is like the Father, in such a
manner as the sacred Scriptures declare and
teach. Let therefore all heresies which have
been already condemned, or may have arisen of
late, which are opposed to this exposition of the
faith, be anathema.'

These things were recognized at that time at
Constantinople. And now as we have at length


■■ Athanas. de Synodd. 30.


* John XV. 26.


72


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[II. 41.


wound our way through the labyrinth of all the
various forms of faith, let us reckon the num-
ber of them. After tliat which was promul-
gated at Nicaea, two others were proposed at
Antioch at the dedication of the church there.^
A third was presented to the Kmperor Constans
in Gaul by Narcissus and those who accompa-
nied him.® The fourth was sent by Eudoxius
into Italy.^ There were three forms of the
creed published at Sirmium, one of which hav-
ing the consuls' names prefixed was read at
Ariminum.'" The Acacian party produced an
eighth at Seleucia." The last was that of Con-
stantinople, containing the prohibitory clause
respecting the mention of ' substance ' or ' sub-
sistence ' in relation to God. To this creed
Ulfilas bishop of the Goths gave his assent,
although he had previously adhered to that of
Nicaea ; for he was a disciple of Theophilus
bishop of the Goths, who was present at the
Nicene council, and subscribed what was there
determined. Let this suffice on these subjects.


CHAPTER XLII.

On the Deposition of Macedonius, Eudoxius
obtains the Bishopric of Constantinople.

AcACius, Eudoxius, and those at Constantino-
ple who took part with them, became exceed-
ingly anxious that they also on their side might
depose some of the opposite party. Now it
should be observed that neither of the factions
were influenced by religious considerations in
making depositions, but by other motives : for
although they did not agree respecting the faith,
yet the ground of their reciprocal depositions
was not error in doctrine. The Acacian party
therefore availing themselves of the emperor's
indignation against others, and especially against
Macedonius, which he was cherishing and anx-
ious to vent, in the first place deposed Macedo-
nius, both on account of his having occasioned
so much slaughter, and also because he had
admitted to communion a deacon who had been
found guilty of fornication.' They then depose
Eleusius bishop of Cyzicus, for having baptized,
and afterwards invested with the diaconate, a
priest of Hercules at Tyre named Heraclius,
who was known to have practiced magic arts.-
A like sentence was pronounced against Basil,
or Basilas, — as he was also called, — who had
been constituted bishop of Ancyra instead of
Marcellus : the causes assigned for this condem-
nation were, that he had unjustly imprisoned a


' Chap. 10. " Chaps. 30, 37.

• Chap. 18. " Chcip. 41.

» Chap. 19. ' Cf. Apost. Cation, XXV.

' Cf. Tertull. de /Jo!. IX. : Post fTatig;riiuin nusqiinm inveiiies
aui sofihistas, aitt Chahiiros, aiit Incnutatorcs, aiit Coiijectorrs,
aut mag^os, nisi plane punitos. See also Bingham, Eccl. Antig.
XVI. 5.


certain individual, loaded him with chains, and
put him to the torture ; that he had traduced
some persons ; and that he had disturbed the
churches of Africa by his epistles. Dracontius
was also deposed, because he had left the
(ialatian church for that of Pergamos. More-
over they deposed, on various pretenses, Neo-
nas bishop of Seleucia, the city in which the
Synod had been convened, Sophronius of Pom-
peiopolis in Paphlagonia, Elpidius of Satala, in
Macedonia, and Cyril of Jerusalem, and others
for various reasons.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Of Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia.

But Eustathius bishop of Sebastia in Arme-
nia was not even permitted to make his defense ;
because he had been long before deposed by
Eulalius, his own father, who was bishop of Caes-
area in Cappadocia, for dressing in a style
unbecoming the sacerdotal office.' Let it be
noted that Meletius was appointed his successor,
of whom we shall hereafter speak. Eustathius
indeed was subsequently condemned by a Synod
convened on his account at Gangra in Paphla-
gonia ; he having, after his deposition by the
council at Caesarea, done many things repug-
nant to the ecclesiastical canons. Eor he had
' forbidden marriage,' ^ and maintained that
meats were to be abstained from : he even sep-
arated many from their wives, and persuaded
those who disliked to assemble in the churches
to commune at home. Under the pretext of
piety, he also seduced servants from their mas-
ters. He himself wore the habit of a philoso-
pher, and induced his followers to adopt a new
and extraordinary garb, directing that the hair
of women should be cropped. He permitted
the prescribed fasts to be neglected, but recom-
mended fasting on Sundays. In short, he for-
bade prayers to be offered in the houses of
married persons : and declared that both the
benediction and the communion of a presbyter
who continued to live with a wife whom he
might have lawfully married, while still a lay-
man, ought to be shunned as an abomination.
For doing and teaching these things and many
others of a similar nature, a Synod convened, as
we have said, at Gangra^ in Paphlagonia de-

' On the prescribed dress of the clergy, and the puhishment of
those who did not constantly adopt it, sec Bingham, Eccl. Antig.
VI. 4. ,5.

' I Tim. iv. 3. Cf. Euseb. H. E. IV. 19, on the earliest forms
of expression against marriage in the Christian Church; also Apost,
Canon. LI. and Auciistine, Harr. XXV., XL., XLVI. See Bing-
ham, Eccl. Antig. XXII. i.

' On Synod of Gangra, see Hefele, l/isi. of the Ch. Councils,
Vol. II. p. 325-339. Almost all the canons of the synod seem to be
addressed against the teachings of Eustathius. The fourth canon is
expressly on the celibacy of the clergy, as follows: ' If any one
maintains that, when a married priest offer the sacrifice, no one
should take part in the service, let him be anathema.'


n. 45-]


EUDOXIUS, MELETIUS AND MACEDONIUS.


n


posed him, and anathematized his opinions.
This, however, was done afterwards. But on
Macedonius being ejected from the see of Con-
stantinople, Eudoxius, who now looked upon the
see of Antioch as secondary in importance, was
promoted to the vacant bishopric ; being conse-
crated by the Acacians, who in this instance
cared not to consider that it was inconsistent
with their former proceedings. For they who
had deposed Dracontius because of his transla-
tion from Galatia to Pergamos, were clearly act-
ing in contrariety to their own principles and
decisions, in ordaining Eudoxius, who then made
a second change. After this they sent their
own exposition of the faith, in its corrected and
supplementary form, to Arminium, ordering that
all those who refused to sign it should be exiled,
on the authority of the emperor's edict. They
also informed such other prelates in the East as
coincided with them in opinion of what they
had done ; and more especially Patrophilus
bishop of Scythopolis, who on leaving Seleucia
had proceeded directly to his own city. Eudox-
ius having been constituted bishop of the impe-
rial city, the great church named Sophia was at
that time consecrated,^ in the tenth consulate^ of
Constantius, and the third of Julian Caesar, on
the 15 th day of February. It was while Eu-
doxius occupied this see, that he first uttered
that sentence which is still everywhere current,
' The Father is impious, the Son is pious.' When
the people seemed startled by this expression,
and a disturbance began to be made, ' Be not
troubled,' said he, 'on account of what I have just
said : for the Father is impious, because he wor-
ships no person ; but the Son is pious because
he worships the Father.' Eudoxius having said
this, the tumult was appeased, and great laugh-
ter was excited in the church : and this saying
of his continues to be a jest, even in the present
day. The heresiarchs indeed frequently devised
such subtle phrases as these, and by them rent
the church asunder. Thus was the Synod at
Constantinople terminated.


CHAPTER XLIV.

Of Meletius^ Bishop of Antioch.

It becomes us now to speak of Meletius, who,
as we have recently observed, was created bishop
of Sebastia in Armenia, after the deposition of

* This was evidently the second consecration of the earlier church
of St. Sophia (cf. I. 16, II. 6) ; the first consecration was celebrated
in 326 A.D. Later, the structure was destroyed in a fire, in connec-
tion with a popular uprising; and the great church of St. Sophia, at
present a Mohammedan mosque, was erected by Justinian, with
Isidore of Miletus and Anthimius of Tralles as architects.

^ 360 A.D.

1 The name has been written ' Melitius ' thus far, but is found
as ' Meletius ' from this point, and through Bk. III. Cf. Euseb.
H. E. VII. 32.


Eustathius ; from Sebastia he was transferred to
Bercea, a city of Syria. Being present at the
Synod of Seleucia, he subscribed the creed set
forth there by Acacius, and immediately re-
turned thence to Beroea. When the convention
of the Synod at Constantinople was held, the
people of Antioch finding that Eudoxius, capti-
vated by the magnificence of the see of Con-
stantinople, had contemned their church, they
sent for Meletius, and invested him with the
bishopric of the church at Antioch. Now he at
first avoided all doctrinal questions, confining
his discourses to moral subjects; but subse-
quently he expounded to his auditors the Nicene
creed, and asserted the doctrine of the homoou-
sion. The emperor being informed of this,
ordered that he should be sent into exile ; and
caused Euzoius, who had before been deposed
together with Arius, to be installed bishop of
Antioch in his stead. Such, however, as were
attached to Meletius, separated themselves from
the Arian congregation, and held their assem-
blies apart : nevertheless, those who originally
embraced the homoousian opinion would not
communicate with them, because Meletius had
been ordained by the Arians, and his adherents
had been baptized by them. Thus was the An-
tiochian church divided, even in regard to those
whose views on matters of faith exactly corre-
sponded. Meanwhile the emperor getting in-
telligence that the Persians were preparing to
undertake another war against the Romans,
repaired in great haste to Antioch.


CHAPTER XLV.
The Heresy of Macedonius.


V


Macedonius on being ejected from Constan-
tinople, bore his condemnation ill and became
restless ; he therefore associated himself with
the other faction that had deposed Acacius and
his party at Seleucia, and sent a deputation to
Sophronius and Eleusius, to encourage them to
adhere to that creed which was first promulga-
ted at Antioch, and afterwards confirmed at
Seleucia, proposing to give it the counterfeit '
name of the ' hotnoiousian ' creed.* By this
means he drew around him a great number of
adherents, who from him are still denominated
' Macedonians.' And although such as dis-
sented from the Acacians at the Seleucian Synod
had not previously used the term hoffioiousios,
yet from that period they distinctly asserted it.
There was, however, a popular report that this

' jrapao-jjMo?; just as a counterfeit coin has the appearance of
the genuine, and is meant to deceive those who do not investigate
its genuineness, so the term ^ homoioousios' (onoiooiio-ioc) , the
author implies, was meant to deceive the popular ear by its likeness
to the genuine ' homoousi'os'

2 See Theodoret, H. E. II. 6.


74


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[11- 45-


term did not originate with Macedonius, but was
the invention rather of Marathonius, who a little
before had been set over the church at Niconie-
dia ; on which account the maintainers of this
doctrine were also called ' Marathonians.' To
this party Kustathius joined himself, who for the
reasons before stated had been ejected from the
church at Sebastia. But when Macedonius
began to deny the Divinity of the Holy Spirit
in the Trinitv, Eustathius said : ' I can neither
admit that the Holy Spirit is God, nor can
I dare affirm him to be a creature.' For this
reason those who hold the homoousion of the
Son call these heretics ' PneumatotnacJii.' ' By
what means these Macedonians became so
numerous in the Hellespont, I shall state in its
proper place.'* The Acacians meanwhile became
extremely anxious that another Synod should be
convened at Antioch, in consequence of having
changed their mind respecting their former
assertion of the likeness ' in all things ' of the
Son to the Father. A small number of them
therefore assembled in the following consulate*
which was that of Taurus and Florentius, at
Antioch in Syria, where the emperor was at that
time residing, Euzoius being bishop. A discus-
sion was then renewed on some of those points
which they had previously determined, in the
course of which they declared that the term

* hofnoios ' ought to be erased from the form of
faith which had been published both at Arimi-
num and Constantinople ; and they no longer
concealed but openly declared that the Son was
altogether unlike the Father, not merely in rela-
tion to his essence, but even as it respected his
will ; asserting boldly also, as Arius had already
done, that he was made of nothing. Those in
that city who favored the heresy of Aetius, gave
their assent to this opinion ; from which circum-
stance in addition to the general appellation of
Arians, they were also termed 'Anomceans,'®and

* Exucontians,' ' by those at Antioch who em-
braced the homoousian, who nevertheless were
at that time divided among themselves on
account of Meletius, as I have before observed.
Being therefore questioned by them, how they
dared to affirm that the Son is unlike the
Father, and has his existence from nothing, after
having acknowledged him ' God of God ' in their
former creed ? they endeavored to elude this
objection by such fallacious subterfuges as these.

* The expression, " God of God,'' ' said they, ' is
to be understood in the same sense as the words
of the apostle,* " Im/ all things of God." Where-


• nfev/iaroMaxo') '••• ' active enemies of the Spirit.'

• I. 4. " 361 A.D.

• "Avouoioi, because they held that the essence of the Son was
'dissimilar,' oi-ofioio?, to that of the Father.

' 'F.f >v«oi'Tioi, from the phrase 'f owic oi'tu)i'= ' from [things]
not existing,' because they asserted that the Son was made tx
nihilo. The term might De put roughly in some such form as
• Fromnothingians.' ' i Cor. xi. 12,


fore the Son is of God, as being one of these
all things : and it is for this reason the words
" according to the Scriptures " are added in the
draught of the creed.' The author of this
sophism was George bishop of Laodicea, who
being unskilled in such phrases, was ignorant of
the manner in which Origen had formerly ex-
plained these peculiar expressions of the apos-
tle, having thoroughly investigated the matter.
But notwithstanding these evasive cavilings, they
were unable to bear the reproach and contumely
they had drawn upon themselves, and fell back
upon the creed which they had before put forth
at Constantinople ; and so each one retired to
his own district. George returning to Alexan-
dria, resumed his authority over the churches
there, Athanasius still not having made his
appearance. Those in that city who were
opposed to his sentiments he persecuted ; and
conducting himself with great severity and
cruelty, he rendered himself extremely odious to
the people. At Jerusalem Arrenius^was placed
over the church instead of Cyril : we may also
remark that Heraclius was ordained bishop there
after him, and after him Hilary. At length, how-
ever, Cyril returned to Jerusalem, and was again
invested with the presidency over the church
there. About the same time another heresy
sprang up, which arose from the following cir-
cumstance.


CHAPTER XLVI.

Of the Apollinariajis, and their Heresy.^

There were two men of the same name at
Laodicea in Syria, a father and son : their name
was Apollinaris ; the former of them was a pres-
byter, and the latter a reader in that church.
Roth taught Greek literature, the father gram-
mar, and the son rhetoric. The father was a
native of Alexandria, and at first taught at Bery-
tus, but afterwards removed to Laodicea, where
he married, and the younger Apollinaris was
born. They were contemporaries of Epiphanius
the sophist, and being true friends they became
intimate with him ; but Theodotus bishop of
Laodicea, fearing that such communication
should pervert their principles, and lead them
into paganism, forbade their a.ssociating with him :
they, however, paid but little attention to this
prohibition, their familiarity with Epiphanius
being still continued. George, the successor of
Theodotus, also endeavored to prevent their
conversing with Epiphanius ; but not being able
in any way to persuade them on this point, he
excommunicated them. The younger Apolli-

» Written ' Errenius' in the Allat. MS.

> Cf. .Sozom. VT. ly. SchafT. Hist, of the Christ. Ch., Vol. III.
p. 708 seq. ; Walch, Kttzerhistorie, ITI. p. 119-229.


II. 47]


DEATH OF CONSTANTIUS.


75


naris regarding this severe procedure as an act
of injustice, and relying on the resources of his
rhetorical sophistry, originated a new heresy,
which was named after its inventor, and still has
many supporters. Nevertheless some affirm that
it was not for the reason above assigned that
they dissented from George, but because they
saw the unsettledness and inconsistency of his
profession of faith ; since he sometimes main-
tained that the Son is like the Father, in accord-
ance with what had been determined in the
Synod at Seleucia, and at other times counte-
nanced the Arian view. They therefore made
this a pretext for separation from him : but as
no one followed their example, they introduced
a new form of doctrine, and at first they asserted
that in the economy of the incarnation, God the
Word assumed a human body without a soul.
Afterwards, as if changing mind, they retracted,
admitting that he took a soul indeed, but that
it was an irrational one, God the Word himself
being in the place of a mind. Those who fol-
lowed them and bear their name at this day af-
firm that this is their only point of distinction
[from the Catholics] ; for they recognize the
consubstantiality of the persons in the Trinity.
But we will make further mention of the two
Apolliftares in the proper place.^

» in. i6.


CHAPTER XLVII.

Successes of Julian; Death of the Emperor
Constantius.

While the Emperor Constantius continued his
residence at Antioch, Julian Caesar engaged with
an immense army of barbarians in the Gauls,
and obtaining the victory over them, he became
extremely popular among the soldiery and was
proclaimed emperor by them. When this was
made known, the Emperor Constantius was af-
fected most painfully ; he was therefore baptized
by Euzoius, and immediately prepared to un-
dertake an expedition against Julian. On arriv-
ing at the frontiers of Cappadocia and Cilicia,
his excessive agitation of mind produced apo-
plexy, which terminated his life at Mopsucrene,
in the consulate of Taurus and Florentius,' on
the 3d of November. This was in the first year
of the 285th Olympiad. Constantius had lived
forty-five years, having reigned thirty-eight years ;
thirteen of which he was his father's colleague
in the empire, and after his father's death for
twenty-five years [sole emperor], the history of
which latter period is contained in this book.


1 361 A.D.


END OF THE SECOND BOOK.


BOOK III.


CHAPTER I.

Of Julian ; his Lineage and Education ; his
Elrvation to the Throne; his Apostasy to
Paganism.

The Emperor Constantius died on the fron-
tiers of Cilicia on the 3d of November, during
the consulate of Taurus and Florentius ; Julian
leaving the western parts of the empire about
the nth of December following, under the
same consulate, came to Constantinople, where
he was proclaimed emperor.' And as I must
needs speak of the character of this prince who
was eminently distinguished for his learning, let
not his admirers expect that I should attempt a
pompous rhetorical style, as if it were necessary
to make the delineation correspond with the
dignity of the subject : for my object being to
compile a history of the Christian religion, it is
both proper in order to the being better under-
stood, and consistent with my original purpose,
to maintain a humble and unaffected style.-
However, it is proper to describe his person,
birth, education, and the manner in which he
became possessed of the sovereignty ; and in
order to do this it will be needful to enter into
some antecedent details. Constantine who gave
Byzantium his own name, had two brothers
named Dalmatius and Constantius, the offspring
of the same father, but by a different mother.
The former of these had a son who bore his
own name : the latter had two sons, Gallus and
Julian. Now as on the death of Constantine
who founded Constantinople, the soldiery had
put the younger brother Dalmatius to death, the
lives of his two orphan children were also en-
dangered : but a disease which threatened to be
fatal preserved Gallus from the violence of his
father's murderers ; while the tenderness of
Julian's age — for he was only eight years old
at the time — protected him. The emperor's
jealousy toward them having been gradually sub-
dued, Gallus attended the schools at Ephesus in
Ionia, in which country considerable hereditary
possessions had been left them. And Julian,
when he was grown up, pursued his studies at

' December, 361 a.d. This proclamatiun must be distinguished
from the one in Gaul (II. 47); the latter was the proclamation by
the army, and occurred during the lifetime of Constantius.

' Cf. 1. I.


Constantinople, going constantly to the palace,
where the schools then were, in plain clothes,
under the superintendence of the eunuch Mar-
donins. In grammar Nicocles the Lacaedemo-
nian was his instructor ; and Ecebolius the
Sophist, who was at that time a Christian, taught
him rhetoric : for the emperor had made the
])rovision that he should have no pagan masters,
lest he should be seduced to the pagan supersti-
tions. For Julian was a Christian at the begin-
ning. His proficiency in literature soon became
so remarkable, that it began to be said that he
was capable of governing the Roman empire ;
and this popular rumor becoming generally dif-
fused, greatly disquieted the emperor's mind,
so that he had him removed from the Great
City to Nicomedia, forbidding him at the same
time to frequent the school of Libanius the
Syrian Sophist. For Libanius having been driven
at that time from Constantinople, by a combi-
nation of the educators there, had retired to
Nicomedia, where he opened a school. Here
he gave vent to his indignation against the edu-
cators in the treatise he composed regarding
them. Julian was, however, interdicted from be-
ing his auditor, because Libanius was a pagan
in religion: nevertheless he privately, procured
his orations, which he not only greatly admired,
but also frequently and with close study ])erused.
As he was becoming very expert in the rhetori-
cal art, Maximus the philosopher arrived at
Nicomedia (not the Byzantine, Euclid's father)
but the Ephesian, whom the emperor Valentin-
ian afterwards caused to be executed as a
practicer of magic. This took place later ; at
that time the only thing that attracted him to
Nicomedia was the fame of Julian. From him
[Julian] received, in addition to the principles
of philosophy, his own religious sentiments, and
a desire to possess the empire. When these
things reached the ears of the emperor, Julian,
between hope and fear, became very anxious to
lull the suspicions which had been awakened,
and therefore began to assume the external sem-
blance of what he once was in reality. He was
shaved to the very skin," and pretended to live
a monastic life : and while in private he pursued
his philosophical studies, in public he read the
sacred writings of the Christians, and moreover

* See Bingham, Eccl. Antiq. VI. 4, end.


III. I.]


EARLY CAREER OF JULIAN.


n


was constituted a reader^ in the church of Nico-
media. Thus by these specious pretexts he suc-
ceeded in averting the emperor's displeasure.
Now he did all this from fear, but he by no
means abandoned his hope ; telling his friends
that happier times were not far distant, when he
should possess the imperial sway. In this con-
dition of things his brother Gallus having been
created Caesar, on his way to the East came to
Nicomedia to See him. But when not long after
this Gallus was slain, Julian was suspected by
the emperor ; wherefore he directed that a
guard should be set over him r he soon, however,
found means of escaping from them, and fleeing
from place to place he managed to be in safety.
At last the Empress Eusebia having discovered
his retreat, persuaded the emperor to leave him
uninjured, and permit him to go to Athens to
pursue his philosophical studies. From thence —
to be brief — the emperor recalled him, and after
created him Caesar ; in addition to this, uniting
him in marriage to his own sister Helen, he sent
him against the barbarians. For the barbarians
whom the Emperor Constantius had engaged as
auxiliary forces against the tyrant Magnentius,
having proved of no use against the usurper, were
beginning to pillage the Roman cities. And
inasmuch as he was young he ordered him to
undertake nothing without consulting the other
military chiefs.

Now these generals having obtained such au-
thority, became lax in their duties, and the bar-
barians in consequence strengthened themselves.
Julian perceiving this allowed the commanders
to give themselves up to luxury and revelling,
but exerted himself to infuse courage into the
soldiery, offering a stipulated reward to any one
who should kill a barbarian. This measure ef-
fectually weakened the enemy and at the same
time conciliated to himself the affections of the
army. It is reported that as he was entering
a town a civic crown which was suspended be-
tween two pillars fell upon his head, which it
exactly fitted : upon which all present gave a
shout of admiration, regarding it as a presage
of his one day becoming emperor. Some have
affirmed that Constantius sent him against the
barbarians, in the hope that he would perish in
an engagement with them. I know not whether
those who say this speak the truth ; but it cer-
tainly is improbable that he should have first
contracted so near an alliance with him, and
then have sought his destruction to the prejudice
of his own interests. Let each form his own
judgment of the matter. Julian's complaint to
the emperor of the inertness of his mihtary offi-
cers procured for him a coadjutor in the com-


* The ' reader,' ai'ayi'cu<rTT)5, lector, was commonly a young
man possessed of a good voice, who read the Scriptures from the
pulpit or reading-desk (not the altar). Bennett, Christ. Archaol.
P- 374-


mand more in sympathy with his own ardor ;
and by their combined efforts such an assault
was made upon the barbarians, that they sent
him an embassy, assuring him that they had
been ordered by the emperor's letters, which
were produced, to march into the Roman terri-
tories. But he cast the ambassador into prison,
and vigorously attacking the forces of the en-
emy, totally defeated them ; and having taken
their king prisoner, he sent him alive to Con-
stantius. Immediately after this brilliant success
he was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers ;
and inasmuch as there was no imperial crown
at hand, one of his guards took the chain which
he wore about his own neck, and bound it
around Julian's head. Thus Julian became em-
peror : but whether he subsequently conducted
himself as became a philosopher, let my readers
determine. For he neither entered into com-
munication with Constantius by an embassy, nor
paid him the least homage in acknowledgment
of past favors ; but constituting other governors
over the provinces, he conducted everything just
as it pleased him. Moreover, he sought to bring
Constantius into contempt, by reciting publicly
in every city the letters which he had written to
the barbarians ; and thus having rendered the
inhabitants of these places disaffected, they were
easily induced to revolt from Constantius to
himself. After this he no longer wore the mask
of Christianity, but everywhere opened the pagan
temples, offering sacrifice to the idols ; and des-
ignating himself ' Pontifex Maximus,'^ gave per-
mission to such as would to celebrate their
superstitious festivals. In this manner he man-
aged to excite a civil war against Constantius ;
and thus, as far as he was concerned, he would
have involved the empire in all the disastrous
consequences of a war. For this philosopher's
aim could not have been attained without much
bloodshed : but God, in the sovereignty of his
own councils, checTced the fury of these antago-
nists without detriment to the state, by the re-
moval of one of them. For when Julian arrived
among the Thracians, intelligence was brought
him that Constantius was dead ; and thus was
the Roman empire at that time preserved from
the intestine strife that threatened it. Julian
forthwith made his public entry into Constanti-
nople ; and considered with himself how he
might best conciliate the masses and secure
popular favor. Accordingly he had recourse to
the following measures : he knew that Constan-
tius had rendered himself odious to the de-
fenders of the homoousian faith by having driven
them from the churches, and proscribed their
bishops.^ He was also aware that the pagans

^ See Smith, Diet, of Greek and Rom. Antig. See also, on
sacrificing to idols as a sign of apostacy, Bingham, Eccl. Antiq.
XVl. iv. 5. « See II. 7, 13, 16, &c.


78


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


y


[III. I.


were extremely discontented because of the pro-
hibitions which prevented their sacrificing to
their gods, and were very anxious to get their
temples opened, with liberty to exercise their
idolatrous rites. In fact, he was sensible that
while both these classes secretly entertained
rancorous feelings against his predecessor, the
people in general were exceedingly exasperated
by the violence of the eunuchs, and especially
by the rapacity of Eusebius the chief officer of
the imperial bed-chamber. Under these cir-
cumstances he treated all parties with subtlety :
with some he dissimulated ; others he attached
to himself by conferring obligations upon them,
for he was fond of affecting beneficence ; but
to all in common he manifested his own predi-
lection for the idolatry of the heathens. And
first in order to brand the memory of Constan-
tius by making him appear to have been cruel
toward his subjects, he recalled the exiled bish-
ops, and restored to them their confiscated es-
tates. He next commanded the suitable agents
to see that the pagan temples should be opened
without delay. Then he directed that such in-
dividuals as had been victims of the extortionate
conduct of the eunuchs, should receive back the
property of which they had been plundered.
Eusebius, the chief of the imperial bed-chamber,
he punished with death, not only on account of
the injuries he had inflicted on others, but be-
cause he was assured that it was through his
machinations that his brother Gallus had been
killed. The body of Constantius he honored
with an imperial funeral, but expelled the eu-
nuchs, barbers, and cooks from the palace. The
eunuchs he dispensed with, because they were
unnecessary in consequence of his wife's de-
cease, as he had resolved not to marry again ;
the cooks, because he maintained a very simple
table ; and the barbers, because he said one was
sufficient for a great many persons. These he dis-
missed for the reasons given ; he also reduced
the majority of the secretaries to their former
condition, and appointed for those who were
retained a salary befitting their office. The mode
of public traveling^ and conveyance of neces-
saries he also reformed, abolishing the use of
mules, oxen, and asses for this purpose, and per-
mitting horses only to be so employed. These
various retrenchments were highly lauded by
some few, but strongly reprobated by all others,
as tending to bring the imperial dignity into
contempt, by stripping it of those appendages
of pomp and magnificence which exercise so
powerful an influence over the minds of the
vulgar. Not only so, but at night he was accus-
tomed, to sit up composing orations which he


' It is difficult to determine in what particulars the improvements
mentioned here were made. Gregory Nazianzen, Contra Julianum,
I. Ixzv., confesses that Julian h;ul made reforms in the matter.


afterwards delivered in the senate : though in
fact he was the first and only emperor since the
time of Julius Caesar who made speeches in that
assembly. To those who were eminent for lit-
erary attainments, he extended the most flatter-
ing patronage, and especially to those who were
professional philosophers ; in consequence of
which, abundance of pretenders to learning of
this sort resorted to the palace from all quarters,
wearing their palliums, being more conspicuous
for their costume than their erudition. These
impostors, who invariably adopted the religious
sentiments of their prince, were all inimical to
the welfare of the Christians ; and Julian him-
self, whose excessive vanity prompted him to
deride all his predecessors in a book which he
wrote entitled The Ccesars, was led by the same
haughty disposition to compose treatises against
the Christians also.** The expulsion of the cooks
and barbers is in a manner becoming a philoso-
pher indeed, but not an emperor ; but ridiculing
and caricaturing of others is neither the part of
the philosopher nor that of the emperor : for
such personages ought to be superior to the in-
fluence of jealousy and detraction. An em-
peror may be a philosopher in all that regards
moderation and self-control ; but should a phi-
losopher attempt to imitate what might become
an emperor, he would frequently depart from
his own principles. We have thus briefly spoken
of the Emperor Julian, tracing his extraction,
education, temper of mind, and the way in
which he became invested with the imperial
power.

CHAPTER II.

0/ the Sedition excited at Alexandria, and how
George was slain.

It is now proper to mention what took place
in the churches under the same [emperor]. A
great disturbance occurred at Alexandria in con-
sequence of the following circumstance. There
was a place in that city which had long been
abandoned to neglect and filth, wherein the
pagans had formerly celebrated their mysteries,
and sacrificed human beings to Mithra.* This
being empty and otherwise useless, Constantius
had granted to the church of the Alexandrians ;
and George wishing to erect a church on the
site of it, gave directions that the place should
be cleansed. In the process of clearing it, an
adytum ^ of vast depth was discovered which
unveiled the nature of their heathenish rites :

• See chap. 23.

' The friendly or propitious divinity of the Persian theology;
hence identified with the light and life-giving sun.

• The secret or innermost sanctuary of the temple, where none
but priests were permitted to enter; afterwards applied to any secret
place.


III. 3.]


JULIAN REBUKES THE ALEXANDRIANS.


79


for there were found there the skulls of many
persons of all ages, who were said to have been
immolated for the purpose of divination by the
inspection of entrails, when the pagans per-
formed these and such like magic arts whereby
they enchanted the souls of men. The Chris-
tians on discovering these abominations in the
adytum of the Mithreum, went forth eagerly to
expose them to the view and execration of all ;
and therefore carried the skulls throughout the
city, in a kind of triumphal procession, for the
inspection of the people. When the pagans
of Alexandria beheld this, unable to bear the
insulting character of the act, they became so
ejiasperated, that they assailed the Christians
with whatever weapon chanced to come to
hand, in their fury destroying numbers of them
in a variety of ways : some they killed with the
sword, others with clubs and stones ; some they
strangled with ropes, others they crucified, pur-
posely inflicting this last kind of death in con-
tempt of the cross of Christ : most of them they
wounded ; and as it generally happens in such
a case, neither friends nor relatives were spared,
but friends, brothers, parents, and children
imbrued their hands in each other's blood.
Wherefore the Christians ceased from cleans-
ing the Mithreurri : the pagans meanwhile having
dragged George out of the church, fastened him
to a camel, and when they had torn him to
pieces, they burnt him together with the camel.^

CHAPTER in.

The Emperor Indignant at the Murder of
George, rebukes the Alexandrians by Letter.

The emperor being highly indignant at the
assassination of George, wrote to the citizens of
Alexandria, rebuking their violence in the strong-
est terms. A report was circulated that those
who detested him because of Athanasius, perpe-
trated this outrage upon George : but as for me
I think it is undoubtedly true that such as cher-
ish hostile feelings against particular individuals
are often found identified with popular commo-
tions ; yet the emperor's letter evidently at-
taches the blame to the populace, rather than
to any among the Christians. George, however,
was at that time, and had for some time previ-
ously been, exceedingly obnoxious to all classes,
which is sufficient to account for the burning
indignation of the multitude against him. That
the emperor charges the people with the crime
may be seen from his letter which was expressed
in the following terms.

3 This George is, according to some authorities, the St. George of
the legend. In its Arian form the legend represents St. George as
warring against the wizard Athanasius; later, the wizard was trans-
formed to a dragon, and George to an armed knight slaying the
dragon. On other forms and features of the legend, see Smith &
Wace, Diet. 0/ Christ. Biog., Georgius (43).


Emperor Ccesar yulian Maximus Augustus to
the Citizens of Alexandria}

Even if you have neither respect for Alexan-
der the founder of your city, nor, what is more,
for that great and most holy god Serapis ; yet
how is it you have made no account not only
of the universal claims of humanity and social
order, but also of what is due to us, to whom
all the gods, and especially the mighty Serapis,
have assigned the empire of the world, for
whose cognizance therefore it became you to
reserve all matters of public wrong? But per-
haps the impulse of rage and indignation, which
taking possession of the mind, too often stimulate
it to the most atrocious acts, has led you astray.
It seems, however, that when your fury had in
some degree moderated, you aggravated your
culpability by adding a most heinous offense to
that which had been committed under the ex-
citement of the moment : nor were you, al-
though but the common people, ashamed to
perpetrate those very acts on account of which
you justly detested them. By Serapis I conjure
you tell me, for what unjust deed were ye so
indignant at George ? You will perhaps answer,
it was because he exasperated Constantius of
blessed memory against you : because he intro-
duced an army into the sacred city : because
in consequence the governor^ of Egypt de-
spoiled the god's most holy temple of its images,
votive offerings, and such other consecrated
apparatus as it contained ; who, when ye could
not endure the sight of such a foul desecration,
but attempted to defend the god from sacrile-
gious hands, or rather to hinder the pillage of
what had been consecrated to his service, in
contravention of all justice, law, and piety, dared
to send armed bands against you. This he
probably did from his dreading George more
than Constantius : but he would have consulted
better for his own safety had he not been guilty
of this tyrannical conduct, but persevered in his
former moderation toward you. Being on all
these accounts enraged against George as the
adversary of the gods, you have again polluted
your sacred city ; whereas you ought to have
impeached him before the judges. For had you
thus acted, neither murder, nor any other unlaw-
ful deed would have been committed ; but jus-
tice being equitably dispensed, would have pre-
served you innocent of these disgraceful ex-
cesses, while it brought on him the punishment
due to his impious crimes. Thus too, in short,
the insolence of those would have been curbed
who contemn the gods, and respect neither
cities of. such magnitude, nor so flourishing a

' Julian, Ep. 10.

2 Artemius, whom the Emperor Julian afterwards beheaded for
desecrating the pagan temple.


So


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 3.


population ; but make the barbarities they prac-
tice against them the prelude, as it were, of
their e.xercise of power. Compare therefore
this my present letter, with that which I wrote
you some time since. With what high commen-
dation did I then greet you ! But now, by the
immortal gods, with an equal disposition to
praise you I am unable to do so qn account of
your heinous misdoings. The people have had
the audacity to tear a man in pieces, like dogs ;
nor have they been subsequently ashamed of
this inhuman procedure, nor desirous of purify-
ing their hands from such pollution, that they
may stretch them forth in the presence of the
gods undefiled by blood. You will no doubt be
ready to say that George justly merited this
chastisement ; and we might be disposed per-
haps to admit that he deserved still more acute
tortures. Should you farther affirm that on your
account he was worthy of these sufferings, even
this might also be granted. But should you add
that it became you to inflict the vengeance due
to his offenses, that I could by no means acquiesce
in ; for you have laws to which it is the duty of
every one of you to be subject, and to evince
your respect for both publicly, as well as in pri-
vate. If any individual should transgress those
wise and salutary regulations which were origi-
nally constituted for the well-being of the com-
munity, does that absolve the rest from obedience
to them ? It is fortunate for you, ye Alexandri-
ans, that such an atrocity has been perpetrated
in our reign, who, by reason of our reverence
for the gods, and on account of our grandfather
and uncle ^ whose name we bear, and who gov-
erned Egypt and your city, still retain a fraternal
affection for you. Assuredly that power which
will not suffer itself to be disrespected, and such
a government as is possessed of a vigorous and
healthy constitution, could not connive at such
unbridled licentiousness in its subjects, without
unsparingly purging out the dangerous distemper
by the application of remedies sufficiently potent.
We shall however in your case, for the reasons
already assigned, restrict ourselves to the more
mild and gentle medicine of remonstrance and
exhortation ; to the which mode of treatment
we are persuaded ye will the more readily sub-
mit, inasmuch as we understand ye are Greeks
by original descent, and also still preserve in
your memory and character the traces of the
glory of your ancestors. Let this be published
to our citizens of Alexandria.

Such was the emperor's letter.


' Philoslorgius (VII. 10) calls this Julian ' the governor of the
East, who was the uncle on the maternal side of Julian the Apos-
tate.' Sozomen also (V. 7 and 8) and Thcodoret (//. £. III.
12, 13) furnish information regarding him, as well as Ammianus
Marcellius XXIII. i. Cf. also Julian, £pis/. XIII. (Spanheim, p.
382).


chaptp:r IV.

On the Death of George, Athanasiiis returns to
Alexandria, and takes Possession of his
See.

Not long after this, Athanasius returning from
his exile, was received with great joy by the
people of Alexandria. They expelled at that
time the Arians from the churches, and restored
Athanasius to the possession of them. The
Arians meanwhile assembling themselves in low
and obscure buildings, ordained Lucius to supply
the place of George. Such was the state of
things at that time at Alexandria.


CHAPTER V.

Of Lucifer and Eusebius.

About the same time Lucifer and Eusebius^
were by an imperial order, recalled from banish-
ment out of the Upper Thebais ; the former
being bishop of Carala, a city of Sardinia, the
latter of Vercellai, a city of the Ligurians in Italy,
as I have said^ previously. These two prelates
therefore consulted together on -the most effectual
means of preventing the neglected canons^ and
discipline of the church from being in future
violated and despised.


CHAPTER VI.

Lucifer goes to Antioch and consecrates Pau-
linas.

It was decided therefore that Lucifer should
go to Antioch in Syria, and Eusebius to Alexan-
dria, that by assembling a Synod in conjunction
with Athanasius, they might confirm the doc-
trines of the church. Lucifer sent a deacon
as his representative, by whom he pledged him-
self to assent to whatever the Synod might
decree ; but he himself went to Antioch, where
he found the church in great disorder, the people
not being agreed among themselves. For not
only did the Arian heresy, which had been intro-
duced by Euzoius, divide the church, but, as we
before said,' the followers of Meletius also, from
attachment to their teacher, separated them-
selves from those with whom they agreed in
sentiment. When therefore Lucifer had consti-
tuted Paulinus their bishop, he again departed.


• Theodoret, H. E. III. 4, mentions Hilarius, Astenius, and
some other bishops who were at this time recalled from exile by
Julian's edict, and joined Lucifer and Eusebius in these delibera-
tions about restoring the authority of the canons and correcting
abuses in the church.

» Cf. II. 36.

* More especially the canons of the Council of Nicsea.
' 11.44.


III. 7.]


SYNOD OF ALEXANDRIA.


81


CHAFl^ER VII.

By the Co-operation of Eusebius and Athanasius
a Synod is held at Alexandria, rvhercin the
Trinity is declared to be Consubstantial.

As soon as Eusebius reached Alexandria, he
in concert with Athanasius immediately convoked
a Synod. The bishops assembled on this occa-
sion out of various cities, took into consideration
many subjects of the utmost importance. They
asserted the divinity of the Holy Spirit' and
comprehended him in the consubstantial Trinity :
they also declared that the Word in being made
man, assumed not only flesh, but also a soul, in
accordance with the views of the early ecclesias-
tics. For they did not introduce any hew doc-
trine of their own devising into the church,
but contented themselves with recording their
sanction of those points which ecclesiastical tra-
dition has insisted on from the beginning, and
wise Christians have demonstratively taught.
Such sentiments the ancient fathers have uni-
formly maintained in all their controversial writ-
ings. Irenseus, Clemens, Apollinarisof Hierapolis,
and Serapion who presided over the church at
Antioch, assure us in their several works, that it
was the generally received opinion that Christ
in his incarnation was endowed with a soul.
Moreover, the Synod convened on account of
Beryllus^ bishop of Philadelphia in Arabia,
recognized the same doctrine in their letter to
that prelate. Origen also everywhere in his
extant works accepts that the Incarnate God
took on himself a human soul. But he more
particularly explains this mystery in the ninth
volume of his Comments upon Genesis, where
he shows that Adam and Eve were types of
Christ and the church. That holy man Pam-
philus, and Eusebius who was surnamed after
him, are trustworthy witnesses on this subject :
both these witnesses in their joint life of Origen,
and admirable defense of him in answer to such
as were prejudiced against him, prove that he
was not the first who made this declaration, but
that in doing so he was the mere expositor of
the mystical tradition of the church. Those
who assisted at the Alexandrian Council ex-
amined also with great minuteness the question
concerning * Essence ' or ' Substance,' and
' Existence,' ' Subsistence,' or ' Personality.' For
Hosius, bishop of Cordova in Spain, who has
been before referred to as having been sent by

1 The bishops composing the Council of Nicaea simply declared
their faith in the Holy Spirit, without adding any definition; they
were not met with any denial of the divinity of the Holy Spirit.
This denial was first made by Macedonius, in the fourth century.

2 Euseb. H. E. VI. 33, says that this Beryllus denied that Christ
was God before the Incarnation. He, however, gives the see of
Beryllus as Bostra in Arabia, instead of Philadelphia. So also F".pi-
phanius Scholasticus; though Nicephorus, X. 2, calls him Cyrillus,
instead of Beryllus.


the Emperor Constantine to allay the excitement
which Arius had caused, originated the con-
troversy about these terms in his earnestness to
overthrow the dogma of Sabellius the Libyan.
In the council of Nicaea, however, which was
held soon after, this dispute was not agitated ;
but in consequence of the contention about it
which subsequently arose, the matter was freely
discussed at Alexandria.^ It was there deter-
mined that such expressions as ousia and hypo-
stasis ought not to be used in reference to God :
for they argued that the word ousia is nowhere
employed in the sacred Scriptures ; and that
the apostle has misapplied the term hypostasis*
owing to an inevitable necessity arising from the
nature of the doctrine. They nevertheless
decided that in refutation of the Sabellian error
these terms were admissible, in default of more
appropriate language, lest it should be sup-
posed that one thing was indicated by a three-
fold designation ; whereas we ought rather to
believe that each of those named in the Trinity
is God in his own proper person. Such were
the decisions of this Synod. If we may express
our own judgment concerning substance and
personality, it appears to us that the Greek
philosophers have given us various definitions
of ousia, but have not taken the slightest notice
of hypostasis. Irensenus^ the grammarian in-
deed, in his Alphabetical [Lexicon entitled]
Atticistes, even declares it to be a barbarous
term ; for it is not to be found in any of the
ancients, except occasionally in a sense quite
different from that which is attached to it in the
present day. Thus Sophocles, in his tragedy
entitled Phanix, uses it to signify ' treachery ' :
in Menander it implies ' sauces ' ; as if one should
call the ' sediment ' at the bottom of a hogshead
of wine hypostasis. But although the ancient
philosophical writers scarcely noticed this word,
the more modern ones have frequently used it
instead of ousia. This term, as we before observed,
has been variously defined : but can that which
is capable of being circumscribed by a definition
be applicable to God who is incomprehensible ?
Evagrius in his Monachicus,^ cautions us against
rash and inconsiderate language in reference to
God ; forbidding all attempt to define the divin-
ity, inasmuch as it is wholly simple in its nature :
' for,' says he, ' definition belongs only to things
which are compound.' The same author further
adds, * Every proposition has either a " genus "


' Valesius conjectures that Socrates is wrong here in altril-uting
such an action to the Synod of Alexandria, as ihe term omta
does not occur in the Nicene Creed, and such action would il trefc.re
be in manifest contradiction to the action at Nicsea. This, hcwcver,
is not probable, in view of the dominating influence of Athanasius
in both. But, as the acts of the Alexnndrian synod arc not extant,
it is impossible to verify this conjecture.

< Heb. i. 3.

^ See Suidas, Lexicon.

° The only work of Evagrius preserved to our days is his Eccle-
siastical History.


82


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 7.


which is predicted, or a " species," or a " differ-
entia," or a " proprium," or an " accidens," or
that which is compounded of these : but none
of these can be supposed to exist in the sacred
Trinity. Let then what is inexphcable be adored
in silence.' Such is the reasoning of Evagrius,
of whom we shall again speak hereafter.' We
have indeed made a digression here, but such as
will tend to illustrate the subject under consider-
ation.

CHAPTER VIII.

Quotations from Athanasius' ' Defense of his
Flight:

On this occasion Athanasius read to those
present the Defense which he had composed
some time before in justification of his flight ;
a few passages from which it may be of service
to introduce here, leaving the entire production,
which is too long to be transcribed, to be sought
out and perused by the studious.'

See the daring enormities of the impious
persons ! Such are their proceedings : and yet
instead of blushing at their former clumsy in-
trigues against us, they even now abuse us for
having effected our escape out of their murder-
ous hands ; nay, are grievously vexed that they
were unable to put us out of the way altogether.
In short, they overlook the fact that while they
pretend to upbraid us with 'cowardice,' they
are really criminating themselves : for if it be
disgraceful to flee, it is still more so to pursue,
since the one is only endeavoring to avoid being
murdered, while the other is seeking to commit
the deed. But Scripture itself directs us to flee :^
and those who persecute unto death, in attempt-
ing to violate the law, constrain us to have re-
course to flight. They should rather, therefore,
be ashamed of their persecution, than reproach
us for having sought to escape from it : let them
cease to harass, and those who flee will also
cease. Nevertheless they set no bounds to their
malevolence, using every art to entrap us, in the
consciousness that the flight of the persecuted is
the strongest condemnation of the persecutor :
for no one runs away from a mild and benefi-
cent person, but from one who is of a barbarous
and cniel disposition. Hence it was that ' Every
one that was discontented and in debt ' fled from
Saul to David.'^ Wherefore these [foes of ours]
in like manner desire to kill such as conceal
themselves, that no evidence may exist to con-
vict them of their wickedness. But in this also
these misguided men most egregiously deceive
themselves : for the more obvious the effort to
elude them, the more manifestly will their de-
liberate slaughters and exiles be exposed. If


they act the part of assassins, the voice of the
blood which is shed will cry against them the
louder : and if they condemn to banishment,
they will raise so everywhere living monuments
of their own injustice and oppression. Surely
unless their intellects were unsound they would
perceive the dilemma in which their own coun-
sels entangle them. But since they have lost
sound judgment, their folly is exposed when
they vanish, and when they seek to stay they do
not see their wickedness.'* But if they reproach
those who succeed in secreting themselves from
the malice of their blood-thirsty adversaries, and
revile such as flee from their persecutors, what
will they say to Jacob's retreat from the rage of
his brother Esau,* and to Moses*' retiring into
the land of Midian for fear of Pharaoh ? And
what apology will these babblers make for Da-
vid's' flight from Saul, when he sent messengers
from his own house to dispatch him ; and for
his concealment in a cave, after contriving to
extricate himself from the treacherous designs
of Abimelech,** by feigning madness? What will
these reckless asserters of whatever suits their
purpose answer, when they are reminded of the
great prophet Elijah,^ who by calling upon God
had recalled the dead to life, hiding himself
from dread of Ahab, and fleeing on account of
Jezebel's menaces? At which time the sons
of the prophets also, being sought for in order
to be slain, withdrew, and were concealed in
caves by Obadiah ; '" or are they unacquainted
with these instances because of their antiquity?
Have they forgotten also what is recorded in
the Gospel, that the disciples retreated and hid
themselves for fear of the Jews?" Paul,'^ when
sought for by the governor [of Damascus] ' was
let down from the wall in a basket, and thus es-
caped the hands of him that sought him.' Since
then Scripture relates these circumstances con-
cerning the saints, what excuse can they fabricate
for their temerity? If they charge us with ' cow-
ardice,' it is in utter insensibility to the condem-
nation it pronounces on themselves. If they as-
perse these holy men by asserting that they acted
contrary to the will of God, they demonstrate their
ignorance of Scripture. For it was commanded
in the Law that ' cities of refuge ' should be
constituted," by which provision was made that
such as were pursued in order to be put to
death might have means afforded of preserving
themselves. Again in the consummation of the
ages, when the Word of the Father, who had
before spoken by Moses, came himself to the
earth, he gave this express injunction, ' When


' IV. a,.

> Athan. de Fuga. 7.


» Ma«. X. 23.

' I Kings xxii. 1 (LXX).


♦ Athanas. de Fuga. 10.

* Gen. xxviii.

• Ex. ii. 15.

' I Sam. xix. 12.

• Rather Achisch, king of Gath,

I Sam. xxi. 10.


• I Kings xix. 3.
'" I Kings xviii. 4.
" Matt. xxvi. 56.
" 2 Cbr. xi. 32, 33.
" Num. XXXV. II.


III. 9]


ATHANASIUS' DEFENSE OF HIS FLIGHT.


83


they persecute you in one city, flee unto an-
other : ' " and shortly after, ' When therefore ye
shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken
of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy
place (let whosoever reads, understand), then
let those in Judea flee unto the mountains : let
him that is on the house-top not come down to
take anything out of his house ; nor him that is
in the fields return to take his clothes.' "* The
saints therefore knowing these precepts, had
such a sort of training for their action : for what
the Lord then commanded, he had before his
coming in the flesh already spoken of by his
servants. And this is a universal rule for man,
leading to perfection, ' to practice whatever God
has enjoined.' On this account the Word him-
self, becoming incarnate for our sake, deigned
to conceal himself when he was sought for ; '^
and being again persecuted, condescended to
withdraw to avoid the conspiracy against him.
For thus it became him, by hungering and thirst-
ing and suffering other afflictions, to demonstrate
that he was indeed made man.*' For at the
very commencement, as soon as he was born,
he gave this direction by an angel to Joseph :
' Arise and take the young child and his mother,
and flee into Egypt, for Herod will seek the
infant's life.' ** And after Herod's death, it
appears that for fear of his son Archelaiis he
retired to Nazareth. Subsequently; when he
gave unquestionable evidence of his Divine
character by healing the withered hand, ' when
the Pharisees took council how they might de-
stroy him,'^ Jesus knowing their wickedness
withdrew himself thence.' Moreover, when he
had raised Lazarus from the dead, and they
had become still more intent on destroying him,
[we are told that] ' Jesus walked no more openly
among the Jews,^ but retired into a region on
the borders of the desert.' Again when the
Saviour said, ' Before Abraham was, I am ; ''^^
and the Jews took up stones to cast at him ;
Jesus concealed himself, and going through the
midst of them out of the Temple, went away
thence, and so escaped. Since then they see
these things, or rather understand them,^ (for
they will not see,) are they not deserving of
being burnt with fire, according to what is writ-
ten, for acting and speaking so plainly contrary
to all that the Lord did and taught ? Finally,
when John had suffered martyrdom, and his
disciples had buried his body, Jesus having
heard what was done, departed thence by ship
into a desert place apart.^' Now the Lord did
these things and so taught. But would that
these men of whom I speak, had the modesty


" Matt. X. 23.

'5 Matt. xxiv. 15-18.

"" John viii. 59.

" Abbreviated from Athanasius.

" Matt. ii. 13, 22.


"• Matt. xii. 14, 15.

2" John xi. 53, 54.

-' John viii. 58.

"- Matt. xiii. 13; Isa. ix. 5.

-' Matt. xiv. 12, 13.


to confine their rashness to men only, without
daring to be guilty of such madness as to accuse
the Saviour himself of ' cowardice ' ; especially
after having already uttered blasphemies against
him. But even if they be insane they will not
be tolerated and their ignorance of the gospels
be detected by every one. The cause for re-
treat and flight under such circumstances as
these is reasonable and valid, of which the evan-
gelists have afforded us precedents in the con-
duct of our Saviour himself: from which it may
be inferred that the saints have always been
justly influenced by the same principle, since
whatever is recorded of him as man, is appli-
cable to mankind in general. For he took on
himself our nature, and exhibited in himself the
affections of our infirmity, which John has thus
indicated : ' Then they sought to take him ; but
no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come.'^^ Moreover, before that
hour came, he himself said to his mother, ' Mine
hour is not yet come ; ' ^ and to those who were
denominated his brethren, ' My time is not yet
come.' Again when the time had arrived, he
said to his disciples, * Sleep on now, and take
your rest : for behold the hour is at hand, and
the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands
of sinners.'^"... So ^ that he neither per-
mitted himself to be apprehended before the
time came ; nor when the time was come did
he conceal himself, but voluntarily gave himself
up to those who had conspired against him.^" . . .
Thus also the blessed martyrs have guarded
themselves in times of persecution : being per-
secuted they fled, and kept themselves con-
cealed ; but being discovered they suffered
martyrdom.

Such is the reasoning of Athanasius in his
apology for his own flight,

CHAPTER IX.

After the Synod of Alexandria, Eusebius pro-
ceeding to Antioch finds the Catholics at Vari-
ance on Accotmt of Paiilinus' Consecration ;
and having exerted himself in vain to recon-
cile them, he departs ; Indignation of Lucifer
and Origifi of a Sect called after him.

As soon as the council of Alexandria was dis-
solved, Eusebius bishop of Vercellae went from
Alexandria to Antioch ; there finding that Pau-
linus had been ordained by Lucifer, and that the
people were disagreeing among themselves, —
for the partisans of Meletius held their assem-
blies apart, — he was exceedingly grieved at the
want of harmony concerning this election, and
in his own mind disapproved of what had taken


" John vii. 30.

^ John ii. 4; iii. 6.

^ Matt. xxvi. 45.


" Athan. de Fuga. 15.
* Athan. dc Fuga. 22.


84


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 9.


place. His respect for Lucifer however induced
him to be silent about it, and on his departure
he engaged that all things should be set right by
a council of bishops. Subsequently he labored
-with great earnestness to unite the dissentients,
but did not succeed. Meanwhile Meletius re-
turned from exile ; and finding his followers
holding their assemblies apart from the others,
he set himself at their head. But Euzoius, the
chief of the Arian heresy, had possession of the
churches : Paulinus ' only retained a -small
church within the city, from which Euzoius had
not ejected him, on account of his personal
respect for him. But Meletius assembled his
adherents without the gates of the city. It was
under these circumstances that Kusebius left
Antioch at that time. When Lucifer understood
that his ordination of Paul was not approved of
by Kusebius, regarding it as an insult, he became
highly incensed ; and not only separated him-
self from communion with him, but also began,
in a contentious spirit, to condemn what had
been determined by the Synod. These things
occurring at a season of grievous disorder,
alienated many from the church ; for many
attached themselves to Lucifer, and thus a dis-
tinct sect arose under the name of Luciferians.' ^
Nevertheless Lucifer was unable to give full
expression to his anger, inasmuch as he had
pledged himself by his deacon to assent to what-
ever should be decided on by the Synod.
Wherefore he adhered to the tenets of the
church, and returned to Sardinia to his own
see : but such as at first identified themselves
with his quarrel, still continue separate from the
church. Kusebius, on the other hand, traveling
throughout the Kastern provinces like a good
physician, completely restored those who were
weak in the faith, instructing and establishing
them in ecclesiastical principles. After this he
passed over to Illyricum, and thence to Italy,
where he pursued a similar course.


CHAPTER X.

Of Hilary Bishop of Poic tiers.

There, however, Hilary bishop of Poictiers
(a city of Acjuitania Secunda) had anticipated
him, having previously confirmed the bishops
of Italy and Gaul in the doctrines of the ortho-
dox faith ; for he first had returned from exile
to these countries. Both therefore nobly com-
bined their energies in defense of the faith : and
Hilary being a very eloquent man, maintained
with great power the doctrine of the liomoou-
sion in books which he wrote in Latin. In
these he gave sufficient support [to the doc-


i v.s.


' Cf. Sozom. III. 15, and V. 12.


trine] and unanswerably confuted the Arian
tenets. These things took place shortly after
the recall of those who had been banished. But
it must be observed, that at the same time Mace-
donius, Eleusius, Kustathius, and Sophronius,
with all their partisans, who had but the one
common designation Macedonians, held frequent
Synods in various places.' Having called to-
gether those of Seleucia who embraced their
views, they anathematized the bishops of the
other party, that is the Acacian : and rejecting
the creed of Ariminum, they confirmed that which
had been read at Seleucia. This, as I have
stated in the preceding book,^ was the same as
had been before promulgated at Antioch. When
they were asked by some one, ' Why have ye,
who are called Macedonians hitherto, retained
communion with the Acacians, as though ye,
agreed in opinion, if ye really hold different
sentiments?' they replied thus, through Sophro-
nius, bishop of Pompeiopolis, a city of Paphla-
gonia : ' Those in the West,' said he, ' were
infected with the homoousian error as with a
disease : Aetius in the East adulterated the
purity of the faith by introducing the assertion
of a dissimilitude of substance. Now both of
these dogmas are illegitimate ; for the former
rashly blended into one the distinct persons of
•the Father and the Son, binding them together
by that cord of iniquity the term ho?noousioti ;
while Aetius wholly separated that affinity of
nature of the Son to the Father, by the expres-
sion anomoion, unlike as to substance or es-
sence. Since then both these opinions run into
the very opposite extremes, the middle course
between them appeared to us to be more con-
sistent with truth and piety : we accordingly
assert that the Son is " like the Father as to
subsistence." '

Such was the answer the Macedonians made by
Sophronius to that question, as Sabinus assures
us in his Collection of the Synodical Acts. But
in decrying Aetius as the author of the Anomoion
doctrine, and not Acacius, they flagrantly dis-
guise the truth, in order to seem as far removed
from the Arians on the one side, as from the
Homoousians on the other : for their own words
convict them of having separated from them
both, merely from the love of innovation. With
these remarks we close our notice of these per-
sons.

CHAPTER XL

The Emperor Julian extracts Money from the
Christians.

Although at the beginning of his reign the
Emperor Julian conducted himself mildly toward

» Sozom. V. 14; Theodoret, Haret. Fabul. IV.
• II. 10. 39.


III. 13]


JULIAN'S TREATMENT OF CHRISTIANS.


85


all men ; but as he went on he did not continue
to show the same equanimity. He most readily
indeed acceded to the requests of the Christians,
when they tended in any way to cast odium on
the memory of Constantius ; but when this in-
ducement did not exist, he made no effort to
conceal the rancorous feelings which he enter-
tained towards Christians in general. Accord-
ingly he soon ordered that the church of the
Novatians at Cyzicus, which Euzoius had totally
demolished, should be rebuilt, imposing a very
heavy penalty upon F^leusius bishop of that city,
if he failed to complete that structure at his own
expense within the space of two months. More-
over, he fevored the pagan superstitions with the
whole weight of his authority : and the temples
of the heathen were opened, as we have before
stated ; ^ but he himself also publicly offered
sacrifices to Fortune, goddess of Constantinople,
in the cathedral,^ where her image was erected.


CHAPTER XII


Of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon ; Julian forbids
Christians from entering Literary Pursuits.

About this time, Maris bishop of Chalcedon
in Bithynia being led by the hand into the em-
peror's presence, — for on account of extreme
old age he had a disease in his eyes termed ' cat-
aract,' — severely rebuked his impiety, apostasy,
and atheism. Julian answered his reproaches
by loading him with contumelious epithets : and
he defended himself bywords calling him 'blind.'
' You bUnd old fool,' said he, ' this Galilaean God
of yours will never cure you.' For he was ac-
customed to term Christ ' the Galilaean,' ^ and
Christians Galilaeans. Maris with still greater
boldness replied, ' I thank God for bereaving me
of my sight, that I might not behold the face
of one who has fallen into such awful impiety.'
The emperor suffered this to pass without farther
notice at that time ; but he afterwards had his
revenge. Observing that those who suftered
martyrdom under the reign of Diocletian were
gready honored by the Christians, and knowing
that many among them were eagerly desirous of
becoming martyrs, he determined to wreak his
vengeance upon them in some other way. Ab-
staining therefore from the excessive cruelties
which had been practiced under Diocletian ; he
did not however altogether abstain from perse-
cution (for any measures adopted to disquiet
and molest I regard as persecution) . This then

1 Chap. I.

2 BamKiKfj. On the origin and history of the term, see Bennett,
Christian Archeology, pp. 157-163. The special basilica meant
here was situated, according to Valesius, in the fourth precinct, and
alone called fiao-iAi«TJ, or 'cathedral' without qualification. The
' Theodosian cathedral ' was situated in the seventh ward.

I Cf. John i. 46, and Acts ii. 7. Later the word was used by the
heathen also, contemptuously, as a term of reproach.


was the plan he pursued : he enacted a law ^ by
which Christians were excluded from the culti-
vation of literature; 'lest,' said he, 'when they
have sharpened their tongue, they should be
able the more readily to meet the arguments of
the heathen.'

CHAPTER XIII.

Of the Outrages committed by the Pagans against
the Christians.

He moreover interdicted such as would not
abjure Christianity, and offer sacrifice to idols,
from holding any office at court : nor would he
allow Christians to be governors of provinces ;
' for,' said he, ' their law forbids them to use
the sword against offenders worthy of capital
punishment.' ^ He also induced many to sacri-
fice, pardy by flatteries, and pardy by gifts.
Immediately, as if tried in a furnace, it at once
became evident to all, who were the real Chris-
tians, and who were merely nominal ones. Such
as were Christians in integrity of heart, very
readily resigned their commission,- choosing to
endure anything rather than deny Christ. Of
this number were Jovian, Valentinian, and
Valens, each of whom afterwards became em-
peror. But others of unsound principles, who
preferred the riches and honor of this world to
the true felicity, sacrificed without hesitation.
Of these was Ecebolius, a sophist ■' of Constan-
tinople who, accommodating himself to the
dispositions of the emperors, pretended in the
reign of Constantius to be an ardent Christian ;
while in Julian's time he appeared an equally
vigorous pagan : and after Julian's death, he
again made a profession of Christianity. For
he prostrated himself before the church doors,
and called out, ' Trample on me, for I am as
salt that has lost its savor.' Of so fickle and
inconstant a character was this person, through-
out the whole period of his history. About this
time the emperor wishing to make reprisals on
the Persians, for the frequent incursions they
had made on the Roman territories in the reign
of Constantius, marched with great expedition
through Asia into the East. But as he well
knew what a train of calamities attend a war,
and what immense resources are needful to carry
it on successfully and that without it cannot be
carried on, he craftily devised a plan for collect-
ing money by extorting it from the Christians.
On all those who refused to sacrifice he imposed

2 Chap. 16.

1 Based, probably, on Matt. xxvi. 52, and John xviii. 11.

2 ^uji'iji' airtTiflci'To; literally, ' put off their girdle,' as the badge
of office.

3 The term was used first by traveling teachers of rhetoric at the
time of the philosopher Socrates as descriptive of their profession;
•Tud although it later acquired an unfavorable significance, it con-
tinued to be used also as a professional name given to teachers of
rhetoric, as here.


86


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 13-


a heavy fine, which was exacted with great rigor
from such as were true Christians, every one
being compelled to pay in proportion to what he
possessed. By these unjust means the emperor
soon amassed immense wealth ; for this law was
put in execution, both where Julian was person-
ally present, and where he was not. The pagans
at the same time assailed the Christians ; and
there was a great concourse of those who styled
themselves ' philosophers.' They then pro-
ceeded to institute certain abominable myste-
ries;^ and sacrificing pure children both male
and female, they inspected their entrails, and
even tasted their flesh. These infamous rites
were practiced in other cities, but more particu-
larly at Athens and Alexandria ; in which latter
])lace, a calumnious accusation was made
against Athanasius the bishop, the emperor
being assured that he was intent on desolating
not that city only, but all Egypt, and that noth-
ing but his expulsion out of the country could
save it. The governor of Alexandria was there-
fore instructed by an imperial edict to apprehend
him.

CHAPTER XIV.

Flight of Athanasius.

But he fled again, saying to his intimates, ' Let
us retire for a little while, friends ; it is but a
small cloud which will soon pass away.' He then
immediately embarked, and crossing the Nile,
hastened with all speed into Egypt, closely pur-
sued by those who sought to take him. When
he understood that his pursuers were not far
distant, his attendants were urging him to retreat
once more into the desert, but he had recourse
to an artifice and thus effected his escape. He
persuaded those who accompanied him to turn
back and meet his adversaries, which they did
immediately ; and on approaching them they
were simply asked ' where they had seen Athan-
asius ' : to which they replied that * he was
not a great way off,' and, that ' if they hastened
they would soon overtake him.' Being thus
deluded, they started afresh in pursuit with
quickened speed, but to no purpose ; and Atha-
nasius making good his retreat, returned secretly
to Alexandria ; and there he remained concealed
until the persecution was at an end. Such were the
perils which succeeded one another in the career
of the bishop of Alexandria, these last from the
heathen coming after that to which he was before
subjected from Christians. In addition to these
things, the governors of the provinces taking
advantage of the emperor's superstition to feed

« Cf. Tert'ill. Apol. IX. ' In the bosom of Africa infants
were publicly sacrificed to Saturn, even to the days of a proconsul
under Tibcnus,' &c.


their own cupidity, committed more grievous
outrages on the Christians than their sovereign
had given them a warrant for ; sometimes exact-
ing larger sums of money than they ought to
have done, and at others inflicting on them cor-
poral punishments. The emperor learning of
these excesses, connived at them ; and when
the sufferers appealed to him against their
oppressors, he tauntingly said, ' It is your duty
to bear these afflictions patiently ; for this is the
command of your God.'


CHAPTER XV.


/


/


Martyrs at Merum in Phrygia, under Julian.

Aauchius governor of Phrygia ordered that
the temple at Merum, a city of that province,
should be opened, and cleared of the filth which
had accumulated there by lapse of time : also
that the statues it contained should be polished
fresh. This in being put into operation grieved
the Christians very much. Now a certain Mac-
edonius and Theodulus and Tatian, unable to
endure the indignity thus put upon their religion,
and impelled by a fervent zeal for virtue, rushed
by night into the temple, and broke the images
in pieces. The governor infuriated at what had
been done, would have put to death many in
that city who were altogether innocent, when
the authors of the deed voluntarily surrendered
themselves, choosing rather to die themselves in
defense of the truth, than to see others put to
death in their stead. The governor seized and
ordered them to expiate the crime they had
committed by sacrificing : on their refusal to do
this, their judge menaced them with tortures ;
but they despising his threats, being endowed
with great courage, declared their readiness to
undergo any sufferings, rather than pollute them-
selves by sacrificing. After subjecting them to
all possible tortures he at last laid them on grid-
irons under which a fire was placed, and thus
slew them. But even in this last extremity they
gave the most heroic proofs of fortitude, address-
ing the ruthless governor thus : * If you wish
to eat broiled flesh, Amachius, turn us on the
other side also, lest we should appear but half
cooked to your taste.' Thus these martyrs
ended their life.

CHAPTER XVI.

Of the Literary Labors of the Two Apollinares
and the Emperor's Prohibition of Christians
being instructed in Greek Literature.

The imperial law' which forbade Christians to
study Greek literature, rendered the two Apolli-


» Cf. Sozom. V. i8; also above, II. 46.


III. i6.] DEFENSE OF THE STUDY OF GREEK LITERATURE.


87


nares of whom we have above spoken, much
more distinguishetl than before. For both being
skilled in polite learning, the father as a gram-
marian, and the son as a rhetorician, they made
themselves serviceable to the Christians at this
crisis. For the former, as a grammarian, com-
posed a grammar consistent with the Christian
faith : he also translated the Books of Moses
into heroic verse ; and paraphrased all the his-
torical books of the Old Testament, putting
them partly into dactylic measure, and partly
reducing them to the form of dramatic tragedy.
He purposely employed all kinds of verse, that
no form of expression peculiar to the Greek
language might be unknown or unheard of
amongst Christians. The younger Apollinaris,
who was well trained in eloquence, expounded
the gospels and apostolic doctrines in the way
of dialogue, as Plato among the Greeks had
done. Thus showing themselves useful to the
Christian cause they overcame the subtlety of
the emperor through their own labors. But
Divine Providence was more potent than either
their labors, or the craft of the emperor :
for not long afterwards, in the manner we
shall hereafter explain,^ the law became wholly
inoperative ; and the works of these men
are now of no greater importance, than if they
had never been written. But perhaps some
one will vigorously reply saying : * On what
grounds do you affirm that both these things
were effected by the providence of God? That
the emperor's sudden death was very advanta-
geous to Christianity is indeed evident : but
surely the rejection of the Christian composi-
tions of the two ApoUinares, and the Christians
beginning afresh to imbue their minds with the
philosophy of the heathens, this works out no
benefit to Christianity, for pagan philosophy
teaches Polytheism, and is injurious to the pro-
motion of true religion.' This objection I shall
meet with such considerations as at present
occur to me. Greek literature certainly was
never recognized either by Christ or his Apos-
tles as divinely inspired, nor on the other hand
was it wholly rejected as pernicious. And this
they did, I conceive, not inconsiderately. For
there were many philosophers among the Greeks
who were not far from the knowledge of God ;
and in fact these being disciplined by logical
science, strenuously opposed the Epicureans
and other contentious Sophists who denied
Divine Providence, confuting their ignorance.
And for these reasons they have become useful
to all lovers of real piety : nevertheless they
themselves were not acquainted with the Head
of true religion, being ignorant of the mystery
of Christ which ' had been hidden from genera-


* Chap. 21.


tions and ages." And that this was so, the
Apostle in his epistle to the Romans thus de-
clares : * ' For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteous-
ness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteous-
ness. Because that which may be known of
God is manifest in them ; for God has shown it
unto them. For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead, that they may
be without excuse ; because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God.'
From these words it appears that they had the
knowledge of truth, which God had manifested
to them ; but were guilty on this account, that
when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God. Wherefore by not forbidding the study
of the learned works of the Greeks, they left it
to the discretion of those who wished to do so.
This is our first argument in defense of the
position we took : another may be thus put :
The divinely inspired Scriptures undoubtedly
inculcate doctrines that are both admirable in
themselves, and heavenly in their character :
they also eminently tend to produce piety and
integrity of life in those who are guided by their
precepts, pointing out a walk of faith which is
highly approved of God. But they do not in-
struct us in the art of reasoning, by means of
which we may be enabled successfully to resist
those who oppose the truth. Besides adversa-
ries are most easily foiled, when we can use
•their own weapons against them. But this
power was not supplied to Christians by the
writings of the ApoUinares. Julian had this in
mind when he by law prohibited Christians from
being educated in Greek literature, for he knew
very well that the fables it contains would expose
the whole pagan system, of which he had be-
come the champion to ridicule and contempt.
Even Socrates, the most celebrated of their
philosophers, despised these absurdities, and
was condemned on account of it, as if he had
attempted to violate the sanctity of their deities.
Moreover, both Christ and his Apostle enjoin
us ' to become discriminating money-changers,'*
so that we might ' prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good ' : " directing us also to ' be-
ware lest any one should spoil us through phil-
osophy and vain deceit.'^ But this we cannot
do, unless we possess ourselves of the weapons
of our adversaries : taking care that in making
this acquisition we do not adopt their senti-
ments, but testing them, reject the evil, but
retain all that is good and true : for good wher-


' Col. i. 26. * Rom. i. 18-21.

^ On this extra-Scriptural saying attributed to Jesus Christ, see
n. 54, IntrocL p. xi.

■' I Thess. V. 21. ' Col. ii. 8.


88


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. i6.


ever it is found, is a property of truth. Should
any one imagine that in making these assertions
we wrest the Scriptures from their legitimate
construction, let it be remembered that the
Apostle not only does not forbid our being in-
structed in Greek learning, but that he himself
seems by no means to have neglected it, inas-
much as he knows many of the sayings of the
Greeks. Whence did he get the saying, ' The
Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, slow-bel-
lies,'* but from a perusal of The Oracles of
Epimenides," the Cretan Initiator? Or how
would he have known this, ' For we are also his
offspring,' '" had he not been acquainted with
The Phenomena of Aratus " the astronomer ?
Again this sentence, ' Evil communications cor-
rupt good manners,' ^- is a sufficient proof that he
was conversant with the tragedies of Euripi-
des.*' But what need is there of enlarging on
this point? It is well known that in ancient
times the doctors of the church by unhindered
usage were accustomed to exercise themselves
in the learning of the Greeks, until they had
reached an advanced age : this they did with a
view to improve themselves in eloquence and to
strengthen and polish their mind, and at the same
time to enable them to refute the errors of the
heathen. Let these remarks be sufficient in the
subject suggested by the two Apollinares.


CHAPTER XVII.

The Emperor preparing an Expedition against
the Persians, arrives at Antioch, and being
ridiculed by the Inhabitants, he retorts on them
by a Satirical Publication entitled^ Misopogon,
or the Beard-Hater'

The emperor having extorted immense sums
of money from the Christians, hastening his ex-
pedition against the Persians, arrived at Antioch
in Syria. There, desiring to show the citizens
how much he affected glory, he unduly depressed
the prices of commodities ; neither taking into
account the circumstances of that time, nor re-
flecting how much the presence of an army in-
conveniences the population of the provinces.


• Tit. i. 12.

• Cf. Thcophrastus, VII. x. and Diogenes Lzrtius, I. x. The
latter gives a list of Epimenidcs' works, but makes no mention of
any ' Oracles." Socrates must have used this term in a more gen-
eral sense therefore, and meant some collection of obscure and mys-
tical writings. He also calls Epimenides an ' Initiator,' because,
according to the testimony of Theophrastus, he was versed particu-
larly in lustration and coruscation.

'" Acts xvii. 28.

^' Fabricius, Bibl. Grctc. II. p. 451 seq.

" I Cor. XV. 33.

" Menander, and not Euripides, is the only author to whom this
line can be traced (see Tertull. ad Uxor. i. 8, and Mcineke, Fragm.
Comtc. Gmc. Vol. IV. p. 132), but it may have been a popular
proverb, or even originally a composition of Euripides, whicli Me-
nander simply used.


and of necessity lessens the supply of provisions
to the cities. The merchants and retailers ^
therefore left off trading, being unable to sustain
the losses which the imperial edict entailed upon
them ; consequently the necessaries failed. The
.Antiochians not bearing the insult, — for they
are a people naturally impatient with insult, —
instantly broke forth into invectives against Ju-
lian ; caricaturing his l)eard also, which was a
very long one, and saying that it ought to be cut
off and manufactured into ropes. They added
that the bull which was impressed upon his coin,
was a symbol of his having desolated the world.
For the emperor, being excessively superstitious,
was continually sacrificing bulls ^ on the altars
of his idols ; and had ordered the impression
of a bull and altar to be made on his coin. Ir-
ritated by these scoffs, he threatened to punish
the city of Antioch, and returned to Tarsus in
Cilicia, giving orders that preparations should be
made for his speedy departure thence. Whence
Lihanius the sophist took occasion to compose
two orations, one addressed to the emperor in
behalf of the Antiochians, the other to the in-
habitants of Antioch on the emperor's displeas-
ure. It is however affirmed that these compo-
sitions were merely written, and never recited in
public. Julian abandoning his former purpose
of revenging himself on his satirists by injurious
deeds, expended his wrath in reciprocating their
abusive taunts ;*for he wrote a pamphlet against
them which he entitled Antiochicus, or Alisopo-
gon, thus leaving an indelible stigma upon that
city and its inhabitants. But we must now speak
of the evils which he brought upon the Chris-
tians at Antioch.


CHAPTER XVIII.

The Emperor consulting an Oracle, the Demon
gives no Response, being aiued by the Nearness
of Babylas the Mart}'r.

Having ordered that the pagan temples at
Antioch should be opened, he was very eager to
obtain an oracle from Apollo of Daphne. But
the demon that inhabited the temple remained
silent through fear of his neighbor, Babylas ' the
martyr ; for the coffin which contained the body
of that saint was close by. When the emperor
was informed of this circumstance, he com-
manded that the coffin should be immediately

I (i«Ta0oA(i?. Cf. »x<Ta/3oA>), used to designate all merchandi.s-
ing, Julius Pollux, III. 25; hence /lera^oAeut, a ' retailer,' ' smalt
merchant.'

• Hence Gregory of Na2ianus calls him uouiriToupo?, ' a burner
of bulls.'

' See Euseb. H. E. VI. 20 and 39: also Chrysostom, de S. Babyl.
According to these authorities Babylas was bishop of Antioch, suc-
ceeding S.ibrinus, and was beheaded in prison during the reign of
Decius. His remains were transferred to a church built over against
the temple of Apollo of Daphne (Sozom. V. 19) by Gallus, Julian's-
brother.


III. 20.] JULIAN EXASPERATED AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS.


89


removed : upon which the Christians of Antioch,
inckiding women and children, transported the
coffin from Daphne to the city, with solemn re-
joicings and chanting of psalms. The psalms'
were such as cast reproach on the gods of the
heathen, and those who put confidence in them
and their images.


CHAPTER XIX.

Wrath of the Emperor, and Firmness of Theo-
dore the Confessor.

Then indeed the emperor's real temper and
disposition, which he had hitherto kept as much
as possible from observation, became fully mani-
fested : for he who had boasted so much of his
philosophy, was no longer able to restrain him-
self; but being goaded almost to madness by
these reproachful hymns, he was ready to inflict
the same cruelties on the Christians, with which
Diocletian's agents had formerly visited them.
Since, however, his solicitude about the Persian
expedition afforded him no leisure for personally
executing his wishes, he commanded Sallust the
Prsetorian Prefect to seize those who had been
most conspicuous for their zeal in psalm-singing,
in order to make examples of them. The pre-
fect, though a pagan, was far from being pleased
with his commission ; but since he durst not
contravene it, he caused several of the Chris-
tians to be apprehended, and some of them to
be imprisoned. One young man named Theo-
dore, whpm the heathens brought before him, he
subjected to a variety of tortures, causing his
person to be so lacerated and only released him
from further punishment when he thought that
he could not possibly outlive the torments : yet
God preserved this sufferer, so that he long sur-
vived that confession. Rufinus, the author of
the Ecclesiastical History written in Latin, states
that he himself conversed with the same Theo-
dore a considerable time afterwards : and en-
quired of him whether in the process of scourg-
ing and racking he had not felt the most intense
pains ; his answer was, that he felt the pain of the
tortures to which he was subjected for a very short
time ; and that a young man stood by him who
both wiped off the sweat which was produced by
the acuteness of the ordeal through which he
was passing, and at the same time strengthened
his mind, so that he rendered this time of trial
a season of rapture rather than of suffering.
Let this suffice concerning the most wonderful
Theodore. About this time Persian ambassa-
dors came to the emperor, requesting him to
terminate the war on certain express conditions.
But Julian abruptly dismissed them, saying, ' You

» Ps. xcvi. 7 (LXX).


shall very shortly see me in person, so that there
will be no need of an embassy.'

CHAPTER XX.

The Je7vs instigated by the Emperor attempt to
rebuild their Te triple, and are frustrated in
their Attempt by Miraculous Interposition.

The emperor in another attempt to molest the
Christians exposed his superstition. Being fond
of sacrificing, he not only himself delighted in
the blood of victims, but considered it an in-
dignity offered to him, if others did not do like-
wise. And as he found but few persons of this
stamp, he sent for the Jews and enquired of them
why they abstained from sacrificing, since the
law of Moses enjoined it? On their replying
that it was not permitted them to do this in any
other place than Jerusalem, he immediately or-
dered them to rebuild Solomon's temple. Mean-
while he himself proceeded on his expedition
against the Persians. The Jews who had been
long desirous of obtaining a favorable opportu-
nity for rearing their temple afresh in order that
they might therein offer sacrifice, applied them-
selves very vigorously to the work. Moreover,
they conducted themselves with great insolence
toward the Christians, and threatened to do them
as much mischief, as they had themselves suf-
fered from the Romans. The emperor having
ordered that the expenses of this structure should
be defrayed out of the public treasury, all things
were soon provided, such as timber and stone,
burnt brick, clay, hme, and all other materials
necessary for building. On this occasion Cyril
bishop of Jerusalem, called to mind the prophecy
of Daniel, which Christ also in the holy gospels
has confirmed, and predicted in the presence of
many persons, that the time had indeed come
' in which one stone should not be left upon
another in that temple,' but that the Saviour's
prophetic declaration ' should have its full accom-
plishment. Such were the bishop's words : and
on the night following, a mighty earthquake tore
up the stones of the old foundations of the tem-
ple and dispersed them all together with the
adjacent edifices. Terror consequently pos-
sessed the Jews on account of the event ; and
the report of it brought many to the spot who
resided at a great distance : when therefore a
vast multitude was assembled, another prodigy
took place. Fire came down from heaven and con-
sumed all the builders' tools : so that the flames
were seen preying upon mallets, irons to smooth
and polish stones, saws, hatchets, adzes, in short
all the various implements which the workmen
had procured as necessary for the undertaking ;

1 Matt. xxiv. 1, 15.


90


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 20.


and the fire continued burning among these
for a whole day. The Jews indeed were in the
greatest possible alarm, and unwillingly confessed
Christ, calling him God : yet they did not do his
will ; but influenced by inveterate prepossessions
they still clung to Judaism. Even a third mira-
cle which afterwards happened failed to lead
them to a belief of the truth. For the next
night luminous impressions of a cross appeared
imprinted on their garments, which at daybreak
they in vain attempted to rub or wash out. They
were therefore ' blinded ' as the apostle says,'^
and cast away the good which they had in their
hands : and thus was the temple, instead of
being rebuilt, at that time wholly overthrown.

CHAPTER XXI.

The Emperor's Invasion of Persia, and Death.

The emperor meanwhile invaded the country
of the Persians a little before spring, having
learnt that the races of Persia were greatly
enfeebled and totally spiritless in winter. For
from their inability to endure cold, they abstain
from military service at that season, and it has
become a proverb that ' a Mede will not then
draw his hand from underneath his cloak.' And
well knowing that the Romans were inured to
brave all the rigors of the atmosphere he let
them loose on the country. After devastating
a considerable tract of country, including numer-
ous villages and fortresses, they next assailed
the cities ; and having invested the great city
Ctesiphon, he reduced the king of the Persians
to such straits that the latter sent repeated
embassies to the emperor, offering to surrender
a portion of his dominions, on condition of his
quitting the country, and putting an end to the
war. But Julian was unaffected by these sub-
missions, and showed no compassion to a sup-
pliant foe : nor did he think of the adage, ' To
conquer is honorable, but to be more than con-
queror gives occasion for envy.' Giving credit
to the divinations of the philosopher Maximus,
with whom he was in continual intercourse, he
was deluded into the belief that his exploits
would not only equal, but exceed those of
Alexander of Macedon ; so that he spurned with
contempt the entreaties of the Persian monarch.
He even supposed in accordance with the teach-
ings of Pythagoras and Plato on ' the transmi-
gration of souls,' ' that he was possessed of Alex-
ander's soul, or rather that he himself was
Alexander in another body. This ridiculous
fancy deluded and caused him to reject the
negotiations for peace proposed by the king of

• Rom. xi. 25; 2 Cor. iii. 14.

1 /ieT«i'<j-i.>»iaTu>(j-»un, lit. 'exchange of bodies,' formed in anal-
ogy with fKTCfii^vxwcif and logically inseparable from that doctrine.


the Persians. Wherefore the latter convinced
of the uselessness of them was constrained to
prepare for conflict, and therefore on the next
day after the rejection of his embassy, he drew
out in order of battle all the forces he had. The
Romans indeed censured their prince, for not
avoiding an engagement when he might have
done so with advantage : nevertheless they at-
tacked those who opposed them, and again put
the enemy to flight. The emperor was present
on horseback, and encouraged his soldiers in
battle ; but confiding simply in his hope of suc-
cess, he wore no armor. In this defenceless
state, a dart cast by some one unknown, pierced
through his arm and entered his side, making a
wound. In consequence of this wound he died.
Some say that a certain Persian hurled the jave-
lin, and then fled ; others assert that one of his
own men was the author of the deed, which indeed
is the best corroborated and most current report.
But Callistus, one of his body-guards, who cele-
brated this emperor's deeds in heroic verse, says
in narrating the particulars of this war, that the
wound of which he died was inflicted by a
demon. This is possibly a mere poetical fic-
tion, or perhaps it was really the fact ; for
vengeful furies have undoubtedly destroyed many
persons. Be the case however as it may, this is
certain, that the ardor of his natural tempera-
ment rendered him incautious, his learning
made him vain, and his affectation of clemency
exposed him to contempt. Thus Julian ended
his life in Persia,^ as we have said, in his fourth
consulate,^ which he bore with Sallust his col-
league. This event occurred on the 26th of
June, in the third year of his reign, and the
seventh from his having been created Caesar by
Constantius, he being at that time in the thirty-
first year of his age.

CHAPTER XXII.

Jovian is proclaimed Emperor.

The soldiery being thrown into extreme per-
plexity by an event so unexpected, and without
delay, on the following day proclaimed Jovian
emperor, a person alike distinguished for his
courage and birth. He was a military tribune
when Julian put forth an edict giving his officers
the option of either sacrificing or resigning their
rank in the army, and chose rather to lay down
his commission,' than to obey the mandate of
an impious prince. Julian, however, being
pressed by the urgency of the war which was


• Thcodoret, H. E. III. 25, gives the familiar version of the death
of Julian, according to which, on perceiving the character of his
wound, the dying emperor filled his hand with blood and threw it up
into the air, crying, ' Galilean, thou hast overcome! '

* 363 A.D. ' See above, chap. 13.


III. 23.]


ACCESSION OF JOVIAN.


91


before him, retained him among his generals.
On being saluted emperor, he positively de-
clined to accept the sovereign power : and
when the soldiers brought him forward by force,
he declared that * being a Christian, he did not
wish to reign over a people who chose to adopt
paganism as their religion.' They all then with
one voice answered that they also were Chris-
tians : upon which he accepted the imperial
dignity. Perceiving himself suddenly left in
very difficult circumstances, in the midst of the
Persian territory, where his army was in danger
of perishing for want of necessaries, he agreed
to terminate the war, even on terms by no
means honorable to the glory of the Roman
name, but rendered necessary by the exigencies
of the crisis. Submitting therefore to the loss
of the government of Syria,^ and giving up also
Nisibis, a city of Mesopotamia, he withdrew
from their territories. The announcement of
these things gave fresh hope to the Christians ;
while the pagans vehemently bewailed Julian's
death. Nevertheless the whole army repro-
bated his intemperate heat, and ascribed to his
rashness in listening to the wily reports of a
Persian deserter, the humiliation of ceding the
territories lost : for being imposed upon by the
statements of this fugitive, he was induced to
burn the ships which supplied them with pro-
visions by water, by which means they were
exposed to all the horrors of famine. Then also
Libanius composed a funeral oration on him,
which he designated Julianus, or Epitaph,
I wherein he celebrates with lofty encomiums
\ almost all his actions ; but in referring to the
\ books which Julian wrote against the Christians,
I he says that he has therein clearly demonstrated
I the ridiculous and trifling character of their sa-
1 cred books. Had this sophist contented him-
self with extolling the emperor's other acts, I
should have quietly proceeded with the course of
my history ; but since this famous rhetorician
has thought proper to take occasion to inveigh
against the Scriptures of the Christian faith, we
also propose to pause a little and in a brief re-
view consider his words.


CHAPTER XXni.

Refutation of what Libanius the Sophist said
concerning JuUan.

* When the winter,' says he,^ ' had lengthened
the nights, the emperor made an attack on those


' So the MSS. and Bright. The same reading was also before
Epiphanius Scholasticus and Nicephorus; but Valesius conjectur-
aliy amends the reading tous 2upou9 ttj? a-Pxh'i into tou! opoi/; t^?
opx^?, alleging that Socrates himself later mentions the loss as
C,ri\i.ia.v Tuji' opuiv. If the reading of Valesius be considered correct,
then we must translate ' submitting to the loss of the borders,' sup-
plying ' of the empire.' This would include the districts beyond
the Tigris. ' Liban. Orat. xviii. {Opera, i. Reiske).


books which made the man of Palestine both
God, and the Son of God : and by a long series
of arguments having proved that these writings,
which are so much revered by Christians, are
ridiculous and unfounded, he has evinced him-
self wiser and more skillful than the Tyrian ^ old
man. But may this Tyrian sage be propitious
to me, and mildly bear with what has been af-
firmed, seeing that he has been excelled by his
son ! ' Such is the language of Libanius the
Sophist. But I confess, indeed, that he was an
excellent rhetorician, but am persuaded that had
he not coincided with the emperor in religious
sentiment, he would not only have given expres-
sion to all that has been said against him by
Christians, but would have magnified every
ground of censure as naturally becomes a rheto-
rician. For while Constantius was alive he wrote
encomiums upon him ; but after his death he
brought the most insulting and reproachful
charges against him. So that if Porphyry had
been emperor, Libanius would certainly have
preferred his books to Julian's : and had Julian
been a mere sophist, he would have termed him
a very indifferent one, as he does Ecebolius in
his Epitaph upon Julian. Since then he has
spoken in the spirit of a pagan, a sophist, and
the friend of him whom he lauded, we shall en-
deavor to meet what he has advanced, as far as
we are able. In the first place he says that the
emperor undertook to ' attack ' these books dur-
ing the long winter nights. Now to ' attack '
means to make the writing of a confutation of
them a task, as the sophists commonly do in
teaching the rudiments of their art ; for he had
perused these books long before, but attacked
them at this time. But throughout the long
contest into which he entered, instead of at-
tempting to disprove anything by sound reason-
ing, as Libanius asserts, in the absence of truth
he had recourse to sneers and contemptuous
jests, of which he was excessively fond ; and
thus he sought to hold up to derision what is
too firmly established to be overthrown. For
every one who enters into controversy with an-
other, sometimes trying to pervert the truth, and
at others to conceal it, falsifies by every possible
means the position of his antagonist. And an
adversary is not satisfied with doing malignant
acts against one with whom he is at variance,
but will speak against him also, and charge upon
the object of his dislike the very faults he is con-
scious of in himself. That both Julian and Por-
phyry, whom Libanius calls the ' Tyrian old
man,' took great delight in scoffing, is evident
from their own works. For Porphyry in his
History of the Philosophers has treated with rid-
icule the life of Socrates, the most eminent of

' Porphyry. See above, I. 9.


92


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[III. 23.


all the philosophers, making such remarks on
him as neither Melitus, nor Anytus, his accusers,
would have dared to utter ; of Socrates, I say,
who was admired by all the Greeks for his mod-
esty, justice, and other virtues ; whom Plato,''
the most admirable among them, Xenophon, and
the rest of the philosophic band, not only honor
as one beloved of Ciod, but also are accustomed
to think of as having been endowed with super-
human intelligence. And Julian, imitating his
' father,' displayed a like morbidness of mind in
his book, entitled The Ciesars, wherein he tra-
duces all his imperial predecessors, not sparing
even Mark the philosopher.* Their own writings
therefore show that they both took pleasure in
taunts and reviling ; and I have no need of pro-
fuse and clever expressions to do this ; but what
has been said is enough concerning their mood
in this respect. Now I write these things, using
the oration of each as witnesses respecting their
dispositions, but of Julian in particular, what
Gregory of Nazianzus * says in his Second Ora-
tion against the Pagans is in the following
terms :

'These things were made evident to others by
experiencei after the possession of imperial au-
thority had left him free to follow the bent of his
inclinations : but I had foreseen it all, from the
time I became acquainted with him at Athens.
Thither he came, by permission of the emperor,
soon after the change in his brother's fortune.
His motive for this visit was twofold : one reason
was honorable to him, viz. to see Greece, and
attend the schools there ; the other was a more
secret one, which few knew anything about,
for his impiety had not yet presumed to openly
avow itself, viz. to have opportunity of consult-
ing the sacrificers and other impostors respect-
ing his own destiny. I well remember that even
then I was no bad diviner concerning this per-
son, although I by no means pretend to be one
of those skilled in the art of divination : but the
fickleness of his disposition, and the incredible
extravagancy of his mind, rendered me pro-
phetic ; if indeed he is the " best prophet who
conjectures correctly"*' events. For it seemed
to me that no good was portended by a neck
seldom steady, the frequent shrugging of shoul-
ders, an eye scowling and always in motion, to-
gether with a frenzied aspect ; a gait irregular
and tottering, a nose breathing only contempt
and insult, with ridiculous contortions of counte-
nance expressive of the same thing ; immoder-
ate and very loud laughter, nods as it were of
assent, and drawings back of the head as if
in denial, without any visible cause ; speech with

' In his Crito, Pfitrdo, Phtrdrus, and Apology of Socrates.
See also Xenophon's Memorabilia 0/ Socrates antl Symposium.

* Marcus Aurelius. * Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. V. 23.

• Euripid. Fragm.


hesitancy and interrupted by his breathing ; dis-
orderly and senseless questions, answers no
better, all jumbled together without the least
consistency or method. Why need I enter into
minute particulars? Such I foresaw he would
be beforehand as I found him afterwards from
experience. And if any of those who were then
present and heard me, were now here, they
would readily testify that when I observed these
prognostics I exclaimed, " Ah ! how great a mis-
chief to itself is the Roman empire fostering!"
And that when I had uttered these words I
prayed God that I might be a false prophet. For
it would have been far better [that I should have
been convicted of having formed an erroneous
judgment], than that the world should be filled
with so many calamities, and that such a mon-
ster should have appeared as never before had
been seen : although many deluges and confla-
grations are recorded, many earthquakes and
chasms, and descriptions are given of many
ferocious and inhuman men, as well as prodi-
gies of the brute creation, compounded of dif-
ferent races, of which nature produced unusual
forms. His end has indeed been such as cor-
responds with the madness of his career.'

This is the sketch which Gregory has given
us of Julian. Moreover, that in their various
compilations they have endeavored to do vio-
lence to the truth, sometimes by the corruption of
passages of sacred Scripture, at others by either
adding to the express words, and putting such
a construction upon them as suited their own
purpose, many have demonstrated, by confuting
their cavils, and exposing their fallacies. Ori-
gen in particular, who lived long before Julian's
time, by himself raising objections to such pas-
sages of Holy Scripture ' as seemed to disturb
some readers, and tlien fully meeting them, has
shut out the invidious clamors of the thought-
less. And had Julian and Por{)hyry given his
writings a candid and serious perusal, they
would have discoursed on other topics, and
not have turned to the framing of blasphe-
mous sophisms. It is also very obvious that
the emperor in his discourses was intent on
beguiling the ignorant, and did not address him-
self to those who possess the * form ' of the
truth as it is presented in the sacred Scrip-
tures. For having grouped together various
expressions in which God is spoken of dispen-
sationally, and more according to the manner of
men, he thus comments on them.' * Every one
of these expressions is full of blasphemy against

' Probably Socrates means Origen's lost work, known as Stro-
mala, which Jerome (in his Ep. ad Magnum) says was written to
show the harmony of the Christian doctrines and the teachings of
the philosophers. The description here given does not tally more
precisely with any other work of Origen now extant.

• Cyril, Contra Julian. III. (p. 93, ed. Spanheim).


III. 23.]


CRITICISM OF LIBANIUS' EULOGY ON JULIAN.


93


God, unless the phrase contains some occult
and mysterious sense, which indeed I can su])-
pose.' This is the exact language he uses in
his third book against the Christians, liut in
his treatise On the Cynic Philosophy, where he
shows to what extent fables may be invented
on religious subjects, he says that in such mat-
ters the truth must be veiled : ' For,' to (juote
his very words,'' ' Nature loves concealment ;
and the hidden substance of the gods cannot
endure being cast into polluted ears in naked
words.' From which it is manifest that the
emperor entertained this notion concerning the
divine Scriptures, that they are mystical dis-
courses, containing in them some abstruse mean-
ing. He is also very indignant because all men
do not form the same opinion of them ; and in-
veighs against those Christians who understand
the sacred oracles in a more literal sense. But
it ill became him to rail so vehemently against
the simplicity of the vulgar, and on their account
to behave so arrogantly towards the sacred Scrip-
tures : nor was he warranted in turning with
aversion from those things which others rightly
apprehended, because forsooth they understood
them otherwise than he desired they should. But
now as it seems a similar cause of disgust seems
to have operated upon him to that which affected
Porphyry, who having been beaten by some
Christians at Caesarea in Palestine and not being
able to endure [such treatment], from the work-
ing of unrestrained rage renounced the Christian
religion : and from hatred of those who had
beaten him he took to write blasphemous works
against Christians, as Eusebius Pamphilus has
proved who at the same time refuted his writ-
ings. So the emperor having uttered disdainful
expressions against the Christians in the pres-
ence of an unthinking multitude, through the
same morbid condition of mind fell into Por-
phyry's blasphemies. Since therefore they both
willfully broke forth into impiety, they are pun-
ished by the consciousness of their guilt. But
when Libanius the Sophist says ^° in derision, that
the Christians make ' a man of Palestine both
God and the Son of God,' he appears to have
forgotten that he himself has deified Julian at
the close of his oration. 'For they almost
killed,' says he, ' the first messenger of his death,
as if he had lied against a god.' And a little
afterwards he adds, ' O thou cherished one of
the gods ! thou disciple of the gods ! thou asso-
ciate '^ with the gods ! ' Now although Libanius
may have meant otherwise, yet inasmuch as he
did not avoid the ambiguity of a word which is
sometimes taken in a bad sense, he seems to


9 Julian, Oral. VII.

i» Liban. Orat. XVIII. {Ofier. I. 625, Reiske).
II TrapeSpevTa, terra applied to associates on the bench in judica-
tories.


have said the same things as the Christians had
done reproachfully. If then it was his intention
to praise him, he ought to have avoided equivo-
cal terms ; as lie did on another occasion, when
being criticised he avoided a certain word, cut-
ting it out of his works. Moreover, that man in
Christ was united to the Godhead, so that while
he was apparently but man, he was the invisible
God, and that both these things are most true,
the divine books of Christians distinctly teach.
But the heathen before they believe, cannot
understand : for it is a divine oracle that de-
clares '^ ' Unless ye believe, assuredly ye shall not
understand.' Wherefore they are not ashamed
to place many men among the number of their
gods : and would that they had done this, at
least to the good, just, and sober, instead of the
impure, unjust, and those addicted to drunken-
ness, like the Hercules, the Bacchus, and the
yLsculapius, by whom Libanius does not blush
to swear frequently in his orations. And were I
to attempt to enumerate the unnatural debauch-
eries and infamous adulteries of these, the di-
gression would be lengthened beyond meas-
ure : but for those who desire to be informed on
the subject, Aristoilc''s Peplujn, Dionysius' Co-
ro7ia, Rheginus^ Poly?nnemon, and the whole
host of poets will be enough to show that the
pagan theology is a tissue of extravagant absurd-
ities. We might indeed show by a variety of
instances that the practice of deifying human
beings was far from uncommon among the hea-
then, nay, that they did so without the slightest
hesitation : let a few examples suffice. The
Rhodians having consulted an oracle on some
public calamity, a response was given directing
them to pay their adoration to Atys, a pagan
priest who instituted frantic rites in Phrygia.
The oracle was thus expressed :

' Atys propitiate, the great god, the chaste
Adonis, the blessed fair-haired Dionysius rich in
gifts.'

Here Atys, who from an amatory mania had
castrated himself, is by the oracle designated as
Adonis and Bacchus.

Again, when Alexander, king of the Mace-
donians, passed over into Asia, the Amphictyons
courted his favor, and the Pythoness uttered
this oracle :

' To Zeus supreme among the gods, and
Athene Tritogenia pay homage, and to the
king divine concealed in mortal form, him Zeus
begat in honor to be the protector and dispen-
ser of justice among mortals, Alexander the king.'

These are the words of the demon at Delphi,
who when he wished to flatter potentates, did
not scruple to assign them a place among the
gods. The motive here was perhaps to concili-

'* Isa. vii. 9 (LXX, KoX iav /ni; Tri<rTev<n)Tf, oiiSe fi») o-ui'JjTc).


94


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[HI. 23.


ate by adulation : but what could one say of the
case of Cleomedes the pugilist, whom they
ranked among the gods in this oracle ?

'The last of the heroes is Cleomedes, the
Astypalian. Him honor with sacrifices ; for he
is no longer a mortal.'

Because of this oracle Diogenes the cynic,
and Oenomaus the philosopher, strongly con-
demned Apollo. The inhabitants of Cyzicus
declared Hadrian to be the thirteenth god ; and
Adrian himself deified his own catamite Antin-
oiis.'^ Libanius does not term these ' ridiculous
and contemptible absurdities,' although he was
familiar with these oracles, as well as with the work
of Adrias on the life of Alexander '* (the pseudo-
prophet of Paphlagonia) : nor does he himself
hesitate to dignify Porphyry in a similar manner,
when after having preferred Julian's books to
his, he says, ' May the Syrian be propitious to
me.' This digression will suffice to repel the
scoffs of the sophist, without following him far-
ther in what he has advanced ; for to enter into
a complete refutation would require an express
work. We shall therefore proceed with our his-
tory.

CHAPTER XXIV.

The Bishops flock around Jovian, each attempt-
ing to draw him to his oivn Creed.

Jovian having returned from Persia, ecclesi-
astical commotions were again renewed : for
those who presided over the churches endeav-
ored to anticipate each other, in the hope that
the emperor would attach himself to their own
tenets. He however had from the beginning
adhered to the homoousian faith, and openly
declared that he preferred this to all others.
Moreover, he wrote letters to and encouraged
Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, who immedi-
ately after Julian's death had recovered the
Alexandrian church, and at that time gaining
confidence from the letters [spoken of] put
away all fear. The emperor further recalled
from exile all those prelates whom Constantius
had banished, and who had not been re-estab-
lished by Julian, Moreover, the pagan temples
were again shut up, and they secreted them-
selves wherever they were able. The philoso-
phers also lai<l aside their palliums, and clothed
themselves in ordinary attire. That public
pollution by the blood of victims, which had
been profusely lavished even to disgust in the
reign of Julian, was now likewise taken away.

" For a full account of Antinniis and his relations to Hadrian,
see Smith, Diet, of Gretk and Roman Biogr. and Mythol., article
AntinoOs. The story has been put into literary fiction in the his-
torical novels An/inoiis, by George Taylor (A. Hausrath),and TAe
Emperor, by Georg Ebers.

'* It is uncertain what the true reading should be here. In one
of the MSS. it is 'Aipiot, in another "Avfipio? ; according to others
'Aiptacdf, or ' Kftp\.a.v6%. Valesius suggests the substitution of


CHAPTER XXV.

The Macedonians and Acacians meet at Anti-
och, and proclaim their Assent to the Nicene
Creed.

Meanwhile the state of the church was by no
means tranquil ; for the heads of the sects assid-
uously paid their court to the emperor their
king that protection for themselves meant also
power against their acknowledged opponents.
And first the Macedonians presented a petition
to him, in which they begged that all those who
asserted the Son to be unlike the Father, might
be expelled from the churches, and themselves
allowed to take their place. This supplication
was presented by Basil bishop of Ancyra, Sil-
vanus of Tarsus, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis,
Pasinicus of Zelae,^ Leontius of Comana, Calli-
crates of Claudiopolis, and Theophilus of Casta-
bala. The emperor having perused it, dismissed
them without any other answer than this : * I
abominate contentiousness ; but I love and honor
those who exert themselves to promote unanim-
ity.' When this remark became generally known,
it subdued the violence of those who were de-
sirous of altercation and thus was realized in
the design of the emperor. At this time the
real spirit of the Acacian sect, and their readi-
ness to accommodate their opinions to those
invested with supreme authority, became more
conspicuous than ever. For assembling them-
selves at Antioch in Syria, they entered into a
conference with Melitius, who had separated
from them a little before, and embraced the
' homoousian ' opinion. This they did because
they saw Melitius was in high estimation with
the emperor, who then resided at Antioch ; and
assenting therefore by common consent, they
drew up a declaration of their sentiments ac-
knowledging the homoousion and ratifying the
Nicene Creed and presented it to the emperor.
It was expressed in the following terms.

'The Synod of bishops convened at Antioch
out of various provinces, to the most pious and
beloved of God, our lord Jovian Victor Au-
gustus.

' That your piety has above all things aimed
at establishing the peace and harmony of the
church, we ourselves, most devout emperor, are
fully aware. Nor are we insensible that you
have wisely judged an acknowledgment of the


AovKtafdt. If this be adopted, then the Alexander suggested is
Lucian's Alexander of Abonoteichus. For a lucid and suggestive
reproduction of this story, see Froude, Short Studies on Great
Subjects, essay on Lucian.

' The MSS. and all the Greek texts read Zr\vii>v, making the
name ' Pasinicus Zenon, or Zeno.' The translation here given
assumes the alteration in the process of transcription of a single
letter, making the original 'lr\K!av, which probably means the city
of Zeleia, on the southeastern coast of the Euxme, famous for a
victory of Mithridates over Triarius, the lieutenant of Lucullus,
in 67 D.c.


III. 26.] ACCEPTANCE OF NICENE CREED BY MACEDONIANS.


95


orthodox faith to be the sum and substance
of this unity. Wherefore lest we should be in-
cluded in the number of those who adulterate
the doctrine of the truth, we hereby declare to
your piety that we embrace and steadfastly hold
the faith of the holy Synod formerly convened
at Niccea. Especially since the term homo-
ottsios, which to some seems novel- and inap-
propriate, has been judiciously explained by the
fathers to denote that the Son was begotten of
the Father's substance, and that he is like the
Father as to substance. Not indeed that any
passion is to be understood in relation to that
ineffable generation. Nor is the term ousia,
" substance," taken by the fathers in any usual
signification of it among the Greeks ; but it has
been employed for the subversion of what Arius
impiously dared to assert concerning Christ, viz.
— that he was made of things "not existing."
Which heresy the Anomoeans, who have lately
sprung up, still more audaciously maintain, to
the utter destruction of ecclesiastical unity. We
have therefore annexed to this our declaration,
a copy of the faith set forth by the bishops as-
sembled at Nicsea, with which also we are fully
satisfied. It is this : " We believe in one God
the Father Almighty," and all the rest of the
Creed in full. We, the undersigned, in present-
ing this statement, most cordially assent to its
contents. Melitius bishop of Antioch, Eusebius
of Samosata, Evagrius of Sicily, Uranius of Apa-
maea, Zoilus of Larissa, Acacius of Caesarea,
Antipater of Rhosus, Abramius of Urimi," Aris-
tonicus of Seleucia-upon-Belus, Barlamenus of
Pergamus, Uranius of Melitina, Magnus of Chal-
cedon, Eutychius of Eleutheropolis, Isacocis of
Armenia Major, Titus of Bostra, Peter of Sippi,*
Pelagius of Laodicaea, Arabian of Antros, Piso
of Adana through Lamydrion a presbyter, Sabi-
nian bishop of Zeugma, Athanasius of Ancyra
through Orphitus and Aetius presbyters, Irenion
bishop of Gaza, Piso of Augusta, Patricius of
Paltus through Lamyrion a presbyter, Anatolius
bishop of Beroea, Theotimus of the Arabs, and
Lucian of Area.' *

This declaration we found recorded in that
work of Sabinus, entitled A Collection of the
Acts of Synods. Now the emperor had resolved
to allay if possible the contentious spirit of the


* This word, whose original is ^ivov, is inserted by Valesius. If
it were omitted, the translation would be, ' which to some seems
acceptable.'

' On the present borders of Turkey and Persia.

* According to Valesius Hippi.

* The name of this city is variously given as Archis, Area, Arcse,
Areas, Arcsea, Arcena. It lies at the foot of Mount Lebanon. See
Joseph. Antiq. V. i and de Bella, XII. 13.


parties at variance, by bland manners and per-
suasive language toward them all ; declaring that
he ' would not molest any one on account of his
religious sentiments, and that he should love and
highly esteem such as would zealously promote
the unity of the church.' The philosopher
Themistius attests that such was his conduct, in
the oration he composed on his * consulate.'
For he extols the emperor for his overcoming
the wiles of flatterers by freely permitting every
one to worship God according to the dictates of
his conscience. And in allusion to the check
which the sycophants received, he facetiously
observes® that experience has made it evident
that such persons ' worship the purple and not
God ; and resemble the changeful Euripus,'^
which sometimes rolls its waves in one direction,
and at others the very opposite way.'


CHAPTER XXVI.
Death of the Emperor Jovian .

Thus did the emperor repress at that time the
impetuosity of those who were disposed to cavil :
and immediately departing fr9m Antioch, he
went to Tarsus in Cilicia, where he duly per-
formed the funeral obsequies of Julian, after
which he was declared consul. Proceeding
thence directly to Constantinople, he arrived at
a place named Dadastana, situated on the fron-
tiers of Galatia and Bithynia. There Themistius
the philosopher, with others of the senatorial
order, met him, and pronounced the consular
oration before him, which he afterwards recited
before the people at Constantinople. And in-
deed the Roman empire, blest with so excellent
a sovereign, would doubtless have flourished ex-
ceedingly, as it is likely that both the civil and
ecclesiastical departments would have been hap-
pily administered, had not his sudden death be-
reft the state of so eminent a personage. For
disease caused by some obstruction, having at-
tacked him at the place above mentioned during
the winter season, he died there on the 1 7th day
of February, in his own and his son Varronian's
consulate,^ in the thirty-third year of his age,
after having reigned seven months.

This book contains an account of the events
which took place in the spaae of two years and
five months.


« Themist. Oral. V. (p. 80, ed. Harduin).
' Straits between Euboea and the mainland.
' 364 A.D.


END OF THE THIRD BOOK.


BOOK IV.


CHAPTER I.

After Jovian' s Death, Valentinian is proclaimed
Emperor, and takes his Brother Valens as Col-
league in the Empire ; Valentinian holds the
Orthodox Faith, but Valens is an Arian.

The Emperor Jovian having died, as we have
said, at Dadastana, in his own consulate and that
of Varronian his son on the 1 7th of February,
the army leaving Galatia arrived at Nicaea in
Bithynia in seven days' march, and there unani-
mously proclaimed Valentinian emperor, on the
25th of February, in the same consulate. He
was a Pannonian by race, a native of the city of
Cibalis, and being entrusted with a military
command, had displayed great skill in tactics.
He was moreover endowed with such greatness
of mind, that he always appeared superior to
any degree of honor he might have attained.
As soon as they had created him emperor, he
proceeded forthwith to Constantinople ; and
thirty days after his own possession of the impe-
rial dignity, he made his brother Valens his col-
league in the empire. They both professed
Christianity, but did not hold the same Christian
creed : for Valentinian respected the Nicene
Creed ; but Valens was prepossessed in favor of
the Arian opinions. And this prejudice was
caused by his having been baptized by Eudoxius
bishop of Constantinople. Each of them was
zealous for the views of his own party ; but
when they had attained sovereign power, they
manifested very different dispositions. For pre-
viously in the reign of Julian, when Valentinian
was a military tribune, and Valens held a com-
mand in the emperor's guards, they both proved
their zeal for the faith ; for being constrained to
sacrifice, they chose rather to give up their mili-
tary rank than to do so and renounce Christian-
ity.' Julian, however, knowing the necessity of
the men to the state, retained them in their
respective places, as did also Jovian, his succes-
sor in the empire. Later on, being invested
with imperial authority, they were in accord in
the management of public afTiirs, but as regards
Christianity, as I have said, they behaved them-
selves very differently : for Valentinian while he
favored those who agreed with him in sentiment,
offered no violence to the Arians ; but Valens,

> a. III. 13.


in his anxiety to promote the Arian cause, griev-
ously disturbed those who differed from them,
as the course of our history will show. Now
at that time Liberius presided over the Roman
church ; and at Alexandria Athanasius was
bishop of the Homoousians, while Lucius had
been constituted George's successor by the
Arians. At Antioch Euzoius was at the head of
the Arians : but the Homoousians were di-
vided into two parties, of one of which Paulinus
was chief, and Melitius of the other. Cyril was
again constituted over the church at Jerusalem.
The churches at Constantinople were under the
government of Eudoxius, who openly taught the
dogmas of Arianism, but the Homoousians had
but one small edifice in the city wherein to hold
their assemblies. Those of the Macedonian
heresy who had dissentea from the Acacians at
Seleucia, then retained their churches in every
city. Such was the state of ecclesiastical affairs
at that time.^


CHAPTER n.

Valentinian goes into the West; Valens re-
mains at Constantinople, and grants the Re-
quest of the Macedonians to hold a Synod,
but persecutes the Adherents of the ' Homoou-


sion.


N


Of the emperors one, i.e. Valentinian, speed-
ily went to the western parts of the empire ;
for the exigencies of affairs required his presence
thither : meanwhile Valens, residing at Constan-
tinople, was addressed by most of the prelates
of the Macedonian heresy, requesting that
another Synod might be convened for the
correction oif the creed. The emperor sup-
posing they agreed in sentiment with Eudox-
ius and Acacius, gave them permission to
do so : they therefore made preparations for
assembling in the city of Lampsacus. But
Valens proceeded with the utmost despatch
toward Antioch in Syria, fearing lest the Persians
should violate the treaty into which they had
entered for thirty years in the reign of Jovian,
and invade the Roman territories. They how-
ever remained quiet ; and Valens employed this
season of external tranquillity to prosecute a

' Cf. v. 3.


IV. 6.]


VALENS PERSECUTES THE ORTHODOX.


97


war of extermination against all who acknowl-
edged the homoousion. Paulinus their bishop,
because of his eminent piety, he left unmolested.
Melitius he punished with exile : and all the
rest, as many as refused to communicate with
Euzoius, he drove out from the churches in
Antioch, and subjected to various losses and
punishments. It is even affirmed that he caused
many to be drowned in the river Orontes, which
flows by that city.

CHAPTER III.

While Valcns persecutes the Orthodox Chris-
tiafis in the East, a Usurper arises at Con-
stantinople named Procopius : and at the
Same Time an Earthquake and Inundation
take Place and injure Several Cities.

While Valens was thus occupied in Syria,
there arose a usurper at Constantinople named
Procopius ; who having collected a large body
of troops in a very short time, meditated an ex-
pedition against the emperor. This intelligence
created extreme solicitude in the emperor's mind
and checked for a while the persecution he had
commenced against all who dared to differ from
him in opinion. And while the commotions
of a civil war were painfully anticipated, an
earthquake occurred which did much damage to
many cities. The sea also changed its accus-
tomed boundaries, and overflowed to such an
extent in some places, that vessels might sail
where roads had previously existed ; and it
retired so much from other places, that the
ground became dry. These events happened
in the first consulate of the two emperors.^

CHAPTER IV.

The Macedonians hold a Synod at Lafnpsacus,
during a Period of Both Secular and Eccle-
siastical Agitation ; and after co7ifirming the
Antiochian C?'eed, and anathematizing that
promulgated at Ariminujn, they again rat-
ify the Deposition of Acacius and Eudoxius.

While these events were taking place there
could be no peace either in the church or in the
state. Now those who had been empowered by
the emperor to hold a council assem.bled at
Lampsacus in the consulate just mentioned :
this was seven years after the council of Seleu-
cia. There, after confirming the Antiochian
Creed, to which they had subscribed at Seleu-
cia,' they anathematized that which had been
set forth at Ariminum^ by their former associates


1 365 A.D. 1 Cf. II. 40.

* Cf. II. 37. Six years previous to the point of time reached by
jthe historian thus far; i.e. 359 a.d.


in opinion. They moreover again condemned
the party of Acacius and Eudoxius, and declared
their deposition to have been just.'' The civil
war which was then impending prevented Eu-
doxius bishop of Constantinople from either
gainsaying or revenging these determinations.
Wherefore Eleusius bishop of Cyzicus and his
adherents became for a little while the stronger
party ; inasmuch as they supported the views of
Macedonius, which although before but ob-
scurely known, acquired great publicity through
the Synod at Lampsacus. This Synod, I think,
was the cause of the increase of the Macedoni-
ans in the Hellespont ; for Lampsacus is situated
in one of the narrow bays of the Hellespont.
Such was the issue of this council.


CHAPTER V.

Engagement betiueen Valens atid Procopius near
Nacolia in Phrygia ; after jvhich the Usurper
is betrayed by his Chief Officers, and with them,
put to Death.

Under the consulate ^ of Gratian and Daga-
laifus in the following year, the war was begun.
For as soon as the usurper Procopius, leaving
Constantinople, began his march at the head of
his army toward the emperor, Valens hastened
from Antioch, and came to an engagement with
him near a city of Phrygia, called Nacolia. In
the first encounter he was defeated ; but soon
after he took Procopius alive, through the treach-
ery of Agilo and Gomarius, two of his generals,
whom he subjected to the most extraordinary
punishments.^ The traitors he caused to be ex-
ecuted by being sawn asunder, disregarding the
oaths he had sworn to them. Two trees standing
near each other being forcibly bowed down, one
of the usurper's legs was fastened to each of
them, after which the trees being suddenly per-
mitted to recover their erect position, by their
rise rent the tyrant into two parts ; and thus
torn apart the usurper perished.


CHAPTER VI.


v/


After the Death of Procopius Valens constrains
those 7vho composed the Synod, and All Chris-
tians, to profess Arianism.

The emperor having thus successfully termi-
nated the conflict, immediately began to move

' Cf. II. 40, end. > 366 A.D.

2 Ammianus Marcellinus, Rerum Gfstarum, XXVI. ix. 8-10,
says that Florentius and Barchalba, after the fight at Nacolia, deliv-
ered Procopius bound to Valens, and that Procopius was immedi-
ately beheaded, and Florentius and Barchalba soon underwent the
same punishment. Philostorgius also (IX.) relates that Procopius
was beheaded, and that Florentius, who delivered him to Valens,
was burnt.


98


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 6.


against the Christians, with the design of con-
verting every sect to Arianism. But he was
especially incensed against those who had com-
posed the Synod at Lampsacus, not only on ac-
count of their deposition of the Arian bishops,
but because they had anathematized the creed
published at Ariminum. On arriving therefore
at Nicomedia in Bithynia, he sent for Eleusius
bishop of Cyzicus, who, as I have before said,'
closely adhered to the opinions of Macedonius.
Therefore the emperor having convened a coun-
cil of Arian bishops, commanded Eleusius to
give his assent to their faith. At first he refused
to do so, but on being terrified with threats of
banishment and confiscation of property, he was
intimidated and assented to the Arian belief. Im-
mediately afterwards, however, he repented ; and
returning to Cyzicus, bitterly complained in
presence of all the people, asserting that his ac-
quiescence was due to violence, and not of his
own choice. He then exhorted them to seek
another bishop for themselves, since he had been
compelled to renounce his own opinion. But
the inhabitants of Cyzicus loved and venerated
him too much to think of losing him ; they
therefore refused to be subject to any other
bishop, nor would they permit him to retire
from his own church : and thus continuing un-
der his oversight, they remained steadfast in
their own heresy.


CHAPTER VII.

Eunomius supersedes Eleusius the Macedonian
in the See of Cyzicus. His Origin and Imi-
tation of A'etius, whose Amanuensis he had
been.

The bishop of Constantinople being informed
of these circumstances, constituted Eunomius
bishop of Cyzicus, inasmuch as he was a per-
son able by his eloquence to win over the minds
of the multitude to his own way of thinking.
On his arrival at Cyzicus an imperial edict was
published in which it was ordered that Eleusius
should be ejected, and Eunomius installed in
his place. This being carried into effect, those
who attached themselves to Eleusius, after erect-
ing a sacred edifice without the city, assembled
there with him. But enough has been said of
Eleusius : let us now give some account of Eu-
nomius. He had been secretary to Aetius, sur-
named Athens, of whom we have before spoken,^
and had learnt from conversing with him, to imi-
tate his sophistical mode of reasoning ; being lit-
tle aware that while exercising himself in framing
fallacious arguments, and in the use of certain
insignificant terms, he was really deceiving him-


> Cf. 11.38.


> II. 35, end.


self. This habit however inflated him with
pride, and he fell into blasphemous heresies,
and so became an advocate of the dogmas of
.Arius, and in various ways an adversary to the
doctrines of truth. .\nd as he had but a very
slender knowledge of the letter of Scripture, he
was wholly unable to enter into the spirit of it.
Yet he abounded in words, and was accustomed
to repeat the same thoughts in different terms,
without ever arriving at a clear explanation of
what he had proposed to himself. Of this his
seven books On the Apostle's Epistle to the Ro-
mans, on which he bestowed a quantity of vain
labor, is a remarkable proof: for although he
has employed an immense number of words in
the attempt to expound it, he has by no means
succeeded in apprehending the scope and object
of that epistle. All other works of his extant
are of a similar character, in which he that would
take the trouble to examine them, would find a
great scarcity of sense, amidst a profusion of
verbiage. This Eunomius Eudoxius promoted to
the see of Cyzicus ; ^ who being come thither,
astonished his auditors by the extraordinary dis-
play of his ' dialectic ' art, and thus a great sen-
sation was produced at Cyzicus. At length the
people unable to endure any longer the empty
and assumptions parade of his language, drove
him out of their city. He therefore withdrew
to Constantinople, and taking up his abode with
Eudoxius, was regarded as a titular' bishop.
But lest we should seem to have said these
things for the sake of detraction, let us hear
what Eunomius himself has the hardihood to
utter in his sophistical discourses concerning
the Deity himself, for he uses the following lan-
guage : ' God knows no more of his own sub-
stance than we do ; nor is this more known to
him, and less to us : but whatever we know
about the Divine substance, that precisely is
known to God ; and on the other hand, what-
ever he knows, the same also you will find with-
out any difference in us.' This and many other
similar tedious and absurd fallacies Eunomius
was accustomed to draw up in utter insensibility
to his own folly. On what account he afterwards
separated from the Arians, we shall state in its
proper place.*

' Sozom. VI. 8, gives the same account; but Philostorgius (V. 3)
and Theodoret (//. E. II. 37 and 39) say that Eunomius was made
bishop of Cyzicus under the Emperor Constantius immediately after
the Synod of Seleucia. He was banished by Valens because he
favored the usurper Procopius.

' a\ok<iXn<:, defined by Sophocles {Grrtk Lexicon of the Rom.
and Byzantine Periods') as suspended. It appears, however, that
among the civil and military officers in the Koman system there
were some who bore the title without being concerned m the man-
aqemcnt of their offices, and that these were termed vacanles and
therefore that Socrates is using the Greek equivalent of a Latin
term and applying it in ecclesiastical matters as its original was
applied in civil and military affairs. Cf., on the position of bish-
ops without churches Bingham, Christ. Antiq. IV. ii. 14. This
system of clerics without charges was abu<^ed so much that the Coun-
cil of Chalcedon (Canon 6) forbade further ordination sine tiiulo.

< See chap. 3, and on the Eunomians with their subsequent for-
tunes, v. 24.


IV. 9-]


ANCIENT ORACLE PROVES TRUE.


99


CHAPTER VIII.

Of the Oracle found inscribed on a Stone, when
the Walls of Chalcedon were demolished by
Order of the Emperor Valens.

An order was issued by the emperor that the
walls of Chalcedon, a city opposite to Byzan-
tium, should be demolished : for he had sworn
to do this, after he should have conquered the
usurper, because the Chalcedonians had sided
with the usurper, and had used insulting lan-
guage toward Valens,^ and shut their gates
against him as he passed by their city. In con-
sequence of the imperial decree, therefore, the
walls were razed and the stones were conveyed
to Constantinople to serve for the formation of
the public baths which are called Constantianse.^
On one of these stones an oracle was found
engraven, which had lain concealed for a long
time, in which it was predicted that when the
city should be supplied with abundance of water,
then should the wall serve for a bath ; and that
innumerable hordes of barbarous nations having
overrun the provinces of the Roman empire,
and done a great deal of mischief, should them-
selves at length be destroyed. We shall here
insert this oracle for the gratification of the
studious : ^

' When nymphs their mystic dance with wat'ry feet
Shall tread through proud Byzantium's stately street;
When rage the city wall shall overthrow,
Whose stones to fence a bathing-place shall go :
Then savage lands shall send forth myriad swarms,
Adorned with golden locks aud burnished arms.
That having Ister's silver streams o'erpast,
Shall Scythian fields and Moesia's meadows waste.
But when with conquest flushed they enter Thrace,
Fate shall assign them there a burial-place.'

Such was the prophecy. And indeed it after-
wards happened, that when Valens by building
an aqueduct supplied Constantinople with abun-
dance of water, the barbarous nations made
various irruptions, as we shall hereafter see. But
it happened that some explained the prediction
otherwise. For when that aqueduct was com-
pleted, Clearchus the prefect of the city built a
stately bath, to which the name of * the Plentiful
Water ' * was given, in that which is now called
the Forum of Theodosius : on which account
the people celebrated a festival with great re-

1 Ammianus Marcellinus {Rertitn Gestarum XXVI. viii.
2 seq.) says, ' From the walls of Chalcedon they uttered reproaches
to him and insultingly reviled him as Sabaiarius. For, sabaia is a poor
drink made of wheat or barley in lllyricum (whence Valens came).'
On the Pannonian or Illyrian origin of Valens, see IV. i. It appears
also that the Pannonians were accustomed to live on poor diet in
general.

* Sozom. VIII. 21, mentions these baths. Am. Marcellinus
{Rerum. Gestarum, XXXI. i. 4) relates that Valens built a bath
out of the stones of the walls of Chalcedon. So also Themist. Or at.
Deceti. ad Valeiitcm, and Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 25; the latter
calls it a ' subterraneous and aerial river.' Zonaras and Cedrenus,
however, affirm that the structure built was not a bath, but an aque-
duct. Cf Cedrenus, I. 543 (p. 310, B).

* Cedrenus, I. 543 (p. 310, B). « AaifiiAet uSwp.


joicings, whereby there was, say they, an accom-
plishment of those words of the oracle,

' their mystic dance with wat'ry feet
Shall tread through proud Byzantium's stately street.'

But the completion of the prophecy took place
afterwards. While the demolition was in pro-
gress the Constantinopolitans besought the
emperor to suspend the destruction of the walls ;
and the inhabitants of Nicomedia and Nicaea
sending from Bithynia to Constantinople, made
the same request. But the emperor being ex-
ceedingly exasperated against the Chalcedonians,
was with difficulty prevailed upon to listen to
these petitions in their favor : but that he might
perform his oath, he commanded that the walls
should be pulled down, while at the same time
the breaches should be repaired by being filled
up with other small stones. Whence it is that
in the present day one may see in certain parts
of the wall very inferior materials laid upon
prodigiously large stones, forming those unsightly
patches which were made on that occasion. So
much will be sufficient on the walls of Chalce-
don.

CHAPTER IX.

Valens persecutes the Novatians, because they
accepted the Orthodox Faith.

The emperor however did not cease his per-
secution of those who embraced the doctrine
of the homoousiofi, but drove them away from
Constantinople : and as the Novatians acknowl-
edged the same faith, they also were subje-cted
to similar treatment. He commanded that their
churches should be shut up, also their bishop
they sent into exile. His name was Agelius, a
person that had presided over their churches
from the time of Constantine, and had led an
apostolic life : for he always walked barefoot,
and used but one coat, observing the injunction
of the gospel.' But the emperor's displeasure
against this sect was moderated by the efforts of
a pious and eloquent man named Marcian, who
had formerly been in military service at the
imperial palace, but was at that time a presbyter
in the Novatian church, and taught Anastasia
and Carosa, the emperor's daughters, grammar ;
from the former of whom the public baths yet
standing, which Valens erected at Constantino-
ple, were named.^ From respect for this person
therefore the Novatian churches which had been


' Matt. X. 10.

2 Am. Marcellinus {Rerum Gestarum, XWl. 4. 14). 'n speak-
ing of Procopius, the usurper, says: ' Procopius . . . resorted to
the .'Vnastasian baths, named from the sister of Constantine ' ; from
which it appears that either {i) there were two baths of the same
name, or (2') the baths here alluded to were named after Constan-
tine's sister and renamed on the occasion of their being repaired or
altered, or (3) that Socrates is in error. From the improbabilities
connected with (i) and (2) we may infer that (3) is the right view.


lOO


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 9.


for some time closed, were again opened. The
Arians however would not suffer this people to
remain undisturbed, for they disliked them on
account of the sympathy and love the Novatians
manifested toward the Homoousians, with whom
they agreed in sentiment. Such was the state
of affairs at that time. We may here remark
that the war against the usurper Procopius was
terminated about the end of May, in the consu-
late^ of Gratian and Dagalaifus.

CHAPTER X.

Birth of I'akntinian the Younger.

Soon after the conclusion of this war, and
under the same consulate,^ a son was born to
Valentinian, the emperor in the Western parts,
to whom the same name as his father's was given.
For Gratian had been born previously to his be-
coming emperor.

CHAPTER XI.

Hail of Extraordinary Size ; and Earthquakes
in Bithynia and the Hellespont.

On the 2d of June of the following year, in
the consulate ^ of Lupicin and Jovian, there fell
at Constantinople hail of such a size as would
fill a man's hand. Many affirmed that this hail
had fallen as a consequence of the Divine dis-
/ pleasure, because of the emperor's having ban-
I ished several persons engaged in the sacred
I ministry, those, that is to say, who refused to
communicate with Eudoxius.^ During the same
consulate, on the 24th of August, the emperor
Valentinian proclaimed his son Gratian Augustus.
In the next year,^ when Valentinian and Valens
were a second time consuls, there happened on
the nth of October, an earthquake in Bithynia
which destroyed the city of Nicaea on the eleventh
day of October. This was about twelve years
after Nicomedia had been visited by a similar
catastrophe. Soon afterwards the largest por-
tion of Germa in the Hellespont was reduced to
ruins by another earthquake. Nevertheless no
impression was made on the mind of either
Eudoxius the Arian bishop, or the emperor
Valens, by these occurrences ; for they did not
desist from their relentless persecution of those
who dissented from them in matters of faith.
Meanwhile these convulsions of the earth were

' 366 A.D.

' Sozemen (VI. lo) says the same. There were two Valentin-
ians in the second generation : one a son of Valens, and another
the son of Valentinian the Elder. According to Idatius' Fasti, it
was the former that was born during the consulate of Gratian and
Dagalaifus: so that Socrates was in error here, confusing perhaps
the two younger Valentinians. Valesius adduces other reasons
proving tne same, which it is unnecessary to repeat here.

> 367 A.D. * See II. 43. =• 368 A.D.


regarded as typical of the disturbances which
agitated the churches : for many of the clerical
body were sent into exile, as we have stated ;
Basil and Gregory alone, by a special dispensa-
tion of Divine Providence, being on account of
their eminent piety exempted from this punish-
ment. The former of these individuals was bishop
of Caesarea in Cappadocia ; while Gregory pre-
sided over Nazianzus,^ a little city in the vicinity
of Caesarea. But we shall have occasion to
mention both Basil and Gregory again in the
course of our history.^


CHAPTER XII.

The Macedonians, pressed by the Emperor's
Violence toward thetn, send a Deputation to
Liberius Bishop of Rome, and subscribe the
Nicene Creed.

When the maintainers of the 'homoousian'
doctrine had been thus severely dealt with, and
put to flight, the persecutors began afresh to
harass the Macedonians ; who impelled by fear
rather than violence, send deputations to one
another from city to city, declaring the necessity
of appealing to the emperor's brother, and also
to Liberius bishop of Rome : and that it was far
better for them to embrace their faith, than to
communicate with the party of Eudoxius. They
sent for this purpose Eustathius bishop of Se-
bastia, who had been several times deposed,
Silvanus of Tarsus in Cilicia, and Theophilus of
Castabala in the same province ; charging them
to dissent in nothing from Liberius concerning
the faith, but to enter into communion with the
Roman church, and confirm the doctrine of
the homoousion. These persons therefore pro-
ceeded to Old Rome, carrying with them the
letters of those who had separated themselves
from Acacius at Seleucia. To the emperor they
could not have access, he being occupied in the
Gauls with a war against the Sarmatae ; but they
presented their letters to Liberius. He at first
refused to admit them ; saying they Avere of the
Arian faction, and could not possibly be received
into communion by the church, inasmuch as they
had rejected the Nicene Creed. To this they
replied that by change of sentiment they had
acknowledged the truth, having long since re-
nounced the Anomoean ' Creed, and avowed
the Son to be in every way 'like the Father':
moreover that they considered the terms ' like '

* If Socrates means to speak with precision here of the offices
occupied by these men during the year which his narrative has
reached he is mistaken, for Basil became bishop of Cxsarea in
Cappadocia the year following, and Gregory was made bishop, not
of Nazianzus at this time, but of Sisima. He did not, however,
enter on the duties of this bishopric as he says in his letters.

° Chap. 26.

« See II. 35, and Hefele, Hist, of the Ch. Councilt, Vol. II.
p. 218 seg.


IV. 12.]


LETTER OF THE ARIANS TO LIBERIUS.


loi


{homoios) and homoousios to have precisely
the same import. When they had made this
statement, Liberius demanded of them a written
confession of their faith ; and they accordingly
presented him a document in which the sub-
stance of the Nicene Creed was inserted. I have
not introduced here, because of their length,
the letters from Smyrna, Asia, and from Pisidia,
Isauria, Pamphylia, and Lycia, in all which places
they had held Synods. The written profession
which the deputies sent with Eustathius, de-
livered to Liberius, is as follows :

' To our Lord, Brother, and fellow-Minister
Liberius : Eustathius, Theophilus, and Silvanus,
salutations in the Lord.

'■ On account of the insane opinion of heretics,
who cease not to introduce occasions of offense
into the catholic churches, we being desirous of
checking their career, come forward to express
our approbation of the doctrines recognized by
the Synod of orthodox bishops which has been
convened at Lampsacus, Smyrna, and various
other places : from which Synod we being con-
stituted a deputation, bring a letter to your
benignity and to all the Italian and Western
bishops, by which we declare that we hold and
maintain the catholic faith which was established
in the holy council at Nicaea under the reign of
Constantine of blessed memory, by three hun-
dred and eighteen bishops, and has hitherto
continued entire and unshaken ; in which creed
the term homoousios is holily and devoutly em-
ployed in opposition to the pernicious doc-
trine of Arius. We therefore, together with the
aforesaid persons whom we represent, profess
under our own hand, that we have held, do hold,
and will maintain the same faith even unto the
end. We condemn Arius, and his impious doc-
trine, with his disciples, and those who agree
with his sentiments ; as also the same heresy
of Sabellius,^ the Patripassians,^ the Marcion-
ites,* the Photinians,^ the Marcellians," that of
Paul of Samosata,' and those who countenance
such tenets ; in short all the heresies which are
opposed to the aforesaid sacred creed, which
was piously and in a catholic spirit set forth by
the holy fathers at Nicaea. But we especially
anathematize that form of the creed which was
recited at the Synod of Ariminum,* as altogether
contrary to the before-mentioned creed of the


' See I. 5, and note.

' The Patripassians were a sect of the early Church (end of
second century), who asserted the identity of the Son with the
Father. And, as on being confronted with the question whether
it was the Father that suffered on the cross they answered in the
affirmative, they were called Patri-passians. Their leader was
Praxeas. See Tertull. Adv. Praxeam (the whole treatise is meant
to be a refutation of this heresy).

* Followers of the well-known Gnostic leader of the second cen-
tury. For his peculiar views, see Tertull. Adv. Marcionem ; Epi-
phan. H'Fres. XLII.; also Smith and Wace, Diet, of Christ. Biog.,
under Marcion, and ecclesiastical histories.

^ Cf. II. i8 and 29. ' See note, I. 36.

« Cf. I. 36 ; II. 20. « See II. 37.


holy Synod of Nicaea, to which the bishops at
Constantinople affixed their signatures, being
deceived by artifice and perjury, by reason of its
having been brought from Nice,^ a town of
Thrace. Our own creed, and that of those
whose delegates we are, is this :

' " We believe in one God the Father Al-
mighty, the Maker of all things visible and invis-
ible : and in one only-begotten God, the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God ; begotten of the
Father ; that is of the substance of the Father ;
God of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God ; begotten not made, of the same substance
with the Father, through whom all things were
made which are in heaven, and which are upon
the earth : whp for us men, and for our salvation,
descended, became incarnate, and was made
man ; suffered, and rose again the third day ;
ascended into the heavens, and will come to
judge the living and the dead. [We believe]
also in the Holy Spirit. But the Catholic and
Apostohc Church of God anathematizes those
who assert that ' there was a time when he was
not,' and ' that he was not before he was begot-
ten,' and that * he was made of things which are
not ' ; or those that say ' the Son of God is of
another hypostasis ' or ' substance than the
Father,' or that ' he is mutable, or susceptible of
change.'

' " I, Eustathius, bishop of the city of Sebastia,
with Theophilus and Silvanus, delegates of the
Synod of Lampsacus, Smyrna, and other places,
have voluntarily subscribed this confession of
faith with our own hands. And if, after the
publication of this creed, any one shall presume
to calumniate either us, or those who sent us, let
him come with the letters of your holiness before
such orthodox bishops as your sanctity shall
approve of, and bring the matter to an issue
with us before them ; and if any charge shall be
substantiated, let the guilty be punished." '

Liberius having securely pledged the delegates
by this document, received them into commun-
ion, and afterwards dismissed them with this
letter :

The Letter of Liberius Bishop of Rome, to the
Bishops of the Macedonians.

To our beloved brethren and fellow-ministers,
Evethius, Cyril, Hyperechius, Uranius, Heron,
Elpidius, Maximus, Eusebius, Eucarpius, Heor-
tasius. Neon, Eumathius, Faustinus, Proclinus,
Pasinicus, Arsenius, Severus, Didymion, Brittan-
iiis, Callicrates, Dalmatius, ^desius, Eusto-
chius, Ambrose, Gelonius, Pardalius, Macedonius,
Paul, Marcellus, Heraclius, Alexander, Adolius,
Marcian, Sthenelus, John, Macer, Charisius,


* See II. 37. As it appears from V. 4, Liberius was actually
deceived by the artifice.


I02


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 12.


Silvanus, Photinus, Anthony, Aythus, Celsus,
Euphranon, Milesius, Patricius, Severian, Euse-
bius, Eumolpius, Athanasius, Diophantiis, Meno-
dorus, Diodes, Chrysampelus, Neon, Eugenius,
Eustathius, Callicrates, Arsenius, Eugenius, Mar-
tyrius, Hieracius, Leontius, Philagrius, Lucius,
and to all the orthodox bishops in the East,
Liberius bishop of Italy, and the bishops through-
out the West, salutations always in the Lord.

Your letters, beloved brethren, resplendent
with the light of faith, delivered to us by our
highly esteemed brethren, the bishops Eusta-
thius, Silvanus, and Theophilus, brought to us
the much longed-for joy of peace and concord :
and this chiefly because they have demonstrated
and assured us that your opinion and sentiments
are in perfect harmony with those both of our
insignificance, and also with those of all the
bishops in Italy and the Western parts. We ac-
knowledge this to be the Catholic and Apostolic
faith, which until the time of the Synod at Nic?ea
had continued unadulterated and unshaken. This
creed your legates have professed that they them-
selves hold, and to our great joy have obliterated
every vestige and impression of an injurious sus-
picion, by attesting it not only in word, but also
in writing. We have deemed it proper to sub-
join to these letters a copy of this their declara-
tion, lest we should leave any pretext to the
heretics for entering into a fresh conspiracy, by
which they might stir up the smouldering em-
bers of their own malice, and according to their
custom, rekindle the flames of discord. More-
over our most esteemed brethren, Eustathius,
Silvanus, and Theophilus, have professed this
also, both that they themselves, and also your
love, have always held, and will maintain unto
the last, the creed approved of at Nicaea by 318
Orthodox Bishops ; which contains the perfect
truth, and both confutes and overthrows the
whole swarm of heretics. For it was not of
their own will, but by Divine appointment that
so great a number of bishops was collected
against the madness of Arius, as equaled that
of those by whose assistance blessed Abraham
through faith destroyed so many thousand of
his enemies.'" This faith being comprehended
in the terms hypostasis and homoousios, like a
strong and impregnable fortress checks and re-
pels all the assaults and vain machinations of
Arian perverseness. Wherefore when all the
Western bishops were assembled at Ariminum,
whither the craft of the Arians had drawn them,
in order that either by deceptive persuasions, or
to speak more truly, by the coercion of the sec-
ular power, they might erase, or indirecdy re-
voke what had been introduced into the creed
with so much prudence, their subtlety was not

'* Gen. xiv. 14.


of the least avail. For almost all those who at
.Ariminum were either allured into error, or at
that time deceived, have since taken a right view
of the matter ; and after anathematizing the ex-
position of faith set forth by those who were
convened at Ariminum, have subscribed the
Catholic and Apostolic Creed which was pro-
mulgated at Nicrea. They have entered into
communion with us, and regard the dogma of
.■\rius and his disciples with increased aversion,
and are even indignant against it. Of which
fact when the legates of your love saw the in-
dubitable evidences, they annexed yourselves to
their own subscription ; anathematizing Arius,
and what was transacted at Ariminum against
the creed ratified at Nicaea, to which even you
yourselves, beguiled by perjury, were induced to
subscribe. Whence it appeared suitable to us
to write to your love, and to accede to your
just request, especially since we are assured by
the profession of your legates that the Eastern
bishops have recovered their senses, and now
concur in opinion with the orthodox of the
West. We, further give you to understand, lest
ye should be ignorant of it, that the blasphemies
of the Synod of Ariminum have been anathema-
tized by those who seem to have been at that
time deceived by fraud, and that all have ac-
knowledged the Nicene Creed. It is fit there-
fore that it should be made generally known by
you that such as ha^e had their faith vitiated by
violence or guile, may now emerge from hereti-
cal darkness into the Divine light of catholic
liberty. Moreover whosoever of them, after this
council, shall not disgorge the poison of corrupt
doctrine, by abjuring all the blasphemies of
Arius, and anathematizing them, let them know
that they are themselves, together with Arius
and his disciples and the rest of the serpents,
whether Sabellians, Patripassians, or the fol-
lowers of any other heresy, dissevered and
excommunicated from the assemblies of the
Church, which does not admit of illegitimate
children. May God preserve you steadfast,
beloved brethren.

When the adherents of Eustathius had re-
ceived this letter, they proceeded to Sicily,
where they caused a Synod of Sicilian bishops
to be convened, and in their presence avowed
the homoousian faith, and professed their adher-
ence to the Nicene Creed : then having received
from them also a letter to the same effect as
the preceding, they returned to those who had
sent them. They on their part, on the receipt
of the letters of Liberius, sent delegates from
city to city to the prominent supporters of the
doctrine of the homoousion, exhorting them
to assemble simultaneously at Tarsus in Cilicia,
in order to confirm the Nicene Creed, and ter-


IV. 15.]


PERSECUTION OF THE ORTHODOX BY VALENS.


103


minate all the contentions which had subse-
quently arisen. And indeed this would prob-
ably have been accomplished had not the Arian
bishop, pAidoxius, who at that time possessed
great influence with the emperor, thwarted their
purpose ; for on learning of the Synod that had
been summoned to meet [at Tarsus], he became
so exasperated that he redoubled his persecution
against them. That the Macedonians by send-
ing legates to Liberius were admitted to com-
munion with him, and professed the Nicene
Creed, is attested by Sabinus himself, in his
Collection of Synodical Transactions.


CHAPTER XIII.

Eunomius separates from Eudoxius ; a Dis-
turbance is raised at Alexandria by Eudoxius,
and Athanasius flees i?ito Voluntary Exile
again, but in Consequence of the Clamors of
the People the Emperor recalls and re-estab-
lishes him in his See.

About the same time Eunomius^ separated
himself from Eudoxius, and held assemblies
apart, because after he had repeatedly entreated
that his preceptor Aetius might be received into
communion, Eudoxius continued to oppose it.
Now Eudoxius did this against his preference,
for he did not reject the opinion with Aetius
since it was the same as his own ; ^ but he yielded
to the prevailing sentiment of his own party,
who objected to Aetius as heterodox. This was
the cause of the division between Eunomius
and Eudoxius, and such was the state of things
at Constantinople. But the church at Alexandria
was disturbed by an edict of the praetorian
prefects, sent hither by means of Eudoxius.
Whereupon Athanasius, dreading the irrational
impetuosity of the multitude, and fearing lest
he should be regarded as the author of the ex-
cesses that might be committed, concealed him-
self for four entire months in an ancestral tomb.
Inasmuch however as the people, on account
of thfeir affection for him, became seditious in
impatience of his absence, the emperor, on as-
certaining that on this account agitation pre-
vailed at Alexandria, ordered by his letters that
Athanasius should be suffered to preside over
the churches without molestation ; and this was
the reason why the Alexandrian church enjoyed
tranquillity until the death of Athanasius. How
the Arian faction became possessed of the
churches after his decease, we shall unfold in
the course of our history.^


* Eunomius adopted the standpoint and also the views of Aetius
and gave them his own name. Briefly his fundamental principle
was that the Son is absolutely unlike the Father in substance, and
hence a creature among other creatures, a mere man.

» See II. 35. 3 Cf. chap. 21.


CHAin^ER XIV.

The Arians ordain Demophilus after the Death
of Eudoxius at Constantinople ; but the Or-
thodox Party constitute Evagrius his Successor.

The Emperor Valens leaving Constantinople
again set out towards Antioch ; but on his arrival
at Nicomedia, a city of Bithynia, his progress was
arrested by the following circumstances. Eudoxius
the bishop of the Arian church who has been in
possession of the seat of the Constantinopolitan
church for nineteen ^ years, died soon after the
emperor's departure from that city, in the third
consulate^ of Valentinian and Valens. The
Arians therefore appointed Demophilus to suc-
ceed him ; but the Homoousians considering
that an opportunity was afforded them, elected
a certain Evagrius, a person who maintained
their own principles ; and Eustathius, who had
been bishop of Antioch, formally ordained him.
He had been recalled from exile by Jovian, and
had at this time privately come to Constantino-
ple, for the purpose of confirming the adherents
to the doctrine of the homoousion.


CHAPTER XV.

The Emperor banishes Evagrius and Eustathius.
The Arians persecute the Orthodox.

When this had been accomplished the Arians
renewed their persecution of the Homoousians :
and the emperor was very soon informed of what
had taken place, and apprehending the subver-
sion of the city in consequence of some popular
tumult, immediately sent troops from Nicome-
dia to Constantinople ; ordering that both he
who had been ordained, and the one who had
ordained him, should be apprehended and sent
into exile in different regions. Eustathius there-
fore was banished to Bizya a city of Thrace ;
and Evagrius was conveyed to another place.
After this the Arians, becoming bolder, grievously
harassed the orthodox party, frequently beating
them, reviUng them, causing them to be impris-
oned, and fined ; in short they practiced dis-
tressing and intolerable annoyances against them.
The sufferers were induced to appeal to the em-
peror for protection against their adversaries if
haply they might obtain some relief from this
oppression. But whatever hope of redress they
might have cherished from this quarter, was
altogether frustrated, inasmuch as they thus
merely spread their grievances before him who
was the very author of them.

' Epiphanius Scholasticus reads ^eicoti'a for itKo.fvvia. ; if he be
followed, the incumbency of the bishopric of Constantinople by
Eudoxius lasted seven years.

' 370 A.D.


I04


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. i6.


CHAPTER XVI.

Certain Presbyters burnt in a Ship by Order of
Valens. Famine in Phrygia.

Certain pious men of the clerical order, eighty
in number, among whom Urbanus, Theodore,
and Menedemus were the leaders, proceeded to
Nicomedia, and there presented to the emperor
a supplicatory petition, informing him and com-
plaining of the ill-usage to which they had been
subjected. The emperor was filled with wrath ;
but dissembled his displeasure in their presence,
and gave Modestus the prefect a secret order
to apprehend these persons, and put them to
death. The manner in which they were de-
stroyed being unusual, deserves to be recorded.
The prefect fearing that he should excite the
populace to a seditious movement against him-
self, if he attempted the public execution of so
many, pretended to send the men away into
exile. Accordingly as they received the intelli-
gence of their destiny with great firmness of mind,
the prefect ordered that fhey should be embarked
as if to be conveyed to their several places of
banishment, having meanwhile enjoined on the
sailors to set the vessel on fire, as soon as they
reached the mid sea, that their victims being so
destroyed, might even be deprived of burial.
This injunction was obeyed ; for when they
arrived at the middle of the Astacian Gulf, the
crew set fire to the ship, and then took refuge
in a small barque which followed them, and so
escaped. Meanwhile it came to pass that a
strong easterly wind blew, and the burning ship
was roughly driven but moved faster and was
preserved until it reached a port named Dacidi-
zus, where it was utterly consumed together with
the men who were shut up in it. Many have
asserted that this impious deed was not suffered
to go unpunished : for there immediately after
arose so great a famine throughout all Phrygia,
that a large proportion of the inhabitants were
obliged to abandon their country for a time, and
betake themselves some to Constantinople and
some to other provinces. For Constantinople,
notwithstanding the vast population it supplies,
yet always abounds with the necessaries of life,
all manner of provisions being imported into it
by sea from various regions ; and the Euxine
which lies near it, furnishes it with wheat to any
extent it may require.'


Antioch in Syria, and during his residence there
cnielly persecuted such as would not embrace
Arianism. For not content with ejecting out
of almost all the churches of the East those
who maintained the ' homoousian ' opinion, he
inflicted on them various punishments besides.
He destroyed a greater number even than be-
fore, delivering them up to many different kinds
of death, but especially drowning in the river.


CHAPTER XVII.

The Emperor Valens, 7vhile at Antioch, again
persecutes the Adherents of the ' Homoousion.'

The Emperor Valens, little affected by the
calamities resulting from the famine, went to

1 Cf. Herodot. VII. 147.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Events at Edessa : Constancy of the Devout
Citizens, and Courage of a Pious Woman.

But we must here mention certain circum-
stances that occurred at Edessa in Mesopotamia.
There is in that city a magnificent church ' dedi-
cated to St. Thomas the Apostle, wherein, on
account of the sanctity of the place, religious
assemblies are incessantly held. The Emperor
Valens wishing to inspect this edifice, and hav-
ing learnt that all who usually congregated there
were opposed to the heresy which he favored,
he is said to have struck the prefect with his
own hand, because he had neglected to expel
them thence also. As the prefect after submit-
ting to this ignominy, was most unwillingly con-
strained to subserve the emperor's indignation
against them, — for he did not desire to effect
the slaughter of so great a number of persons,
— he privately suggested that no one should be
found there. But no one gave heed either to
his admonitions or to his menaces j for on the
following day they all crowded to the church.^
And when the prefect was going towards it
with a large military force in order to satisfy
the emperor's rage, a poor woman leading her
own little child by the hantl hurried hastily by^
on her way to the church, breaking through the
ranks of the prefect's company of soldiers.
The prefect irritated at this, ordered her to
be brought to him, and thus addressed her :
' Wretched woman ! whither are you running in
so disorderly a manner?' She replied, 'To
the same place that others are hastening.'
' Have you not heard,' said he, ' that the prefect
is about to put to death all that shall be found
there?' 'Yes,' said the woman, ' and therefore
I hasten that I may be found there.' 'And
whither are you dragging that little child ? ' said
the prefect: the woman answered, 'That he
also may be made worthy of martyrdom.'^ The


' The kind of church here meant was a memorial structure to
a martyr, erected where his relics were deposited, and was called
MapTvpioi'. See Bingham, Christ. Aiitig. VIII. 1.

' The same church which above was called a ^apriipioi' from
its origin, is here called eiiicTTJpiot totto?, from its use ('a place of
prayer').

•'' Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall, chap. 16, quotes a number
of extracts from Sulpicius Scvenis and Ignatius, showing the honor
in which martyrdom was held in the early church, and the eagerness


rv. 22.]


SUPERSTITION AND CRUELTY BY VALENS.


105


prefect on hearing these things, conjecturing
that a similar resolution actuated the others
who were assembled there, immediately went
back to the emperor, and informed him that all
were ready to die in behalf of their own faith.
He added that it would be preposterous to
destroy so many persons at one time, and thus
persuaded the emperor to control his wrath.
In this way were the Edessenes preserved from
being massacred by order of their sovereign.


CHAPTER XIX.

Slaughter of Many Persons by Valens on Ac-
count of their Names, in Consequence of a
Heathen Prediction}

I The cruel disposition of the emperor was at
this time abused by an execrable demon, who
induced certain curious persons to institute an
inquiry by means of necromancy as to who
should succeed Valens on the throne. To their
magical incantations the demon gave responses
not distinct and unequivocal, but as the general
practice is, full of ambiguity ; for displaying the
four letters 0, e, o, and 8, he declared that the
name of the successor of Valens began with
these ; and that it was a compound name.
When the emperor was apprised of this oracle,
instead of committing to God, who alone can
penetrate futurity, the decision of this matter,
in contravention of those Christian principles to
which he pretended the most zealous adherence,
he put to death very many persons of whom he
had the suspicion that they aimed at the sover-
eign power : thus such as were named ' Theo-
dore,' ' Theodotus,' ' Theodosius,' ' Theodulus,'
and the like, were sacrificed to the emperor's
fears ; and among the rest was Theodosiolus, a
very brave man, descended from a noble family
in Spain. Many persons therefore, to avoid the
danger to which they were exposed, changed their
names, giving up those which they had received
from their parents in infancy as dangerous.
This will be enough on that subject.


CHAPTER XX.

Death of Athanasiiis, and Elevation of Peter to
His See}

It must be said that as long as Athanasius,
bishop of Alexandria, was aUve, the emperor,


with which it was sought. To check the excess of zeal which was
thus manifested, the Council of Elvira, in 306 a.d., passed a canon
(its sixtieth) to the following intent: ' that if any one should over-
throw idols, and should therefore be put to death, inasmuch as jhis
is not written in the Gospel nor found done among the apostles at
any time, such a one should not be received among the martyrs."

1 Amra. Marcellinus, Reritm Gertarum, XXIX. i. ■2()seq.

1 Sozomen, VI. 19; Theodoret, H. E. IV. 20.


restrained by the Providence of God, abstained
from molesting Alexandria and Egypt : indeed
he knew very well that the multitude of those
who were attached to Athanasius was very great ;
and on that account he was careful lest the
public affairs should be hazarded, by the Alex-
andrians, who are an irritable race, being excited
to sedition. But Athanasius, after being engaged
in so many and such severe conflicts on behalf
of the church, departed this life in the second
consulate^ of Gratian and Probus, having gov-
erned that church amidst the greatest perils
forty-six years. He left as his successor Peter^
a devout and eloquent man.


CHAPTER XXI.

The Arians are allowed by the Emperor to im-
prison Peter and to set Lucius over the See of
Alexandria. \/

Upon this the Arians, emboldened by their
knowledge of the emperor's religious senti-
ments, again took courage, and without delay
informed him of the circumstance. He was
then residing at Antioch. Then indeed Euzoius
who presided over the Arians of that city,
eagerly embracing the favorable opportunity thus
presented, begged permission to go to Alexan-
dria, for the purpose of putting Lucius the Arian
in possession of the churches there. The em-
peror acceded to this request, and as speedily
as possible Euzoius proceeded forthwith to Alex-
andria, attended by the imperial troops. Magnus,
also, the emperor's treasurer, went with him.
Moreover an imperial mandate had been issued
to Palladius, the governor of Egypt, enjoining
him to aid them with a military force. Where-
fore having apprehended Peter, they cast him
into prison ; and after dispersing the rest of the
clergy, they placed Lucius in the episcopal chair.


CHAPTER XXII.

Silence of Sabinus on the Misdeeds of the Arians ;
Flight of Peter to Rome ; Massacre of the
Solitaries at the Instigation of the* Arians.

Of the outrages perpetrated upon the instal-
lation of Lucius, and the treatment of those who
were ejected, both in the courts and outside of
the courts, and how some were subjected to a
variety of tortures, and others sent into exile even
after this excruciating process, Sabinus takes not
the slightest notice. In fact, being half disposed

* 371 A.D. But Jerome, Chronic. II. (ninth year of Valens),
makes the consecration of Athanasius' successor in 373 a.d., and
hence also the death of Athanasius himself in the same year. The
later date is now universally accepted.


io6


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


/

[IV. 22.


to Arianism himself, he purposely veils the atroci-
ties of his friends. Peter, however, has exposed
them, in the letters he addressed to all the
churches, when he had escaped from prison.
For this [bishop] having managed to escape
from prison, fled to Damasus, bishop of Rome.
The Arians though not very numerous, becom-
ing thus possessed of the Alexandrian churches,
soon after obtained an imperial edict directing
the governor of Egypt to expel not only from
Alexandria but even out of the country, the
favorers of the ' homoousian ' doctrine, and all
such as were obnoxious to Lucius. After this
they assailed and disturbed and terribly harassed
the monastic institutions in the desert ; armed
men rushed in the most ferocious manner upon
those who were utterly defenceless, and who
would not lift an arm to repel their violence : so
that numbers of unresisting victims were in this
manner slaughtered with a degree of wanton
cruelty beyond description.


CHAPTER XXIII.

The Deeds of Some Holy Persons who devoted
themselves to a Solitary Life}

Since I have referred to the monasteries of
Egypt, it may be proper here to give a brief ac-
count of them. They were founded probably at
a very early period, but were greatly enlarged
and augmented by a devout man whose name
was Ammoun. In his youth this person had an
aversion to matrimony ; but when some of his
relatives urged him not to contemn marriage,
but to take a wife to himself, he was prevailed
upon and was married. On leading the bride
with the customary ceremonies from the ban-
quet-room to the nuptial couch, after their mu-
tual friends had withdrawn, he took a book-
containing the epistles of the apostles and read
to his wife Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians,
explaining to her the apostle's admonitions to
married persons.' Adducing many external con-
siderations besides, he descanted on the incon-
veniences and discomforts attending matrimonial
intercourse, the pangs of child-bearing, and the
trouble and anxiety connected with rearing a
family. He contrasted with all this the advan-
tages of chastity ; described the liberty, and
immaculate purity of a life of continence ; and
affirmed that virginity places persons in the

' On the growth of the monastic system, see Bingham, Eccl.
Antiq. VII.; on its philosophy, briefly, Bennett, Christian Ar-
ch<ro). p. 468. Socrates uses Palladius" Historia Lausiaca copi-
ously in this chapter.

' ii.iKo\> airoo-ToAiitoi'. The books of the New Testament came
to be divided into the two classes of ' gospels ' and ' apostolic epistles,'
the first being called t\>a.yyt\\.ov or (iiaycfAia, and the second,
on-d^TToAo?, an-o(TToAoi or fiiBXiov anotrTo^iKov. Cf. Epiph. Hctr,
XLII. 10. Euthal. Diacon. (Ed. Mipi<,-Vol. LXXXV. col.
yao, C. '1 Cor. vii. 10 seq.


nearest relation to the Deity. By these and
other arguments of a similar kind, he per-
suaded his virgin bride to renounce with him
a secular life, prior to their having any con-
jugal knowledge of each other. Having taken
this resolution, they retired together to the
mountain of Nitria, and in a hut there inhab-
ited for a short time one common ascetic apart-
ment, without regarding their difference of sex,
being according to the apostles, 'one in Christ.'*
But not long after, the recent and unpolluted
bride thus addressed Ammoun : ' It is unsuit-
able,' said she, ' for you who practice chastity,
to look upon a woman in so confined a dwelling ;
let us therefore, if it is agreeable to you, perform
our exercise apart.' This agreement again was
satisfactory to both, and so they separated, and
spent the rest of their lives in abstinence from
wine and oil, eating dry bread alone, sometimes
passing over one day, at others fasting two, and
sometimes more. Athanasius, bishop of Alex-
andria, asserts in his Life of Anthony^ that
the subject of his memoir who was contempo-
rary with this Ammoun, saw his soul taken up
by angels after his decease. Accordingly, a
great number of persons emulated Ammoun's
manner of life, so that by degrees the mountains
of Nitria and Scitis were filled with monks, an
account of whose lives would require an express
work. As, however, there were among them
persons of eminent piety, distinguished for their
strict discipline and apostolic lives, who said
and did many things worthy of being recorded,
\ deem it useful to intenveave with my history
a few particulars selected out of the great
number for the information of my readers. It
is said that Ammoun never saw himself naked,
being accustomed to say that ' it became not
a monk to see even his own person exposed.'
And when once he wanted to pass a river, but
was unwilling to undress, he besought God to
enable him to cross without his being obliged
ito break his resolution ; and immediately an
angel transported him to the other side of the
river. Another monk named Didymus * lived
entirely alone to the day of his death, although
he had reached the age of ninety years. Ar-
Scnius, another of them, would not separate
young delinquents from communion, but only
those that were advanced in age : ' for,' said he,
' when a young person is excommunicated he
becomes hardened ; but an elderly one is soon
sensible of the misery of excommunication.'
Pior was accustomed to take his food as he
walked along. As a certain one asked him,
'Why do you eat thus?' 'That I may not


* Gal. iii. 28. What Socrates here says of Ammoun is attributed
by Theodoret (//. E. IV. 12) to Pelagius, who afterwards became
bishop of Laodicea.

' Atbanas. Vit. Anton. 60. • Cf. chap, 25.


IV. 23-]


HABITS AND SAYINGS OF THE MONKS.


107


seem,' said he, 'to make eating serious business,
but rather a thing done by the way.' To another
putting the same question he rephed, ' Lest
even in eating my mind should be sensible of
corporeal enjoyment.' Isidore affirmed that he
had not been conscious of sin even in thought
for forty years ; and that he had never consented
either to lust or anger. Pambos being an illit-
erate man went to some one for the purpose of
being taught a psalm ; and having heard the
first verse of the thirty-eighth psalm, ' I said I
will take heed to my ways, that I offend not
with my tongue,' "^ he departed without staying
to hear the second verse, saying, ' this one will
suffice, if I can practically acquire it.' And
when the person who had given him the verse
reproved him because he had not seen him for
the space of six months, he answered that he
had not yet learnt to practice the verse of the
psalm. After a considerable lapse of time, be-
ing asked by one of his friends whether he had
made himself master of the verse, his answer
was, ' I have scarcely succeeded in accomplish-
ing it during nineteen years.' A certain individual
having placed gold in his hands for distribution
to the poor, requested him to reckon what
he had given him. ' There is no need of count-
ing,' said he, ' but of integrity of mind.' This
same Pambos, at the desire of Athanasius the
bishop, came out of the desert to Alexandria ;
and on beholding an actress there, he wept.
When those present asked him why he wept, he
replied, ' Two causes have affected me : one is
the destruction of this woman ; the other is that
I exert myself less to please my God than she
does to please obscene characters.' Another
said that ' a monk who did not work ought to
be regarded as on a level with the covetous man.'
Piterus was well-informed in many branches of
natural philosophy, and was accustomed fre-
quently to enter into expositions of the princi-
ples sometimes of one and sometimes of an-
other department of science, but he always
commenced his expositions with prayer. There
were also among the monks of that period, two
of the same name, of great sanctity, each being
called Macarius ; one of whom was from Upper
Egypt, the other from the city of Alexandria.
Both were celebrated for their ascetic discipline,
the purity of their life and conversation, and the
miracles which were wrought by their hands.
The Egyptian Macarius performed so many
cures, and cast out so many devils, that it would
require a distinct treatise to record all that the
grace of God enabled him to do. His manner
toward those who resorted to him was austere,
yet at the same time calculated to inspire venera-
tion. The Alexandrian Macarius, while in all

' According to the LXX.


respects resembling his Egyptian namesake, dif-
fered from him in this, that he was always cheer-
ful to his visitors ; and by the affability of his
manners led many young men to asceticism.
Evagrius" became a disciple of these men, ac-
quired from them the philosophy of deeds,
whereas he had previously known that which
consisted in words only. He was ordained dea-
con at Constantinople by Gregory of Nazianzus,
and afterwards went with him into Egypt, where
he became acquainted with these eminent per-
sons, and emulated their course of conduct, and
miracles were done by his hands as numerous
and important as those of his preceptors. Books
were also composed by him of very valuable
nature, one of which is entitled The Monk, or,
0?i Actwe Virtue ; another The Gnostic^ or.
To htm who is deemed wo7-thy of Knowledge :
this book is divided into fifty chapters. A
third is designated Antirrheiicus, and con-
tains selections from the Holy Scriptures against
tempting spirits, distributed into eight parts,
according to the number of the arguments. He
wrote moreover Six Hundred Prognostic Prob-
lems, and also two compositions in verse, one
addressed To the Monks living in Communi-
ties, and the other To the Virgin. Whoever
shall read these productions will be convinced
of their excellence. It will not be out of place
here, I conceive, to subjoin to what has been
before stated, a few things mentioned by him
respecting the monks. These are his words : '"

It becomes us to enquire into the habits of the
pious monks who have preceded us, in order that
we may correct ourselves by their example : for
undoubtedly very many excellent things have been
said and done by them. One of them was accus-
tomed to say, that ' a drier and not irregular diet
combined with love, would quickly conduct a
monk into the haven of tranquillity.' The same
individual freed one of his brethren from being
troubled by apparitions at night, by enjoining
him to minister while fasting to the sick. And
being asked why he prescribed this : ' Such
affections,' said he, 'are by nothing so effectually
dissipated as by the exercise of compassion.'
A certain philosopher of those times coming to
Anthony the Just, said to him, ' How can you
endure, father, being deprived of the comfort of
books ? ' * My book, O philosopher,' replied
Anthony, ' is the nature of things that are made,
and it is present whenever I wish to read the
words of God.' That 'chosen vessel,'" the
aged Egyptian Macarius, asked me, why the

' Cf. Palladius, Hist. Lausiaca, chap. 86. But Palladtus says
that Evagrius was ordained by Gregory of Nyssa, not of Nazianzus.
Cf. Sozomen, VI. 30.

" Palladius calls this work 'I«pa 'Sacred [matter].' Hist. Lau-
siaca, 86.

"> Cf. Coteler. Eccl. Gr. Mon. 3. 59, containing also other frag-
ments of Evagrius.

" Acts ix. 15.


io8


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 23.


strength of the faculty of memory is impaired
by cherishing the remembrance of injury
received from men ; while by remembering
those done us by devils it remains uninjured ?
And when I hesitated, scarcely knowing what
answer to make, and begged him to account for
it : ' Because,' said he, ' the former is an affec-
tion contrary to nature, and the latter is con-
formable to the nature of the mind.' Going on
one occasion to the holy father Macarius about
mid-day, and being overcome with the heat and
thirst, I begged for some water to drink : ' Con-
tent yourself with the shade,' was his reply, ' for
many who are now journeying by land, or sailing
on the deep, are deprived even of this.' Dis-
cussing with him afterwards the subject of ab-
stinence, ' Take courage, my son,' said he : ' for
twenty years I have neither eaten, drunk, nor
slept to satiety ; my bread has always been
weighed, my water measured, and what little
sleep I have had has been stolen by reclining
myself against a wall.' ^- The death of his
father was announced to one of the monks :
* Cease your blasphemy,' said he to the person
that told him ; ' my father is immortal.' One
of the brethren who possessed nothing but a
copy of the Gospels, sold it, and distributed the
price in food to the hungry, uttering this memo-
rable saying — ' I have sold the book which
says, " Sell that thou hast and give to the
poor." '" There is an island about the northern
part of the city of Alexandria, beyond the lake
called Maria, where a monk from Parembole"
dwells, in high repute among the Gnostics. This
person was accustomed to say, that all the deeds
of the monks were done for one of these five
reasons ; — on account of God, nature, custom,
necessity, or manual labor. The same also
said that there was only one virtue in nature,
but that it assumes various characteristics accord-
ing to the dispositions of the soul : just as the
light of the sun is itself without form, but
accommodates itself to the figure of that which
receives it. Another of the monks said, ' I
withdraw myself from pleasures, in order to cut
off the occasions of anger : for I know that it
always contends for pleasures, disturbing my
tranquillity of mind, and unfitting me for the
attainment of knowledge.' One of the aged
monks said that * Love knows not how to
keep a deposit either of provisions or money.'
He added, ' I never remember to have been
twice deceived by the devil in the same
thing.' Thus wrote Evagrius in his book en-
titled Practice}^ And in that which he called
The Gnostic he says, ' We have learned from

" Cf. Ezra iv. 10, 11. '•''• Matt. xix. 21.

'* Parembole is a village near Alexandria, mentioned by Atha-
nasius in his second Apol. against the Arians, who names \Iacarius
as its presbyter.

" Sec aoove, III. 7.


Gregory the Just, that there are four virtues^
having distinct characteristics : — prudence and
fortitude, temperance and justice. That it is
the province of prudence to contemplate the
sacred and intelligent powers apart from expres-
sion, because these are unfolded by wisdom : of
fortitude to adhere to truth against all opposi-
tion, and never to turn aside to that which is
unreal : of temperance to receive seed from the
chief husbandman,"' but to repel him who would
sow over it seed of another kind : and finally^
of justice to adapt discourse to every one, ac-
cording to their condition and capacity ; stating
some things obscurely, others in a figurative
manner, and explaining others clearly for the
instruction of the less intelligent.' That pillar
of truth, Basil of Cappadocia, used to say that
' the knowledge which men teach is perfected
by constant study and exercise ; but that which
proceeds from the grace of God, by the practice
of justice, patience, and mercy.' That the for-
mer indeed is often developed in persons who
are still subject to the passions ; whereas the lat-
ter is the portion of those only who are superior
to their influence, and who during the season of
devotion, contemplate that peculiar light of the
mind which illumines them. That luminary of
the Egyptians, holy Athanasius, assures us ' that
Moses was commanded to place the table on
the north" side. Let the Gnostics therefore
understand what wind is contrary to them, and
so nobly endure every temptation, and minister
nourishment with a willing mind to those who
apply to them.' Serapion, the angel of the
church of the Thmuitae, declared that ' the
mind is completely purified by drinking in spir-
itual knowledge ' : that ' charity cures the in-
flammatory tendencies of the soul ' ; and that
' the depraved lusts which spring up in it are
restrained by abstinence.' * Exercise thyself
continually,' said the great and enlightened
teacher Uidymus, * in reflecting on providence
and judgment ; and endeavor to bear in memory
the material of whatever discourses thou mayst
have heard on these topics, for almost all fail in
this respect. Thou wilt find reasonings con-
cerning judgment in the difference of created
forms, and the constitution of the universe : ser-
mons on providence comprehended in those
means by which we are led from vice and igno-
rance to virtue and knowledge.'

These few extracts from Evagrius we thought
it would be appropriate to insert here. There
was another excellent man among the monks,
named Ammonius, who had so little interest
in secular matters, that when he went to Rome
with Athanasius, he chose to investigate none


>° Matt. xiii. 24.


" Ex. xxvi. 35.


IV. 24.]


MONKS PERSECUTED.


109


of the magnificent works of that city, con-
tenting himself with examining the Cathedral
of Peter and Paul only. This same Ammo-
nius on being urged to enter upon the epis-
copal office, cut off his own right ear, that
by mutilation of his person he might disqualify
himself for ordination. But when long after-
wards Evagrius, whom Theophilus, bishop of
Alexandria, wished to make a bishop, having
effected his escape without maiming himself in
any way, afterwards happened to meet Ammo-
nius, and told him jocosely, that he had done
wrong in cutting off his own ear, as he had by
that means rendered himself criminal in the
sight of God. To which Ammonius replied,
' And do you think, Evagrius, that you will not
be punished, who from self-love have cut out
your own tongue, to avoid the exercise of that
gift of utterance which has been committed to
you?' There were at the same time in the
monasteries very many other admirable and
devout characters whom it would be too tedious
to enumerate in this place, and besides if we
should attempt to describe the life of each, and
the miracles they did by means of that sanctity
with which they were endowed, we should neces-
sarily digress too far from the object we have in
view. Should any one desire to become ac-
quainted with their history, in reference both to
their deeds and experiences and discourses for
the edification of their auditors, as well as how
wild beasts became subject to their authority,
there is a specific treatise^* on the subject, com-
posed by the monk Palladius, who was a disciple
of Evagrius, and gives all these particulars in
minute detail. In that work he also mentions
several women, who practiced the same kind of
austerities as the men that have been referred
to. Both Evagrius and Palladius flourished a
short time after the death of Valens. We must
now return to the point whence we diverged.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Assault upon the Monks, and Bafiishmentof their
Superiors, who exhibit Aliraciilous Power.

The emperor Valens having issued an edict
commanding that the orthodox should be per-
secuted both in Alexandria and in the rest of
Egypt, depopulation and ruin to an immense
extent immediately followed : some were dragged
before the tribunals, others cast into prison, and
many tortured in various ways, and in fact all
sorts of punishments were inflicted upon persons
who aimed only at peace and quiet. When
these outrages had been perpetrated at Alexan-

" Hist. Lausiaca (Vol. XXXIV. in Mign^'s Patrologia
Graca) .


dria just as Lucius thought proper, Euzoius re-
turned to Antioch, and Lucian the Arian, at-
tended by the commander-in-chief of the army
with a considerable body of troops, immediately
proceeded to the monasteries of Egypt, where
the general in person assailed the assemblage of
holy men with greater fury even than the ruth-
less soldiery. On reaching these solitudes they
found the monks engaged in their customary
exercises, praying, healing diseases, and casting
out devils. Yet they, regardless of these ex-
traordinary evidences of Divine power, suffered
them not to continue their solemn devotions,
but drove them out of the oratories by force.
Rufinus declares that he was not only a witness
of these cruelties, but also one of the sufferers.
Thus in them were renewed those things which
are spoken of by the apostle : ^ * for they were
mocked, and had trial of scourgings, were
stripped naked, put in bonds, stoned, slain with
the sword, went about in the wilderness clad in
sheep-skins and goat-skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not
worthy, wandering in deserts, in mountains, in
dens and caves of the earth.' In all these
things ' they obtained a good report ' for their
faith and their works, and the cures which the
grace of Christ wrought by their hands. But
as it appears Divine Providence permitted them
to endure these evils, ' having for them provided
something better,'^ that through their sufferings
others might obtain the salvation of God, and
this subsequent events seem to prove. When
therefore these wonderful men proved superior
to all the violence which was exercised toward
them, Lucius in despair advised the military
chief to send the fathers of the monks into
exile : these were the Egyptian Macarius, and
his namesake of Alexandria, both of whom were
accordingly banished to an island where there
was no Christian inhabitant, and in this island
there was an idolatrous temple, and a priest whom
the inhabitants worshiped as a god. On the
arrival of these holy men at the island, the
demons of that place were filled with fear and
trepidation. Now it happened at the same time
that the priest's daughter became suddenly pos-
sessed by a demon, and began to act with great
fury, and to overturn everything that came in
her way ; nor was any force sufficient to restrain
her, but she cried with a loud voice to these
saints of God, saying : — * Why are ye come
here to cast us out from hence also ? ' ^ Then
did the men there also display the pecuUar
power which they had received through Divine
grace : for having cast out the demon from the
maid, and presented her cured to her father,
they led the priest himself, and also all the in-


i Heb. xi. 36-38. * Heb. xi. 40.


' Matt. viii. 29.


no


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 24.


habitants of the island to the Christian faith.
Whereupon they immediately brake their images
in pieces, and changed the form of their temple
into that of a church ; and having been bap-
tized, they joyfully received instruction in the
doctrines of Christianity. Thus these marvel-
ous individuals, after enduring persecution on
account of the ' homoousian ' faith, were them-
selves more approved, became the means of
salvation to others, and confirmed the truth.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of Didymus the Blind Man}

About the same period God brought into
observation another faithful person, deeming it
worthy that through him faith might be witnessed
unto : this was Didymus, a most admirable and
eloquent man, instructed in all the learning of
the age in which he flourished. At a very early
age, when he had scarcely acquired the first
elements of learning, he was attacked by disease
in the eyes which deprived him of sight. But
God compensated to him the loss of corporeal
vision, by bestowing increased intellectual acu-
men. For what he could not learn by seeing,
he was enabled to acquire through the sense of
hearing ; so that being from his childhood en-
dowed with excellent abilities, he soon far sur-
passed his youthful companions who possessed
the keenest sight. He made himself master of
the principles of grammar and rhetoric with
astonishing facility ; and proceeded thence to
philosophical studies, dialectics, arithmetic, mu-
sic, and the various other departments of knowl-
edge to which his attention was directed ; and
he so treasured up in his mind these branches
of science, that he was prepared with the utmost
readiness to enter into a discussion of these
subjects with those who had become conversant
therewith by reading books. Not only this, but
he was so well acquainted with the Divine
oracles contained in the Old and New Testa-
ment that he composed several treatises in ex-
position of them, besides three books on the
Trinity. He published also commentaries^ on
Origen's book Of Principles, in which he
commends these writings, saying that they are
excellent, and that those who calumniate their
author, and speak slightingly of his works, are
mere cavilers. * For,' says he, ' they are desti-
tute of sufficient penetration to comprehend
the profound wisdom of that extraordinary man.'
Those who may desire to form a just idea of
the extensive erudition of Didymus, and the

> Sozom. III. 15; Theodoret, IV. 26; Pallad. Hist. Lausiac.

4; Jerom. tie Script. Eccl. 100.

* Mentioned by Jerome, aai'. Rufinum, i.


intense ardor of his mind, must peruse with
attention his diversified and elaborate works.
It is said that after Anthony had conversed for
some time with this Didymus, long before the
reign of Valens, when he came from the desert
to Alexandria on account of the Arians, perceiv-
ing the learning and intelligence of the man, he
said to him', ' Didymus, let not the loss of your
bodily eyes distress you : for you are deprived
of such eyes merely as are the common posses-
sion of gnats and flies ; rather rejoice that you
have eyes such as angels see with, by which the
Deity himself is discerned, and his light com-
prehended.' This address of the pious Anthony
to Didymus was made long before the times we
are describing : in fact Didymus was then re-
garded as the great bulwark of the true faith,
answering the Arians, whose sophistic cavilings
he fully exposed, triumphantly refuting all their
vain subtleties and deceptive reasonings,

CHAPTER XXVI.

Of Basil of Ccesarea, and Gregory of
Nazianzus} ^

Now Providence opposed Didymus to the'
Arians at Alexandria. But for the purpose of
confuting them in other cities, it raised up Basil
of Caesarea and Gregory of Nazianzus ; con-
cerning these it will be reasonable to give a
brief account in this place. Indeed the uni-
versally prevalent memory of the men would be
enough as a token of their fame ; and the ex-
tent of their knowledge is sufficiently percep-
tible in their writings. Since, however, the
exercise of their talents was of great service to
the Church, tending in a high degree to the
maintenance of the catholic faith, the nature
of my history obliges me to take particular
notice of these two persons. If any one should
compare Basil and (Gregory with one another,
and consider the life, morals, and virtues of
each, he would find it difficult to decide to
which of them he ought to assign the pre-emi-
nence : so equally did they both appear to
excel, whether you regard the rectitude of their
conduct, or their deep acquaintance with Greek
literature and the sacred Scriptures. In their
youth they were pupils at -Athens of Himerius^
and Prohaeresius,-'' the most celebrated sophists
of that age : subsequently they frequented the

' For full accounts of the lives of these eminent men, see Smith
and Wace, Diet, of Christ. Biog., and the sources and literature
therein referred to.

» Himcrius, a native of Prusias (mod. Broussa) in Bithynia,
flourished about 360 a.d. as a sophist under Julian the Apostate.
He published various discourses, which, according to Photius, con-
tained insidious attacks on Christianity. Cf. Eunapius, p. 153,
under title Prohirresius; Photius, Bihl. Cod. 165.

' Prohscresius was a native of CjEsarea in Cappadocia, and taught
in Athens a short time before Libanius. Cf. Eunapius, Prohcere-
iius, par. 129-162.


IV. 27-]


BASIL OF C^SAREA AND GREGORY NAZIANZEN.


Ill


school of Libanius * at Antioch in Syria, where
they cultivated rhetoric to the utmost. Having
been deemed worthy of the profession of soph-
istry, they were urged by many 'of their
friends to enter the profession of teaching elo-
quence ; others would have persuaded them to
practice law : but despising both these pursuits,
they abandoned their former studies, and em-
braced the monastic life. Having had some
slight taste of philosophical science from him
who then taught it at Antioch, they procured
Origen's works, and drew from them the right
interpretation of the sacred Scriptures; for the
fame of Origen was very great and widespread
throughout the whole world at that time ; after
a careful perusal of the writings of that great
man, they contended against the Arians with
manifest advantage. And when the defenders
of Arianism quoted the same author in confir-
mation, as they imagined, of their own views,
these two confuted them, and clearly proved
that their opponents did not at all understand
the reasoning of Origen. Indeed, although Eu-
nomius,'^ who was then their champion, and many
others on the side of the Arians were considered
men of great eloquence, yet whenever they at-
tempted to enter into controversy with Gregory
and Basil, they appeared in comparison with
them ignorant and illiterate. Basil being or-
dained to the office of deacon, was by Meletius,
bishop of Antioch, from that rank elevated to
the bishopric of Caesarea in Cappadocia, which
was his native country. Thither he therefore
hastened, fearing lest these Arian dogmas should
have infected the provinces of Pontus ; and in
order to counteract them, he founded several
monasteries, diligently instructed the people in
his own doctrines, and confirmed the faith of
those whose minds were wavering. Gregory
being constituted bishop of Nazianzus," a small
city of Cappadocia over which his own father
had before presided, pursued a course similar to
that which Basil took ; for he went through the
various cities, and strengthened the weak in faith.
To Constantinople in particular he made frequent
visits, and by his ministrations there, comforted
and assured the orthodox believers, wherefore a
short time after, by the suffrage of many bishops,
he was made bishop of the church at Constanti-
nople. When intelligence of the proceedings

* This is doubted by Valesius on the ground that Gregory in his
autobiography (in verse) says that he was thirty years of age when
he left Athens, where his friends wished him to stay and teach
rhetoric; but if he stayed at Athens until the thirtieth year of his age,
it is not likely that he could have studied with Libanius after that
time. So also Rufinus, H. E. II. 9.

'' Cf. chap. 7 of the present book.

" Rufinus {H. E. II. 9) says tlus. But from Gregory's own
works [Or-ai. VIII.) it appears thai he was not made bishop of
Nazianzus but assistant to his father, and on the express condition
that he should not succeed his father. He was first consecrated
bishop of Sasimi bv Basil the Great, from thence transferred to Con-
stantinople, but resigned that bishopric (V. 7) and retired to Nazian-
zus, where he remained bishop until he chose his successor there.


of these two zealous and devoted men reached
the ears of the emperor Valens, he immediately
ordered Basil to be brought from Caesarea to
Antioch ; " where being arraigned before the tri-
bunal of the prefect, that functionary asked him
' why he would not embrace the emperor's faith ? '
Basil with much boldness condemned the errors
of that creed which his sovereign countenanced,
and vindicated the doctrine of the homoousion :
and when the prefect threatened him with death,
' Would,' said Basil, ' that I might be released
from the bonds of the body for the truth's sake.'
The prefect having exhorted him to reconsider
the matter more seriously, Basil is reported to
have said, ' I am the same to-day that I shall be
to-morrow : but I wish that you had not changed
yourself At that time, therefore, Basil remained
in custody throughout the day. It happened,
however, not long afterwards that Galates, the
emperor's infant son, was attacked with a dan-
gerous malady, so that the physicians despaired
of his recovery ; when the empress Dominica,
his mother, assured the emperor that she had
been greatly disquieted in her dreams by fearful
visions, which led her to beheve that the child's
illness was a chastisement on account of the ill
treatment of the bishop. The emperor after a
little reflection sent for Basil, and in order to
prove his faith said to him, ' If the doctrine you
maintain is the truth, pray that my son may not
die.' ' If your majesty should believe as I do,'
replied Basil, ' and the church should be unified,,
the child shall live.' To these conditions the
emperor would not agree : ' God's will concern-
ing the child will be done then,' said Basil ; as
Basil said this the emperor ordered him to be
dismissed ; the child, however, died shortly after.
Such is an epitome of the history of these dis-
tinguished ecclesiastics, both of whom have left
us many admirable works, some of which Rufi-
nus says he has translated into Latin. Basil had
two brothers, Peter and (Gregory ; the former of
whom adopted Basil's monastic mode of life ;
while the latter emulated his eloquence in teach-
ing, and completed after his death Basil's treatise
on the S/x Days' Work, which had been left un-
finished. He also pronounced at Constantinople
the funeral oration of Meletius, bishop of Anti-
och ; and many other orations of his are still
extant.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Of Gregory Thaumaturgus (the Wonder-
worker).

Birr since from the likeness of the name, and
the title of the books attributed to Gregory,


' Sozoraen (VI. 16) says that Valens came from Antioch to
Caesarea and ordered Basil to be brought before the prefect of the
praetorium. This account agrees better with what both Gregory of
Nazianzus and Gregory of Nyssa say of this experience of Basil.


I 12


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 27.


persons are liable to confound very different
parties, it is important to notice that Gregory
of Pontus is a different person. He was a native
of Neocaesarea in Pontus, of greater antiquity
than the one above referred to, inasmuch as he
was a disciple of Origen.' This Gregory's fame
was celebrated at Athens, at l^erytus, throughout
the entire diocese of Pontus, and I might almost
add in the whole world. When he had finished
his education in the schools of Athens, he went
to Berytus to study civil law, where hearing that
Origen expounded the Holy Scriptures at Csesa-
rea, he quickly proceeded thither ; and after
his understanding had been opened to perceive
the grandeur of these Divine books, bidding
adieu to all further cultivation of the Roman
laws, he became thenceforth inseparable from
Origen, from whom having acquired a knowledge
of the true philosophy, he was recalled soon after
by his parents and returned to his own country ;
and there, whil& still a layman, he performed
many miracles, healing the sick, and casting out
devils even by his letters, insomuch that the
pagans were no less attracted to the faith by his
acts, than by his discourses. Pamphilus Martyr
mentions this person in the books which he wrote
in defence of Origen ; to which there is added
a commendatory oration of Gregory's, composed
in praise of Origen, when he was under the
necessity of leaving him. There were then, to
be brief, several Gregories : the first and most
ancient was the disciple of Origen ; the second
was the bishop of Nazianzus ; the third was
Basil's brother ; and there was another Gregory ^
whom the Arians constituted bishop during the
exile of Athanasius. But enough has been said
respecting them.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of Novatiis and his Followers. The Noi^atians
of Phrygia alter the Time of keeping Easter,
following Jetvish Usage.

About this time the Novatians' inhabiting
Phrygia changed the day for celebrating the
Feast of Easter. How this happened I shall
state, after first explaining the reason of the
strict discipline which is maintained in their
church, even to the present day, in the provinces
of Phrygia and Paphlagonia. Novatus," a pres-
byter of the Roman Church, separated from it,

• On Gregory Thaumaturgus in general, see Euseb. H. E.
VI. 30.

2 Cf. II. II. .

' On the Novatians and their schism, see Schaff, Hist, of the
Christ. Ch. Vol. !• P. 450| 451; Neander, Hist, of Christ. Ch.
Vol. I. p. 237-248. On Socrates" attitude toward Novatianism, sec
Introd. p. ix. Cf. also Euseb. //. K. VI. 43.

' His right name was Novatian, although the Greek writers call
him uniformly Navatus, iRnoring or confusini; him with another
person whose name is strictly Novatus. Cf. Jerome, Scriptor.
EccUs. LXX.; also Smith and Wace, Diet, of Christ. Biog.


because Cornelius the bishop received into com-
munion believers who had sacrificed during the
persecution which the Emperor Decius'' had
raised ag'ainst the Church. Having seceded on
this account, on being afterwards elevated to the
episcopacy by such bishops as entertained simi-
lar sentiments, he wrote to all the churches ■* that
' they should not admit to the sacred mysteries
those who had sacrificed ; but exhorting them
to repentance, leave the pardoning of their of-
fense to (iod, who has the power to forgive all
sin.' Receiving such letters, the parties in the
various provinces, to whom they were addressed,
acted according to their several dispositions and
judgments. As he asked that they should not
receive to the sacraments those who after bap-
tism had committed any deadly sin^ this ap-
peared to some a cruel and merciless course :
but others received the rule as just and condu-
cive to the maintenance of discipline, and the
promotion of greater devotedness of life. In
the midst of the agitation of this question, letters
arrived from Cornelius the bishop, promising
indulgence to delinquents after baptism. Thus
as these two persons wrote contrary to one an-
other, and each confirmed his own procedure
by the testimony of the Divine word, as it usually
happens, every one identified himself with that
view which favored his previous habits and incli-
nations. Those who had pleasure in sin, encour-
aged by the license then granted them, took
occasion from it to revel in every species of
criminality. Now the Phrygians appear to be
more temperate than other nations, and are sel-
dom guilty of swearing. The Scythians, on the
other hand, and the Thracians, are naturally of
a very irritable disposition : while the inhabitants
of the East are addicted to sensual pleasures.
But the Paphlagonians and Phrygians are prone
to neither of these vices ; nor are the sports of
the circus and theatrical exhibitions in much
estimation among them even to the present day.
And for this reason, it seems to me, these peo-
ple, as well as others of the same character, so
readily assented to the letters then written by
Novatus. Fornication and adultery are regarded
among them as the grossest enormities : and it
is well known that there is no race of men on
the face of the earth who more rigidly govern
their passions in this respect than the Phrygians
and Paphlagonians. The same reason I think
had force with those who dwelt in the West and
followed Novatus. Yet although for the sake of
stricter discipline Novatus became a separatist,


' This was the great Seventh Persecution, and the first which
historians agree in calling strJAtly ' general.' It took place in 249-
251 A. I)., and consisted in a systematic effort to uproot Christianity
throughout the empire. Many eminent Christians were put to
death durinc its course, and others, among whom was Origen, were
tortured. Cf. Origen, Contra Celsum, III.; Gregory of Nyssa,
yUa Gregori Thauniaturg. III.; Euseb. H. E. VI. 40-42.

* Cf. I. 10. ° I John V. 16, 17.


IV. 30.]


NOVATIANISM. AFFAIRS IN THE WEST.


113


he made no change in the time of keeping Easter,"
but invariably observed the practice that obtained
in the Western churches. For they celebrate
this feast after the equinox, according to the
usage which had of old been delivered to them
when first they embraced Christianity. He him-
self indeed afterwards suffered martyrdom in the
reign of Valerian,^ during the persecution which
was then raised against the Christians. But those
in Phrygia ** who are named after him Novatians,
about this period changed the day of celebrating
Easter, being averse to communion with other
Christians even on this occasion. This was
effected by means of a few obscure bishops of
that sect convening a Synod at the village of
Pazum, which is situated near the sources of the
river Sangarius ; for there they framed a canon
appointing its observance on the same day as
that on which the Jews annually keep the feast
of Unleavened Bread. An aged man, who was
the son of a presbyter, and had been present
with his father at this Synod, gave ue our infor-
mation on this matter. But both Agelius, bishop
of the Novatians at Constantinople, and Maxi-
mus of Nicsea, as also the bishops of Nicomedia
and Cotyaeum, were absent, although the eccle-
siastical affairs of the Novatians were for the
most part under the control of these bishops.
How the church of the Novatians soon after was
divided into two parties in consequence of this
Synod, shall be related in its proper course : ^
but we must now notice what took place about
the same time in the Western parts.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Damasus ordained Bishop of Rome. Sedition
and Loss of Life caused by the Rivalry of
Ursinus.

While the emperor Valentinian governed in
peace, and interfered with no sect, Damasus
after Liberius undertook the administration of
the bishopric at Rome ; ^ whereupon a great
disturbance was caused on the following ac-
count.^ A certain Ursinus, a deacon of that
church, had been nominated among others when

6 Cf. I. 8 and note.

' The accuracy of this statement is disputed by Valesius, who
asserts that the Novatians wrote a book entitled The !\Iartyrdo»t
of No-jatian, but that this book was full of false statements and
fables, and had been disproved by Eulogiiis, bishop of Alexandria,
in the sixth book of his treatise Against the Noi'itiiaiis. Besides,
in this Martyrdom of Novatinn the founder of the sect was not
represented as suffering martyrdom, but simply as being a ' con-
fessor.' Cf. I. 8, note 12.

^ Let it be noted that Novatian was a native of Phrygia and
naturally had many followers in that province.

» y. 21.

1 Socrates follows Rufinus here (cf Rufin. H. E. IL 10) ; but
Jerome, Chronicon, puts the consecration of Damasus as bishop of
Rome in the third year of Valentinian's reign, i.e. in 367. Cf. also
Clinton, Fasti Rom. Ann. 367.

2 Am. Marcellinus [Reruiii Cestarum, XXVIL 3. 12, 13) says
that during the disturbance one hundred and thirty-seven citizens
were killed in the course of a single day.


the election of a bishop took place ; as Dama-
sus^ was preferred, this Ursinus, unable to bear
the disappointment of his hopes, held schismatic
assemblies apart from the church, and even
induced certain bishops of little distinction to
ordain him in secret. This ordination was
made, not in a church,"* but in a retired place
called the Palace of Sicine, whereupon dissen-
sion arose among the people ; their disagree-
ment being not about any article of faith or
heresy, but simply as to who should be bishop.
Hence frequent conflicts arose, insomuch that
many lives were sacrificed in this contention ;
and many of the clergy as well as laity were
punished on that account by Maximin, the pre-
fect of the city. Thus was Ursinus obliged to
desist from his pretensions at that time, and
those who were minded to follow him were re-
duced to order.


CHAPTER XXX.

Dissension about a Successor to Auxentius,
Bishop of Milan. Ambrose, Governor of
the Province, going to appease the Tumult, is
by General Consent and 7inth the Approval of
the Emperor Valentinian elected to the Bish-
opric of that Church.

About the same time it happened that^ another
event took place at Milan well worthy of being
recorded. On the death of Auxentius, who had
been ordained bishop of that church by the
Arians, the people again were disturbed respect-
ing the election of a successor ; for as some pro-
posed one person, and others favored another,
the city was full of contention and uproar. In
this state of things the governor of the province,
Ambrose by name," who was also of consular
dignity, dreading some catastrophe from the
popular excitement, ran into the church in order
to quell the disturbance. As he arrived there
and the people became quiet, he repressed the
irrational fury of the multitude by a long and
appropriate address, by urging such motives as
they felt to be right, and all present suddenly
came to an unanimous agreement, crying out
' that Ambrose was worthy of the bishopric,' and
demanding his ordination : ' for by that means
only,' it was alleged, ' would the peace of the


' Damusus was a Spaniard by race, native of Mantua, patron of
Jerome in his biblical researches. Cf. Jerome, ad Damas. Smith
& Wace, Oict. 0/ Christ. Bwg.

* On the illegality of ordination without a church, see Bingham,
Christ, .'inti'ij. IV. 6. 8. Cf. Gregory Nazian>. Cartit. dr I'l'ta.

• Synchronization of the events attending the accession of
Damasus and Ambrose, the former in Rome, the latter at Milan, is
dependent on Rufinus. Cf. //. E. IL 11. The events of this chap-
ter more properly fall within the time reached by Socrates, i.e. 374
A.D. (see chap. 29, note i). Hence rightly seven years later than
the events of the preceding chapter.

^ A Roman by race, born in 333 a.d., turned to ecclesiastical
and literary pursuits in the manner described in this chapter. Cf.
Sozom. VI. 24; Theodoret, H. £. IV. 6; Rufinus, H. E. II. 11.


114


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 30.


church be secured, and all be reunited in the
same faith and judgment.' And inasmuch as
such unanimity among the people appeared to
the bishops then present to proceed from some
Divine appointment, immediately they laid hands
on Ambrose ; and having baptized him — for he
was then but a catechumen — they were about
to invest him with the episcopal office. But
although Ambrose willingly received baptism,
he with great earnestness refused to be ordained :
upon which the bishops referred the matter to
the Emperor Valentinian. This prince regard-
ing the universal consent of the people as the
work of (lod, sent word to the bishops to do
the will of Ciod by ordaining him ; declaring
that * his choice was by the voice of God rather
than by the votes of men.' Ambrose was there-
fore ordained ; and thus the inhabitants of Milan,
who were divided among themselves, were once
more restored to unity.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Death of Valentinian.

The Sarmatje after this having made incur-
sions into the Roman territories, the emperor
marched against them with a numerous army :
but when the barbarians understood the formi-
dable nature of this expedition, they sent an
.embassy to him to sue for peace on certain con-
ditions. As the ambassadors were introduced
to the emperor's presence, and appeared to him
to be not very dignified fellows, he enquired
whether all the Sarmatae were such as these?
As they replied that the noblest personages of
their whole nation had come to him, Valen-
tinian became excessively enraged, and ex-
claimed with great vehemence, that ' the Roman
empire was indeed most wretched in devolving
upon him at a time when a nation of such
despicable barbarians, not content with being
permitted to exist in safety within their own
limits, dared to take up arms, invade tlie Roman
territories, and break forth into oi)cn war.' The
violence of his manner and utterance of these
words was so great, that all his veins were opened
by the effort, and all the arteries ruptured ; and
from the quantity of blood which thereupon
gushed forth he died. This occurred at IJergi-
tion Castle, after ( iratian's third consulate ' in con-
junction with Equitius, on the seventeenth day of
i November, Valentinian having lived fifty-four
' years and reigned thirteen. Upon the decease
of Valentinian, six days after his death the army
in Italy proclaimed his son Valentinian, then a
young child, emperor, at Acincum, a city of
Italy." When this was announced to the other


1 375 A.D.


' Rather Pannonia.


two emperors, they were displeased, not because
the brother of the one and the nephew of the
other had been declared emperor, but because
the military presumed to proclaim him without
consulting them, whom they themselves wished
to have proclaimed. They both, however, rati-
fied the transaction, and thus was Valentinian the
younger seated on his father's throne. Now this
Valentinian was born of Justina, whom Valen-
tinian the elder married while Severa his former
wife was alive, under the following circumstances.
Justus the father of Justina, who had been gov-
ernor of Picenum under the reign of Constantius,
had a dream in which he seemed to himself to
bring forth the imperial purple out of his right
side. When this dream had been told to many
persons, it at length came to the knowledge of
Constantius, who conjecturing it to be a presage
that a descendant of Justus would become em-
peror, caused him to be assassinated. Justina
being thus bereft of her father, still continued a
virgin. Some time after she became known to
Severa, wife of the emperor Valentinian, and had
frequent intercourse with the empress, until their
intimacy at length grew to such an extent that
they were accustomed to bathe together. When
Severa saw Justina in the bath she was greatly
struck with the beauty of the virgin, and spoke
of her to the emperor ; saying that the daughter
of Justus was so lovely a creature, and possessed
of such symmetry of form, that she herself, though
a woman, was altogether charmed with her. The
emperor, treasuring this description by his wife
in his own mind, considered with himself how
he could espouse Justina, without repudiating
Severa, as she had borne him Gratian, whom he
had created Augustus a little while before. He
accordingly framed a law, and caused it to be
published throughout all the cities, by which any
man was permitted to have two lawful wives.^
The law was promulgated and he married Jus-
tina, by whom he had Valentinian the younger,
and three daughters, Justa, Grata, and Galla ;
the two former of these remained virgins : but
(^alla was afterwards married to the emperor
Theodosius the Great, who had by her a daugh-
ter named Placidia. For that prince had Arca-
dius and Honorius by Flaccilla his former wife :
we shall however enter into particulars respect-
ing Theodosius and his sons in the proper place.''

■■' Baronius {Am. IV. 272) and Valesius in this passage agree in
lookinc; upon this whole story as a groundless fiction which some
pretended eyewitness palmed otT on Socrates. The l.iw mentioned
here is never mentioned by any other historian; no vestige of it is
found in any of the codes; on the contrary-, accordini; to Hingham
{Christ, .-iuti']. XVI. 11), bigamy and poK'ij.Tmy were treated with
the utmost severity in the nn<:lent Church, and the Kom.tn law was
very much against them; furthermore, Am. Marcellinus (XXX.)
says that Valentinian was remarkable for his chastity, both at home
and abroad, and Zosimus (IV. rg) thnt his second wife had been
married to Magnentius previously [and hence was not a vircin as
here stated] and that he married her after the death of his first wife;
all of which considerations taken together render it historically cer-
tain that the stn:v is not true.

< Cf. V. 2; VI. I.


IV. 34-]


CONVERSION OF THE GOTHS.


1^5


CHAFrER XXXII.

The Emperor Valetis, appeased by the Oratioji
af Themistius the Philosopher, abates his Per-
secution of the Christians.

In the meanwhile Valens, making his residence
at Antioch, was wholly undisturbed by foreign
wars ; for the barbarians on every side restrained
themselves within their own boundaries. Never-
theless, he himself waged a most cruel war
against those who maintained the ' homoousian '
doctrine, inflicting on them more grievous pun-
ishments every day ; until the philosopher The-
mistius by his Appealing Oration ^ somewhat
moderated his severity. In this speech he tells
the emperor, 'That he ought not to be sur-
prised at the difference of judgment on religious
questions existing among Christians ; inasmuch
as that discrepancy was trifling when compared
with the multitude of conflicting opinions cur-
rent among the heathen ; for these amount to
above three hundred ; that dissension indeed
was an inevitable consequence of this disagree-
ment ; but that God would be the more glorified
by a diversity of sentiment, and the greatness
of his majesty be more venerated, from the fact
of its not being easy to have a knowledge of
Him.' The philosopher having said these and
similar things, the emperor became milder, but
did not completely give up his wrath ; for al-
though he ceased to put ecclesiastics to death,
he continued to send them into exile, until this
fury of his also was repressed by the following
event.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

The Goths, under the Reign of Valens, embrace
Christianity.

The barbarians, dwelling beyond the Danube,
called the Goths,* having engaged in a civil
war among themselves, were divided into two
parties, one of which was headed by Fritigernes,
the other by Athanaric. When the latter had

1 This oration of Themistius is extant in a Latin translation by
Dudithius appended to G. Retno's Themistii Phil, orationes sex
aiigustales, and entitled, ad Valentent, pro Libertate relligionis.
The passage alluded to by Socrates is found in Dudithius as follows:
' Wherefore, in regard God has removed himself at the greatest dis-
tance from our knowledge, and does not humble to the capacity of
our understanding; it is a sufficient argument that he does not
require one and the same law and rule of religion from all persons,
but leaves every man a license and faculty concerning himself,
according to his own, not another man's, liberty and choice.
Whence it also happens that a greater admiration of the Deity, and
a more religious veneration of his eternal majesty, is engendered in
the minds of men. For it usually comes to pass that we loathe and
disregard those things which are readily apparent and prostrated
to eveiy understanding.'

* The fullest and best ancient authors on the origin and history
of the Goths are Procopius of Cassarea {Historia, IV.-VIII., de
Bella Italico adversus Gothos gesto), Jomandes {,de Getarum
[Go(/toru»t] origine et rebus gestis) , and Isidore Hispalensis
Xfiistoria Gothorum). On the conversion of the Goths to Chris-
tianity, see Neander, Hist, of ike Christ. Ch. Vol. II. p. 125-129,
and SchafT, Hist, o/the Christ. Ch. Vol. III. p. 640, 641.


obtained an evident advantage over his rival,
Fritigernes had recourse to the Romans, and
implored their assistance against his adversary.
This was reported to the Emperor Valens, and
he ordered the troops which were garrisoned in
Thrace to assist those barbarians who had ap-
pealed to him against their more powerful coun-
trymen ; and by means of this subsidy they won
a complete victory over Athanaric beyond the
Danube, totally routing the enemy. This be-
came the occasion for the conversion of many
of the barbarians to the Christian religion : ^ for
Fritigernes, to express his sense of the obligation
the emperor had conferred upon him, embraced
the religion of his benefactor, and urged those
who were under his authority to do the same.
Therefore it is that so many of the Goths are even
to the present time infected with the errors of
Arianism, they having on the occasion preferred
to become adherents to that heresy on the em-
peror's account. Ulfilas, their bishop at that
time, invented the Gothic letters,^ and translat-
ing the Sacred Scriptures into their own lan-
guage, undertook to instruct these barbarians in
the Divine oracles. And as Ulfilas did not re-
strict his labors to the subjects of Fritigernes,
but extended them to those who acknowledged
the sway of Athanaric also, Athanaric regard-
ing this as a violation of the privileges of the
religion of his ancestors, subjected those who
professed Christianity to severe punishments ;
so that many of the Arian Goths of that period
became martyrs. Arius indeed, failing in his
attempt to refute the opinion of Sabellius the
Libyan, fell from the true faith, and asserted
the Son of God to be * a new God ' : * but the
barbarians embracing Christianity with greater
simplicity of mind despised the present life for
the faith of Christ. With these remarks we
shall close our notice of the Christianized Goths.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Admission of the Fugitive Goths into the Roman
Territories, ivhich caused the Emperor's Over-
throw, and eventually the Ruin of the Roman
Empire.

Not long after the barbarians had entered
into a friendly alliance with one another, they
were again vanquished by other barbarians, their
neighbors, called the Huns ; and being driven
out of their own country, they fled into the


* For a slightly differing account of the conversion of the Goths
and the labors of Ulfilas, see Philostorgius, II. 5.

' By selecting from the Greek and I^atin alphabets such charac-
ters as appeared to him to best suit the sounds of his native language.
For a similar invention of an alphabet as a consequence of the intro-
duction of Christianity, compare the Slavonic invented by Cyril and
Methodius and a great number of instances in the history of modera
missions. * Cf. Deut. xxxii. 7.


Il6


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[IV. 34.


territory of the Romans, offering to be subject
to the emperor, and to execute whatever he
should command them. When Valens was
made acquainted with this, not having the least
presentiment of the consequences, he ordered
that the suppliants should be received with kind-
ness ; in this one instance alone showing himself
compassionate. He therefore assigned them
certain parts of Thrace for their habitation,
deeming himself peculiarly fortunate in this
matter : for he calculated that in future he
should possess a ready and well-equipped army
against all assailants ; and hoped that the barba-
rians would be a more formidable guard to the
frontiers of the empire even than the Romans
themselves. For this reason he in the future
neglected to recruit his army by Roman levies ;
and despising those veterans who had bravely
struggled and subdued his enemies in former
wars, he put a pecuniary value on the militia
which the inhabitants of the provinces, village
by village, had been accustomed to furnish,
ordering the collectors of his tribute to demand
eighty pieces of gold for every soldier, although
he had never before lightened the public bur-
dens. This change was the origin of many dis-
asters to the Roman empire subsequently.

CHAPTER XXXV.

Abatement of Persecution against the Christians
because of the War with the Goths.

The barbarians having been put into posses-
sion of Thrace, and securely enjoying that Ro-
man province, were unable to bear their good
fortune with moderation ; but committing hos-
tile aggressions upon their benefactors, devas-
tated all Thrace and the adjacent countries.
When these proceedings came to the knowledge
of Valens, he desisted from sending the adhe-
rents of the hofnoousion into banishment ; and
in great alarm left Antioch, and came to Con-
stantinople, where also the persecution of the
orthodox Christians was for the same reason
come to an end. At the same time Euzoius,
bishop of the Arians at Antioch, departed this
life, in the fifth consulate ^ of Valens, and the
first of Valentinian the younger ; and Dorotheus
was appointed in his place.


/


CHAPTER XXXVI.


The Saracetis, under Mavia their Queen, em-
brace Christianity ; and Moses, a Pious Monk,
is consecrated their Bishop.

No sooner had the emperor departed from

• 376 A.D.


Antioch, than the Saracens,' who had before
been in alliance with the Romans, revolted from
them, being led by Mavia their queen, whose
husband was then dead. All the regions of the
l"'ast therefore were at that time ravaged by the
Saracens : but a certain divine Providence re-
pressed their fury in the manner I am about to
describe. A person named Moses, a Saracen
by birth, who led a monastic life in the desert,
became exceedingly eminent for his piety, faith,
and miracles. Mavia the queen of the Saracens
was therefore desirous that this person should
be constituted bishop over her nation, and prom-
ised on tht^ condition to terminate the war. The
Roman generals considering that a peace founded
on such terms would be extremely advantageous,
gave immediate directions for its ratification.
Moses was accordingly seized, and brought from
the desert to Alexandria, in order that he might
there be invested with the bishopric : but on his
presentation for that purpose to Lucius, who at
that time presided over the churches in that
city, he refused to be ordained by him, protest-
ing against it in these words : * I account myself
indeed unworthy of the sacred office ; but if the
exigences of the state require my bearing it, it
shall not be by Lucius laying his hand on me,
for it has been filled with blood.' When Lucius
told him that it was his duty to learn from him
the principles of religion, and not to utter re-
proachful language, Moses replied, ' Matters of
faith are not now in question : but your infamous
practices against the brethren sufficiently prove
that your doctrines are not Christian. For a
Christian is " no striker, reviles not, does not
fight " ; for " it becomes not a servant of the
Lord to fight." ^ But your deeds cry out against
you by those who have been sent into exile, who
have been exposed to the wild beasts, and who
had been delivered up to the flames. Those
things which our own eyes have beheld are far
more convincing than what we receive from the
report of another.' As Moses expressed these
and other similar sentiments his friends took him
to the mountains, that he might receive ordina-
tion from those bishops who lived in exile there.
Moses having thus been consecrated, the Saracen
war was terminated ; and so scrupulously did
Mavia observe the peace thus entered into with
the Romans that she gave her daughter in mar-
riage to Victor the commander-in-chief of the
Roman army. Such were the transactions in
relation to the Saracens.

' The name Saracen (Sapaxiji-o?, perhaps from the Arabic Shar-
keen 'Orientals') was used vaguely at first; the Greek writers of
the first centuries gave it to the Bedouin Arabs of Eastern Aral ia,
while others used it to designate the Arab races of Syria and P.Tles-
tinc, and others the Berber of North Eastern Afrii-T, who later con-
quered Spain and Sicily and invaded France. The name became
very familiar in Europe during the period of the Crusades. On Sar-
acens, consult the interesting fiftieth chapter, of Gibbon's Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire.

' 2 Tim. ii. 24.


V


IV. 38.]


DEATH OF VALENS.


117


CHAPTER XXXVI I.

After the Departure of Vakns frojn Antioch, the
Alexandrians expel Lucius, and restore Peter,
7vho had co?ne with Letters from Datnasus
Bishop of Rome.

About the same time, as soon as the Emperor
Valens left Antioch, all those who had anywhere
been suffering persecution began again to take
courage, and especially those of Alexandria.
Peter returned to that city from Rome, with let-
ters from Damasus the Roman bishop, in which
he confirmed the 'homoousian ' faith, end sanc-
tioned Peter's ordination. The people there-
fore resuming confidence, expelled Lucius, who
immediately embarked for Constantinople : but
Peter survived his re-establishment a very short
time, and at his death appointed his brother
Timothy to succeed him.


CHAPTER XXXVni.

The Einperor Valens is ridiciiled by the People
on Account of the Goths ; undertakes an Ex-
peditioji against them and is slain in an En-
gagement near Adrianople.

The Emperor Valens arrived at Constantinople
on the 30th of May, in the sixth year of his own
consulate,^ and the second of Valentinian the
Younger, and found the people in a very de-
jected state of mind : for the barbarians, who
had already desolated Thrace, were now laying
waste the very suburbs of Constantinople, there
being no adequate force at hand to resist them.
But when they undertook to make near ap-
proaches, even to the walls of the city, the peo-

' 378 A.D.


pie became exceedingly troubled, and began to
murmur against the emperor ; accusing him of
having brought on the enemy thither, and then
indolently prolonging the struggle there, instead
of at once marching out against the barbarians.
Moreover at the exhibition of the sports of the
Hippodrome, all with one voice clamored against
the emperor's negligence of the public affairs,
crying out with great earnestness, ' Give us arms,
and we ourselves will fight.' The emperor pro-
voked at these seditious clamors, marched out
of the city, on the nth of June ; threatening
that if he returned, he would punish the citizens
not only for their insolent reproaches, but for
having previously favored the pretensions of the
usurper Procopius ; declaring also that he would
utterly demolish their city, and cause the plough
to pass over its ruins, he advanced against the
barbarians, whom he routed with great slaughter,
and pursued as far as Adrianople, a city of
Thrace, situated on the frontiers of Macedonia.
Having at that place again engaged the enemy,
who had by this time rallied, he lost his life on
the 9th of August, under the consulate just men-
tioned, and in the fourth year of the 289th
Olympiad. Some have asserted that he was
burnt to death in a village whither he had re-
tired, which the barbarians assaulted and set on
fire. But others affirm that having put off his
imperial robe he ran into the midst of the main
body of infantry ; and that when the cavalry re-
volted and refused to engage, the infantry were
surrounded by the barbarians, and completely
destroyed in a body. Among these it is said
the emperor fell, but could not be distinguished,
in consequence of his not having on his imperial
habit. He died in the fiftieth year of his age, hav-
ing reigned in conjunction with his brother thir-
teen years, and three year§ after the death of the
brother. This book therefore contains [the course
of events during] the space of sixteen years.


END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.


BOOK V.


:/


INTRODUCTION.

Before we begin the fifth book of our history,
we must beg those who may peruse this treatise,
not to censure us too hastily because having set
out to write a church history we still intermingle
with ecclesiastical matters, such an account of
the wars which took place during the period
imder consideration, as could be duly authenti-
cated. For this we have done for several rea-
sons : first, in order to lay before our readers an
exact statement of facts j but secondly, in order
that the minds of the readers might not become
satiated with the repetition of the contentious
disputes of bishops, and their insidious designs
against one another ; but more especially that
it might be made apparent, that whenever the
affairs of the state were disturbed, those of the
Church, as if by some vital sympathy, became
disordered also.' Indeed whoever shall atten-
tively examine the subject will find, that the
mischiefs of the state, and the troubles of the
church have been inseparably connected ; for
he will perceive that they have either arisen
together, or immediately succeeded one another.
Sometimes the affairs of the Church come first
in order ; then commotions in the state follow,
and sometimes the reverse, so that I cannot
believe this invariable interchange is merely
fortuitous, but am persuaded that it proceeds
from our iniquities ; and that these evils are
inflicted upon us as merited chastisements, if
indeed as the apostle truly says, ' Some men's
sins are open beforehand, going before to judg-
ment ; and some men they follow after.' - For
this reason we have interwoven many affairs of
the state with our ecclesiastical history. Of the
-wars carried on during the reign of Constantine
•we have made no mention, having found no
account of them that could be depended upon
because of their iniquity : but of subsequent
events, as much information as we could gather
from those still living'' in the order of their
occurrence, we have passed in rapid review.
We have continually included the emperors in
these historical details ; because from the time

' The views here expressed show a crude conception of the
vital relation between church and state. The very tone of apolocy
which tinges their expression is based on a misconception of the
idea of history. But Socrates was not below his age in this respect.
See Introd., p. xiii. ^ i Tim. v. 24.

* For the risks of this method, see IV. 31 and note.


they began to profess the Christian religion, the
affairs of the Church have depended on them, so
that even the greatest Synods have been, and
still are convened by their appointment. Finally,
we have j!)articularly noticed the Arian heresy,
because it has so greatly disquieted the churches.
Let these remarks be considered sufficient in the
way of preface : we shall now proceed with our
history.

CH.^PTER I.

After the Death of Valens the Goths a^^ain attack
Constantinople, and are i-epulsed by the Citi-
zens, aided by Some Saracen Auxiliaries.

Ajter the Emperor Valens had thus lost his
life, in a manner which has never been satisfac-
torily ascertained,' the barbarians again ap-
proached the very walls of Constantinople, and
laid waste the suburbs on every side of it.
Whereat the people becoming indignant armed
themselves with whatever weapons they could
severally lay hands on, and sallied forth of their
own accord against the enemy. The empress
Dominica caused the same pay to be distributed
out of the imperial treasury to such as volun-
teered to go out on this service, as was usually
allowed to soldiers. A few Saracens also assisted
the citizens, being confederates, who had been
sent by Mavia their queen : the latter we have
already mentioned.^ In this way the people
having fought at this time, the barbarians retired
to a great distance from the city.

CHAI^'ER II.

The Emperor Gratian recalls, the Orthodox
Bishops, and expels the Heretics from the
Churches. He takes Theodosius as his Col-
league in the Empire.

Grati.jvn being now in possession of the em-
pire, together with Valentinian the younger, and
condemning the cniel policy of his uncle Valens
towards the [orthodox] Christians, recalled those
whom he had sent into exile. He moreover
enacted that persons of all sects, without distinc-
tion, might securely assemble together in their

• See Gibbon, Decline and Fall, chap. 26.
' Cf. IV. 36.


V.5-]


CONDITION OF THE CHURCH UNDER GRATIAN.


119


churches ; and that only the Eunomians,^ Pho-
tinians/ and Manichaeans" should be excluded
from the churches. Being also sensible of the
languishing condition of the Roman empire,
and of the growing power of the barbarians and
perceiving that the state was in need of a brave
and prudent man, he took Theodosius as his
colleague in the sovereign power. This [The-
odosius] was descended from a noble family
in Spain, and had acquired so distinguished
a celebrity for his prowess in the wars, that
he was universally considered worthy of im-
peoal dignity, even before Gratian's election
of him. Having therefore proclaimed him em-
peror at Sirmium a city of Illyricum in the con-
sulate* of Ausonius and Olybrius, on the i6th
of January, he divided with him the care of
managing the war against the barbarians.


CHAPTER HI.

The Principal Bishops who flourished at that

Time.

Now at this time Damasus who had suc-
ceeded Liberius then presided over the church
at Rome. Cyril was still in possession of that
at Jerusalem. The Antiochian church,, as we
have stated, was divided into three parts : for
the Arians had chosen Dorotheus as the suc-
cessor of their bishop Euzoius ; while one por-
tion of the rest was under the government of
Pauliuus, and the others ranged themselves with
Melitius, who had been recalled from exile.
Lucius, although absent, having been compelled
to leave Alexandria, yet maintained the episcopal
authority among the Arians of that city ; the
Homoousians there being headed by Timothy,
who succeeded Peter. At Constantinople De-
mophilus the successor of Eudoxius presided
over the Arian faction, and was in possession of
the churches ; but those who were averse to
communion with him held their assemblies
apart. ^

CHAPTER IV.

The Macedo?iians, ivho had subscribed the ' Ho-
tnoousiati ' Doctrij/e, retur/t to their Former
Error.

After the deputation from the Macedonians
to Liberius, that sect was admitted to entire
communion with the churches in every city,
intermixing themselves indiscriminately with
those who from the beginning had embraced the
form of faith published at Nicaea. But when


' Cf. IV. 7.

= Cf. n. 18.

3 Cf. I. 22.


' 379 A.D.

> Cf. IV. I.


the law of the Emperor Gratian permitted the
several sects to reunite without restraint in the
public services of religion, they again resolved
to separate themselves ; and having met at
Antioch in Syria, they decided to avoid the
word homoousios again, and in no way to
hold communion with the supporters of the
Nicene Creed. They however derived no ad-
vantage from this attempt ; for the majority of
their own party being disgusted at the fickleness
with which they sometimes maintained one
opinion, and then another, withdrew from them,
and thenceforward became firm adherents of
those who professed the doctrine of the homo-
ousion}


CHAPTER V.

Events at Antioch in Connection with Paulinus
and Meletius.

About this time a serious contest was excited
at Antioch in Syria, on account of Melitius.
We have already observed ^ that Paulinus, bishop
of that city, because of his eminent piety was
not sent into exile : and that Melitius after be-
ing restored by Julian, was again banished by
Valens, and at length recalled in Gratian's reign.^
On his return to Antioch, he found Paulinus
greatly enfeebled by old age ; his partisans
therefore immediately used their utmost en-
deavors to get him associated with that bishop
in the episcopal office. And when Paulinus de-
clared that ' it was contrary to the canons ^ to
take as a coadjutor one who had been ordained
by the Arians,' the people had recourse to vio-
lence, and caused him to be consecrated in one
of the churches without the city. When this
was^done, a great disturbance arose; but after-
wards the people were brought to unite on the
following stipulations. Having assembled such
of the clergy as might be considered worthy
candidates for the bishopric, they found them
six in number, of whom Flavian was one. All
these they bound by an oath, not to use any
effort to get themselves ordained, when either

1 For an account of this deputation and their feigned subscrip-
tion to the Nicene Creed, through which they prev.Tiled upon Libe-
rius to receive them into the communion of the church, see IV. 12.

' Cf. III. 9, and IV. 2.

- See above, chap. 3.

•■' In its eighth canon the Council of Nicaea, looking forward to
the reconciliation of such N"ovatians or Cat/tart as might desire to
return to the Catholic Church, enjoins that ' when in villages or in
cities there are found only clergy of their own sect {Cat/iari), the
oldest of these clerics shall remain among the clergy, and in their
position; but if a Catholic priest or bishop be found among them,
it is evident that the bishop of the Catholic Church should preserve
the episcopal dignity, whiUt any one who has received the title of
bishop from the so-called Cut liar i would only have a right to the
honors accorded to priests, unless the bishop thinks it right to let
him enjoy the honor of the title. If he does not desire to do so, let
him give him the place of rural bishop {chnrepiscoptis') or priest,
in order that he may appear to be altogether a part of the clergy,
and that there may not be two bishops in the same city.' Cf. Hefele,
Hist, of the Councils, Vol. I. p. 410; Bingham, Christ. Antiq.
II. 13. I and 2.


I20


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 5.


of the two bishops should die, but to permit the
surv'ivor to retain undisturbed possession of the
see of the deceased.* Thus pletlges were given,
and the people had peace and so no longer
quarreled with one another. The Luciferians,"'
however, separated themselves from the rest, be-
cause Melitius who had been ordained by the
Arians was admitted to the episcopate. In this
state of the Antiocliian church, Melitius was
under the necessity of going to Constantinople.

CHAPTER VI.

Gregory of Naziatizus is transferred to the See

of Constantinople. The Emperor Theodosiiis

falling Sick at Thessalonica, after his Victory

over the Barbarians, is there baptized by As-

cholius the Bishop.

By the common suffrage of many bishops,
Gregory was at this time translated from the see
of Nazianzus to that of Constantinople,^ and
this happened in the manner before described.
About the same time the emperors Gratian and
Theodosius each obtained a victory over the
barbarians.^ And Gratian immediately set out
for Gaul, because the Alemanni were ravaging
those provinces : but Theodosius, after erecting
a trophy, hastened towards Constantinople, and
arrived at Thessalonica. There he was taken
dangerously ill, and expressed a desire to re-
ceive Christian baptism.^ Now he had been in-
structed in Christian principles by his ancestors,
and professed the ' homoousian ' faith. Becom-
ing increasingly anxious to be baptized therefore,
as his malady grew worse, he sent for the bishop
of Thessalonica, and first asked him what doc-
trinal views he held? The bishop having re-
plied, ' that the opinion of Arius had not yet
invaded the provinces of Illyricum, nor had the
novelty to which that heretic had given birth
begim to prey upon the churches in those coun-
tries ; but they continued to preserve unshaken
that faith which from the beginning was deliv-
ered by the apostles, and had been confirmed in
the Nicene Synod,' the emperor was most gladly
baptized by the bishop Ascholius ; and having

♦ Theodoret (//. E. V. 3) gives a diflTerent account of the way
in which the dispute between Melitius and Paulinus came to an
end, giving the glory to Melitius for the eirenic overture above de-
scribed, and representinij Paulinus as constrained to accept it
against his will by the political head of the community.

6 Cf. III. 9: Sozom. III. 15, and V. 12.

1 So also Gregory Nazianz. Carmen de I'ita Sua, 595. 'The
grace of the Spirit sent us, many shepherds and members of the
flock inviting.' See, however, on Gregory's episcopate at Nazian-
zus, IV. 26 and note.

' Cf. Zosimus, IV.; Sozom. VII. 4; Am. Marcellinus, XXXI.
9 and 10.

' Cf. Zosimus, IV. 30, on the dangerous illness of Theodosius.
On delayed baptism, called ' clinic,' sec I. 39, note 2. Evidently
baptism was not thought essential to one's title to be called a Chris-
tian. Theodosius and Constantine were both considered Christians
and 'professed the homoousian faith, and yet they both postponed
their baptism to what they believed to be the latest moments of their
lives.'


recovered from his disease not many days after,
he came to Constantinople on the twenty-fourth
of November, in the fifth consulate of Gratian,
and the first of his own.*


CHAPTER VII.

Gregory, finding Some Dissatisfaction about his
Appointment, abdicates the Episcopate of Con-
stantinople. The Emperor orders Demophilus
the Arian Bishop either to assent to the
' Homoousion,' or leave the City. He chooses
the Latter.

Now at that time Gregory of Nazianzus. after
his translation to Constantinople, held his as-
semblies within the city in a small oratory, ad-
joining to which the emperors afterwards built
a magnificent church, and named it Anastasia}
But Gregory, who far excelled in eloquence and
piety all those of the age in which he lived,
understanding that some murmured at his pre-
ferment because he was a stranger, after express-
ing his joy at the emperor's arrival, resigned the
bishopric of Constantinople. When the em-
peror found the church in this state, he began
to consider by what means he could make
peace, effect a union, and enlarge the churches.
Immediately, therefore, he intimated his desire
to Demophilus,-' who presided over the Arian
party ; and enquired whether he was willing to
assent to the Nicene Creed, and thus reunite
the people, and establish peace. Upon De-
mophilus' declining to accede to this proposal,
the emperor said to him, ' Since you reject
peace and harmony, I order you to quit the
churches.' When Demophilus heard this, weigh-
ing with himself the difficulty of contending
against superior power, he convoked his fol-
lowers in the church, and standing in the midst
of them, thus spoke : ' Brethren, it is written in
the Gospel,^ " If they persecute you in one city,
flee ye into another." Since therefore the em-
peror needs the churches, take notice that we
will henceforth hold our assemblies without the
city.' Having said this he departed ; not how-
ever as rightly apprehending the meaning of
that expression in the Evangelist, for the real

♦ 380 A.D.

* It appears from several places in Gregory's writings (cf.
Sontn. (it Anastasia, Ad Popiil. .Aiiast. and Carmen de l':ta
Sua, 1709) that he himself had used the name of Anastasia in speak-
ing of the church, so that Socrates' slatcment that it was so called
afterwards must be taken as inaccurate. It also appears that Greg-
ory gave the name Anastasia 10 the house which he used as a-
church, and meant to signify by the name (Anastation= Resurrec-
tion) the resurrection of the orthodox community of Constantinople.
It is possible, of course, that Socrates here means that the empe-
rors later adopted the name given by Gregory on the occasion of
building a large church in place of the original chapel. See also on
Gregory's stay at Constantinople Sozom. VII. 5; Philostorgius, IX.
19; Theodoret, V. 8.

' Cf. Philostorgius, IX. 10 and 14, whence it appears that De-
mophilus was the Arian bishop who succeeded Eudoxius in Constan-
tinople.

•> Matt. X. 23.


V. 8.]


SYNOD OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


121


import of the sacred oracle is that such as
would avoid the course of this workl must seek
the heavenly Jerusalem.'' He therefore went
outside the city gates, and there in future held
his assemblies. With him also Lucius went out,
who being ejected from Alexandria, as we have
before related,^ had made his escape to Con-
stantinople, and there abode. Thus the Arians,
after having been in possession of the churches
for forty years, were in consequence of their
opposition to the peace proposed by the em-
peror Theodosius, driven out of the city, in
Gratian's fifth consulate," and the first of Theo-
dosius Augustus, on the 26th of November.
The adherents of the ' homoousian ' faith in this
manner regained possession of the churches.


CHAPTER VHI.


\j


A Syjwd consisting of One Hundred and Fifty
Bishops 7neets at Constantinople. The Decrees
passed. Ordination of Nectarius.

The emperor making no delay summoned a
Synod ^ of the prelates of his own faith, in order
that he might establish the Nicene Creed, and
appoint a bishop of Constantinople : and inas-
much as he was not without hope that he might
win the Macedonians over to his own views, he
invited those who presided over that sect to
be present also. There met therefore on this
occasion of the Homoousian party, Timothy
from Alexandria, Cyril from Jerusalem, who at
that time recognized the doctrine of homoou-
sian^ having retracted his former opinion ;
Melitius from Antioch, he having arrived there
previously to assist at the installation of Gregory ;
Ascholius also from Thessalonica, and many
others, amounting in all to one hundred and
fifty. Of the Macedonians, the leaders were
Eleusius of Cyzicus, and Marcian of Lampsa-
cus ; these with the rest, most of whom came
from the cities of the Hellespont, were thirty-six
in number. Accordingly they were assembled
in the month of May, under tlie consulate^ of
Eucharius and Evagrius, and the emperor used
his utmost exertions, in conjunction with the
bishops who entertained similar sentiments to

* A specimen of allegorical interpretation due to the influence
of Origen. See Farrar, N/si. of Iiiterpretatiou, p. 183 seq. I'or
similar cases of allegorizing, seeHuet, Origciiiana passim, and De
la Rue, Origenis Opera, App. 240-244.

6 IV. 37.

'' The same consulate as at the end of chap. 6; i.e. 380 a.d.

1 Cf. parallel account in Sozom. VII. 7-9; Theodoret, //. E.
V. 8. The Synod of Constantinople was the second great oecumeni-
cal or general council. Its title as an necumenical council h.is not
been disputed, although no Western bishop attended. Baronius,
however {Aiinal. 381, notes 19, 20), attempts to prove, but unsuc-
cessfully, that Pope Damasus summoned the coimcil. For a full
account of the council, see Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol.
II. p. 340-374.

2 Sozomen adds that Cyril was previously a follower of M.ice-
donius, and had changed his mind at this time. Cf. Sozom. VII. 7.

3 381 A.D.


his own, to bring over Eleusius and his adherents
to his own side. They were reminded of the
deputation they had sent by Eustathius to
Liberius ■* then bishop of Rome ; that they had
of their own accord not long before entered into
promiscuous communion with the orthodox ;
and the inconsistency and fickleness of their
conduct was represented to them, in now at-
tempting to subvert the faith which they once
acknowledged, and professed agreement with
the catholics in. But they paying little heed
alike to admonitions and reproofs, chose rather
to maintain the Arian dogma, than to assent
to the 'homoousian' doctrine. Having made
this declaration, they departed from Constanti-
nople ; moreover they wrote to their partisans
in every city, and charged them by no means to
harmonize with the creed of the Nicene Synod.
The bishops of the other party remaining at
Constantinople, entered into a consultation
about the ordination of a bishop ; for Gregory,
as we have before said,^ had resigned that see,
and was preparing to return to Nazianzus. Now
there was a person named Nectarius, of a sena-
torial family, mild and gentle in his manners,
and admirable in his whole course of life,
although he at that time bore the ofllce of pr?e-
tor. This man was seized upon by the people,
and elected ° to the episcopate, and was ordained
accordingly by one hundred and fifty bishops
then present. The same prelates moreover
published a decree," prescribing ' that the bishop
of Constantinople should have the next preroga,2_
tive of honor after the bishop of Rome, because
that city was New Rome.' They also again
confirmed the Nicene Creed. Then too patri-
archs were constituted, and the provinces dis-
tributed, so that no bishop might exercise any
jurisdiction over other churches" out of his own
diocese : for this had been often indiscriminately
done before, in consequence of the persecutions.
To Nectarius therefore was allotted the great
city and Thrace. Helladius, the successor of


•• Cf. IV. 12. •' See above, chap. 7.

o See Bingham, Christ. Aittiq. IV. 2. 8 for other examples illus-
trating this method of electing bishops.

' Canon 3 of the Synod ; see Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol.
II. p. 357. The canon is given by Socrates entire and in the origi-
nal words. Valesius holds that the primacy conferred by this canon
on the Constantinopolitan see was one of honor merely, and involved
no prerogatives of patriarchal or metropolitan jurisdiction. For a
full discussion of its significance, see Hefele, as above. The Coun-
cil of Chalcedon in 451 confirmed the above action in the following
words: ' We following in all things the decision c( the Holy Fathers,
and acknowledging the canon of the one hundred and fifty bishops
. . . do also determine and decree the same things resprcling the
privileges of the most holy city of Constantinople, New Rome.
For the Fathers properly gave the primacy to the throne of the
elder Rome.' Canon 28.

' Canon 2. The words ' patriarch," however, and ' patriarch-
ate' are not used in the canon. According to Sophocles (Greek
Lexicon') the modern sense of these words was introduced at the
close of the fourth century. Valerius holds that the sixth canon of
the Nicene Council had given sanction to the principle of patri-
archal authority, but Beveridge is of opinion that patriarchs were
first constituted by the second general council. Hefele takes sub-
stantially the same position as Valesius. See discussion of the
subject in Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol. I. p. 389 seg.


122


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 8.


Basil in the bishopric of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
obtained the patriarchate of the diocese of Pon-
tus in conjunction with Gregory Basil's brother,
bishop of Nyssa^ in Cappadocia, and Otreius
bishop of rfklelitina in Armenia. To Amphilo-
chius of Iconium and Optimus of Antioch in
Pisidia, was the Asiatic diocese assigned. The
superintendence of the churches throughout
Egypt was committed to Timothy of Alexandria.
On Pelagius of Laodicea, and Diodorus of
Tarsus, devolved the administration of the
churches of the East ; without infringement
however on the prerogatives of honor reserved
to the Antiochian church, and conferred on
Melitius then present. They further decreed
that as necessity required it, the ecclesiastical
affairs of each province should be managed by
a Synod of the province. These arrangements
were confirmed by the emperor's approbation.
Such was the result of this Synod.


chafit:r IX.

Tlie Body of Paul, Bishop of Constantinople, is
honorably transferred from his Place of Exile.
Death of Meletius.

The emperor at that time caused to be re-
moved from the city of Ancyra, the body of the
bishop Paul, whom Philip the prefect of the Prae-
torium ' had banished at the instigation of Mace-
donius, and ordered to be strangled at Cucusus
a town of Armenia, as I have already mentioned."
He therefore received the remains with great
reverence and honor, and deposited in the
church which now takes its name from him ;
which the Macedonian party were formerly in
possession of while they remained separate from
the Arians, but were expelled at that time by
the emperor, because they refused to adopt his
sentiments. About this period Melitius, bishop
of Antioch, fell sick and died : in whose praise
Gregory, the brother of Basil, pronounced a
funeral oration. The body of the deceased

• Cf. IV. 27. On Gregory of Nyssa, one of the most prominent
of the ancient Fathers, see Smith & Wace, Diet. 0/ Christ. Biog.;
Schaff, H'st. 0/ the Christ. Church, Vol. III. p. 903 et seg., and
sources mentioned in the work.

' Constantine made an advance on his predecessors by dividing
the management of the empire among four prefects of the praeto-
rium, which they had committed to two officers of that name.
These four were apportioned as follows: one to the £ast, a second
to Illyricum, a third to Italy, and a fourth to Gaul. Each of these
prefects had a number of dioceses under him, and each diocese was
a combination of several provinces into one territory. In conform-
ity with this model of civil government, the church abandoned grad-
ually and naturally its metropolitan administration of the provmces
and adopted the diocesan. The exact time of the change is, of
course, uncert.iin, it having come about gradually. Il is safe, how-
ever, to put it between the Nicene and Constantinopolitan coimcils.
The Fathers in the Litter of those councils seem to find it in practi-
cal operation and confirm it (Cf Canon 2 of the councils), decreeing
explicitly that it should be unlawful for clerics to perform any office
or transact anv business in their official character outside of the
bounds of the diocese wherein they were placed, just as it was un-
lawful for the civil officer to intermeddle in any affair outside the
limits of his civil diocese. ' II. 26.


bishop was by his friends conveyed to Antioch ;
where those who had identified themselves with
his interests again refused subjection to Paulinus,
but caused Flavian to be substituted in the place
of Melitius, and the people began to quarrel
anew. Thus again the Antiochian church was
divided into rival factions, not grounded on any
difference of faith, but simply on a preference
of bishops.

CHAPTER X.

The Emperor orders a Convention composed of
All the J'arious Sects. Arcadius is proclaimed
Aui^ustiis. The Novatians permitted to hold
their Assemblies in the City of Constantinople :
Other Heretics driven out. I


Great disturbances occurred in other cities
also, as the Arians were ejected from the churches.
But I cannot sufficiently admire the emperor's
prudence in this contingency. For he was un-
willing to fill the cities with d'^sturbance, as far as
this was dependent on him, and so after a very
short time ' he called together a general confer-
ence of the sects, thinking that by a discussion
among their bishops, their mutual differences
might be adjusted, and unanimity established.
And this purpose of the emperor's I am per-
suaded was the reason that his affairs were so
prosperous at that time. In fact by a special
dispensation of Divine Providence the barbarous
nations were reduced to subjection under him :
and among others, Athanaric king of the Goths
made a voluntary surrender of himself to him,^
with all his people, and died soon after at Con-
stantinople. At this juncture the emperor pro-
claimed his son Arcadius Augustus, on the six-
teenth of January, in the second consulate^
of Merobaudes and Saturnilus. Not long after-
wards in the month of June, under the same
consulate, the bishops of every sect arrived fronr,
all places : the emperor, therefore, sent for Nee-
tarius the bishop, and consulted with him on
the best means of freeing the Christian religion
from dissensions, and reducing the church to a
state of unity. 'The subjects of controversy,'
said he, ' ought to be fairly discussed, that by the
detection and removal of the sources of discord,
a universal agreement may be effected.' Hear-
ing this proposition Nectarius fell into uneasi-
ness, and communicated it to Agelius bishop
of the Novatians, inasmuch as he entertained
the same sentiments as himself in matters of


' Socrates according to his custom omits all mention of events in
the Western Church. Some of them are quite important; e.g. the
council of Aquileia called by the Emperor Gratian. See Hefele,
Hist, of Church Councils, Vol. II. p. 375 sfq.

' This was in 382 a.d. as appears from the Fasti of Idatius.
Cf. also Zosimus, IV. 34, and Jerome, Chronicon.

* 383 A.D.


V. lo.] THEODOSIUS DECIDES IN FAVOR OF THE HOMOOUSION.


123


faith. This man, though eminently pious, was
by no means competent to maintain a dispute
on doctrinal points ; he therefore proposed to
refer the subject to Sisinnius'' his reader, as a
fit person to manage a conference. Sisinnius,
who was not only learned, but possessed of
great experience, and was well informed both
in the expositions of the sacred Scriptures and
the principles of philosophy, being convinced
that disputations, far from healing divisions,
usually create heresies of a more inveterate
character, gave the following advice to Necta-
rius, knowing well that the ancients have no-
where attributed a beginning of existence to the
Son of God, conceiving him to be co-eternal
with the Father, he advised that they should
avoid dialectic warfare and bring forward as
evidences of the truth the testimonies of the
ancients. ' Let the emperor,' said he, ' demand
of the heads of each sect, whether they would
pay any deference to the ancients who flour-
ished before schism distracted the church ; or
whether they would* repudiate them, as aHen-
ated from the Christian faith? If they reject
their authority, then let them also anathematize
them : and should they presume to take such a
step, they would themselves be instantly thrust
out by the people, and so the truth will be man-
ifestly victorious. But if, on the other hand,
they are not willing to set aside the fathers, it
will then be our business to produce their books,
by which our views will be fully attested.' Nec-
tarius having heard these words of Sisinnius,
hastened to the palace, and acquainted the em-
peror with the plan which had been suggested
to him ; who at once perceiving its wisdom and
propriety, carried it into execution with con-
summate prudence. For without discovering his
object, he simply asked the chiefs of the heretics
whether they had any respect for and would ac-
cept the teachings of those teachers who lived
previous to the dissension in the church ? As they
did not repudiate them, but replied that they
highly revered them as their masters ; the em-
peror enquired of them again whether they would
defer to them as accredited witnesses of Chris-
tian doctrine ? At this question, the leaders of
the several parties, with their logical champions,
— for many had come prepared for sophistical
debate, — found themselves extremely embar-
rassed. For a division was caused among them
as some acquiesced in the reasonableness of
the emper6r's proposition while others shrunk
from it, conscious that it was by no means favor-
able to their interests : so that all being variously
affected towards the writings of the ancients,
they could no longer agree among themselves,
dissenting not only from other sects, but those


* For a further account of Sisinnius, see VI. 22.


of the same sect differing from one another.
Accordant malice therefore, like the tongue of
the giants of old, was confounded, and their
tower of mischief overturned.* The emperor
perceiving by their confusion that their sole con-
fidence was in subtle arguments, and that they i
feared to appeal to the expositions of the fathers, ^
had recourse to another method : he com-
manded every sect to set forth in writing their
own peculiar tenets. Accordingly those who
were accounted the most skillful among them,
drew up a statement of their respective creeds,
couched in terms the most circumspect they
could devise ; a day was appointed, and the
bishops selected for this purpose presented
themselves at the palace. Nectarius and Age-
lius appeared as the defenders of the ' homoou-
sian ■■ faith ; Demophilus supported the Arian
dogma ; Eunomius himself undertook the cause of
the Eunomians ; and Kleusius, bishop of Cyzicus,
represented the opinions of those who were
denominated Macedonians. The emperor gave
them all a courteous reception ; and receiving
from each their written avowal of faith, he shut
himself up alone, and prayed very earnestly that
God would assist him in his endeavors to ascer-
tain the truth. Then perusing with great care
the statement which each had submitted to him,
he condemned all the rest, inasmuch as they
introduced a separation of the Trinity, and
approved of that only which contained the doc-
trine of the homoousion. This decision caused
the Novatians to flourish again, and hold their
meetings within the city : for the emperor de-
lighted with the agreement of their profession
with that which he embraced, promulgated a
law securing to them the peaceful possession of
their own church buildings, and assigned to
their churches equal privileges with those to
which he gave his more especial sanction. But
the bishops of the other sects, on account of
their disagreement among themselves, were de-
spised and censured even by their own followers :
so that overwhelmed with perplexity and vexa-
tion they departed, addressing consolatory letters
to their adherents, whom they exhorted not to be
troubled because many had deserted them and
gone over to the homoousian party ; for they
said, ' Many are called, but few chosen ' ® — an
expression which they never used when on
account of force and terror the majority of the
people was on their side. Nevertheless the
orthodox believers were not wholly exempt
from inquietude ; for the afl^iirs of the Antiochian
church caused divisions among those who were
present at the Synod. The bishops of Eg>'pt,
Arabia and Cyprus, combined against Flavian,

5 Referring no doubt to the Tower of Babel and the dispersion
of its builders, Gen. xi. 8.
" Matt. XX. 16.


124


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. lo.


and insisted on his expulsion from Antioch : but
those of Palestine, Phoenicia, and Syria, con-
tended with equal zeal in his favor. What result
issued from this contest I shall describe in its
proper place.^

CHAPTER XI.

The Emperor Gratian is slain by the Treachery
of the Usurper Maximus. From Fear of him
Justina ceases persecuting Ambrose.

Nearly at the same time with the holding of
these Synods at Constantinople, the following
events occurred in the Western parts. Maximus,
from the island of Britain, rebelled against the
Roman empire, and attacked Gratian, who was
then wearied and exhausted in a war with the
Alemanni.^ In Italy, Valentinian being still a
minor, Probus, a man of consular dignity, had
the chief administration of affairs, and was at
that time prefect of the Praetorium. Justina, the
mother of the young prince, who entertained
Arian sentiments, as long as her husband lived
had been unable to molest the Homoousians ;
but going to Milan while her son was still young,
she manifested great hostility to Ambrose the
bishop, and commanded that he should be ban-
ished.- While the people from their excessive
attachment to Ambrose, were offering resistance
to those who were charged with taking him into
exile, intelligence was brought that Cratian had
been assassinated by the treachery of the usurper
Maximus. In fact Andragathius, a general under
Maximus, having concealed himself in a litter
resembling a couch, which was carried by mules,
ordered his guards to spread a report before him
that the litter contained the Emperor Gratian's
wife. They met the emperor near the city of
Lyons in France just as he had crossed the river :
who believing it to be his wife, and not suspect-
ing any treachery, fell into the hands of his
enemy as a blind man into the ditch ; for Andra-
gathius, suddenly springing forth from the litter,
slew him.^ Gratian thus perished in the consu-
late of Merogaudes and Saturninus,* in the
twenty-fourth year of his age, and the fifteenth
of his reign. When this happened the Empress
Justina's indignation against Ambrose was re-
pressed. Afterwards Valentinian most unwill-
ingly, but constrained by the necessity of the
time, admitted Maximus as his colleague in the
empire. Probus alarmed at the power of Maxi-
mus, resolved to retreat into the regions of the

' Below, chap. 15. ' Cf. Zosimus, IV. -le sro.

» Cf. IV. 30.

» The account of Gratian's death given by Zosimus, though not
inconsistent with that of Socrates, does not contain the details given
by Socrates. Andragathius is simply said to have pursued Gratian,
and overtaking him near the bridge to have slain him. Cf. Zosimus,
IV. 35 end. * 383 a.d.


East : leaving Italy therefore, he proceeded to
Illyricum, and fixed his residence at Thessalonica
a city of Macedonia.


CHAPTER XII.

While the Emperor Thcodosius is engaged in
Military Preparations against Maxitmis , his
Son Honorius is born. He then proceeds ta
Milan in Order to encounter the Usurper.

But the Emperor Theodosius was filled with
great solicitude, and levied a powerful army
against the usurper, fearing lest he should
meditate the assassination of the young Valen-
tinian also. While engaged in this prepara-
tion, an embassy arrived from the Persians, re-
questing peace from the emperor. Then also
the empress Flaccilla bore him a son named
Honorius, on the 9th of September, in the con-
sulate of Richomelius and Clearchus.' Under
the same consulate, and a little previously, Age-
lius bishop of the Novatians died.^ In the year
following, wherein Arcadius Augustus bore his
first consulate in conjunction with Baudon,^ Tim-
othy bishop of Alexandria died, and was suc-
ceeded in the episcopate by Theophilus. About
a year after this, Demophilus the Arian prelate
having departed this life, the Arians sent for
Marinus a leader of their own heresy out of
Thrace, to whom they entrusted the bishopric :
but Marinus did not long occupy that position,
for under him that sect was divided into two
parties, as we shall hereafter explain ; * for they
invited Dorotheus^ to come to them from An-
tioch in Syria, and constituted him their bishop.
Meanwhile the emperor Theodosius proceeded
to the war against Maximus, leaving his son
Arcadius with imperial authority at Constanti-
nople. Accordingly arriving at Thessalonica he
found Valentinian and those about him in great
anxiety, because through compulsion they had
acknowledged the usurper as emperor. Theo-
dosius, however, gave no expression to his senti-
ments in public ; he neither rejected nor ad-
mitted* the embassy of Maximus: but unable
to endure tyrannical domination over the Roman
empire, under the assumption of an imperial
name, he hastily mustered his forces and ad-
vanced to Milan," whither the usurper had al-
ready gone.


' 384 A.D. Honorius afterwards shared the empire with Arcadius,
rcignrng in the West from 398 to 423 a.d. But although the whole
of this period comes within the time of Socrates' history, he does not
mention Honorius but once again before his death.

' Having been bishop of the Novatians for forty years; see
chap. 21.

' tS? A.D. ♦ Chap. 23.

" Being in the ninety-eighth year of his age as appears from
VII. 6.

« Zosimus, however, says (IV. 37) that the embassy of Maximus
was received hy Theodosius.

' Rather Aquileja as appears from Zosimus and other historians.


V. 15.]


TUMULTS OF ARIANS. MAXIMUS OVERCOME.


125


CHAPTER XIII.

The Arians excite a Tumult at Constantinople.

At the time when the emperor was thus occu-
pied on his miHtary expedition, the Arians ex-
cited a great tumult at Constantinople by such
devices as these. Men are fond of fabricating
statements respecting matters about which they
are in ignorance ; and if at any time they are
given occasion they swell to a prodigious extent
rumors concerning what they wish, being ever
fond of change. This was strongly exemplified
at Constantinople on the present occasion : for
each invented news concerning the war which
was carrying on at a distance, according to his
own caprice, always presuming upon the most
disastrous results ; and before the contest had
yet commenced, they spoke of transactions in
reference to it, of which they knew nothing, with
as much assurance as if they had been specta-
tors on the very scene of action. Thus it was
confidently affirmed that j the usurper had de-
feated the emperor's army,' even the number of
nrien slain on both sides being specified ; and
that ' the emperor himself had nearly fallen into
the usurper's hands.' Then the Arians, who
had been excessively exasperated by those being
put in possession of the churches within the city
who had previously been the objects of their
persecution, began to augment these rumors by
additions of their own. But since the currency
of such stories with increasing exaggeration, in
time made even the farmers themselves believe
them — for those who had circulated them from
hearsay, affirmed to the authors of these false-
hoods, that the accounts they had received from
them had been fully corroborated elsewhere ;
then indeed the Arians were emboldened to
commit acts of violence, and among other out-
rages, to set fire to the house of Nectarius the
bishop. This was done in the second consulate'
of Theodosius Augustus, which he bore with
Cynegius.


CHAPTER XIV.


J


Overthrow and Death of the Usurper Maximus.

As the emperor marched against the usurper
the intelligence of the formidable preparations
made by him so alarmed the troops under Max-
imus, that instead of fighting for him, they de-
livered him bound to the emperor, who caused
him to be put to death, on the twenty-seventh
of August, under the same consulate.^ Andra-


1 388 A.D.

* The same account is given in substance by Zosimus, IV. 46,
who also confirms the statements of Socrates concerning the end of
Andragathius. Valesius, however, relying on Idatius' Fasti, asserts
that Maximus was put to death on the 28th of July, not on the 27th
of August.


gathius, who with his own hand had slain Gra-
tian, understanding the fate of Maximus, precip-
itated himself into the adjacent river, and was
drowned. Then the victorious emperors made
their public entry into Rome, accompanied by
Honorius the son of Theodosius, still a mere
boy, whom his father had sent for from Con-
stantinople immediately after Maximus had been
vanquished. They continued therefore at Rome
celebrating their triumphal festivals : during
which time the Emperor Theodosius exhibited a
remarkable instance of clemency toward Symma-
chus, a man who had borne the consular office,
and was at the head of the senate at Rome.
For this Symmachus was distinguished for his
eloquence, and many of his orations are still
extant composed in the Latin tongue : but inas-
much as he had written a panegyric on Maximus,
and pronounced it before him publicly, he was
afterwards impeached for high treason ; where-
fore to escape capital punishment he took sanc-
tuary in a church.^ The emperor's veneration for
religion led him not only to honor the bishops of
his own communion, but to treat with considera-
tion those of the Novatians also, who embraced the
' homoousian ' creed : to gratify therefore Leon-
tius the bishop of the Novatian church at Rome,
who interceded in behalf of Symmachus, he
graciously pardoned him for that crime. Sym-
machus, after he had obtained his pardon, wrote
an apologetic address to the Emperor Theodo-
sius. Thus the war, which at its commencement
threatened so seriously, was brought to a speedy
termination.

CHAPTER XV.

Of Flavian Bishop of Antioch.

About the same period, the following events
took place at Antioch in Syria. After the death
of Paulinus, the people who had been under his
superintendence refused to submit to the author-
ity of Flavian, but caused Evagrius to be or-
dained bishop of their own party. ^ As he
did not survive his ordination long, no other
was constituted in his place, Flavian having
brought this about : nevertheless those who dis-
liked Flavian on account of his having violated
his oath, held their assemblies apart." Mean-
while Flavian ' left no stone unturned,' as the
phrase is, to bring these also under his control ;
and this he soon after effected, when he appeased
the anger of Theophilus, then bishop of Alex-

' The churches were considered recognized places of asylum.
Cf. Bingham, Christ. Antiq. VIII. 10 and 11.

1 Theodoret (//. E. V. 23) says that there was a double viola-
tion of order in the ordination of Evagrius; first in that he was
ordained by his predecessor, and secondly in that he was ordained
by one bishop, whereas the canon required that not less than three
should take part in an episcopal ordination.

* Cf. VI. 9; also chaps. 5 and 11 of this book.


126


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 15.


andria, by whose mediation he conciliated
Damasus bishop of Rome also. For both these
had been greatly displeased with Flavian, as well
for the perjury of which he had been guilty, as
for the schism he had occasioned among the
previously united people. Theophilus there-
fore being pacified, sent Isidore a presbyter to
Rome, and thus reconciled Damasus, who was
still offended ; representing to him the propriety
of overlooking Flavian's past misconduct, for
the sake of producing concord among the peo-
ple. Communion being in this way restored to
Flavian, the people of Antioch were in the course
of a little while induced to acquiesce in the union
secured. Such was the conclusion of this affair
at Antioch. But the Arians of that city being
ejected from the churches, were accustomed to
hold their meetings in the suburbs. Meanwhile
Cyril bishop of Jerusalem having died about this
time/ was succeeded by John.


CHAPTER XVI.

Demolition of the Idolatrous Temples at Alex-
andria, and the Consequent Conflict between
the Pagans and Christians.

At the solicitation of Theophilus bishop of
Alexandria the emperor issued an order at this
time for the demolition of the heathen temples
in that city ; commanding also that it should be
put in execution under the direction of Theophi-
lus. Seizing this opportunity, Theophilus exerted
himself to the utmost to expose the pagan mys-
teries to contempt. And to begin with, he caused
the Mithreum ' to be cleaned out, and exhibited
to public view the tokens of its bloody mysteries.
Then he destroyed the Serapeum, and the bloody
rights of the Mithreum he publicly caricatured ;
the Serapeum also he showed full of extrava-
gant superstitions, and he had the phalli of Pria-
pus carried through the- midst of the forum. The
pagans of Alexandria, and especially the profes-
sors of philosophy, were unable to repress their
rage at this exposure, and exceeded in revenge-
ful ferocity their outrages on a former occasion :
for with one accord, at a preconcerted signal,
they rushed impetuously upon the Christians,
and murdered every one they could lay hands
on. The Christians also made an attempt to
resist the assailants, and so the mischief was the
more augmented. This desperate affray was
prolonged until satiety of bloodshed put an end
to it. Then it was discovered that very few of
the heathens had been killed, but a great num-
ber of Christians ; while the number of wounded
on each side was almost innumerable. Fear
then possessed the pagans on account of what


' In 386 A.D.


' See III. 2.


was done, as they considered the emperor's dis-
pleasure. For having done what seemed good
in their own eyes, and by their bloodshed having
quenched their courage, some fled in one direc-
tion, some in another, and many quitting Alex-
andria, dispersed themselves in various cities.
Among these were the two grammarians Hella-
dius and Ammonius, whose pupil I was in my
youth at Constantinople.^ Helladius was said
to be the priest of Jupiter, and Ammonius of
Simius.^ Thus this disturbance having been ter-
minated, the governor of Alexandria, and the
commander-in-chief of the troops in Egypt, as-
sisted Theophilus in demolishing the heathen
temples. These were therefore razed to the
ground, and the images of their gods molten
into pots and other convenient utensils for the
use of the Alexandrian church ; for the emperor
had instructed Theophilus to distribute them for
the relief of the poor. All the images were ac-
cordingly broken to pieces, except one statue
of the god before mentioned, which Theophilus
preserved and set up in a public place ; ' Lest,'
said he, * at a future time the heathens should
deny that they had ever worshiped such gods.'
This action gave great umbrage to Ammonius
the grammarian in particular, who to my knowl-
edge was accustomed to say that ' the religion
of the Gentiles was grossly abused in that that
single statue was not also molten, but preserved,
in order to render that religion ridiculous.'
Helladius however boasted in the presence of
some that he had slain in that desperate onset
nine men with his own hand. Such were the
doings at Alexandria at that time.

CHAPTER XVII.

Of the Hieroglyphics found in the Temple of
Serapis.

When the Temple of Serapis was torn down
and laid bare, there were found in it, engraven
on stones, certain characters which they call hie-
roglyphics, having the forms of crosses.' Both
the Christians and pagans on seeing them, ap-
propriated and applied them to their respective
religions : for the Christians who affirm that the
cross is the sign of Christ's saving passion,

2 Cf. Introd. p. 8. ' mSr^Kov, ' the ape-god."

' There are several cruciform signs among the Egyptian hiero-
glyphics, as e.g. the simple determinative X, meanmg ' to cross,'
'to multiply," 'to mix' (see Birch, F.gyfitian Texts, p. 99); or
the syllabic -§• . phonetically equivalent to am (see Birch, ibid.
p. loi) ; or the cross with a ring at the head y : or the still more

elaborate ^B> (see Brugsh, Thesaurus luscript. Egyptiacaruni,

p. 20; also Champollion, Grammaire Egyf>tienne, XII. p. 365,
440). To which of these Socrates refers it is impossible to say from
their mere form. They occur commonly and we must infer that the
discovery described in this passage is not the first brincing into
light of the sign mentioned, but its occurrence in the Serapeum.
The third of the above signs is usually interpreted as ' life ' either
' happy " or ' immortal." which agrees with the meaning given to
the cruciform sign here mentioned.


V. i8.]


REFORMS IN ROME.


127


claimed this character as pecuHarly theirs ; but
the pagans alleged that it might appertain to
Christ and Serapis in common ; ' for,' said they,
' it symbolizes one thing to Christians and an-
other to heathens.' Whilst this point was con-
troverted amongst them, some of the heathen
converts to Christianity, who were conversant
with these heiroglyphic characters, interpreted
the form of a cross and said that it signifies ' Life
to come.' This the Christians exultingly laid
hold of, as decidedly favorable to their reli-
gion. But after other hieroglyphics had been
deciphered containing a prediction that ' When
the cross should appear,' — for this was ' life to
come,' — * the Temple of Serapis would be de-
stroyed,' a very great number of the pagans em-
braced Christianity, and confessing their sins,
were baptized. Such are the reports I have
heard respecting the discovery of this symbol
in form of a cross. But I cannot imagine that
the Egyptian priests foreknew the things con-
cerning Christ, when they engraved the figure
of a cross. For if ' the advent' of our Saviour
into the world ' was a mystery hid from ages and
from generations,' ^ as the apostle declares ; and
if the devil himself, the prince of wiqkedness,
knew nothing of it, his ministers, the Egyptian
priests, are likely to have been still more ignorant
of the matter ; but Providence doubtless pur-
posed that in the enquiry concerning this charac-
ter, there should something take place analogous
to what happened heretofore at the preaching
of Paul. For he, made wise by the Divine
Spirit, employed a similar method in relation to
the Athenians,^ and brought over many of them to
the faith, when on reading the inscription on one
of their altars, he accommodated and applied it
to his own discourse. Unless indeed any one
should say, that the Word of God wrought in
the Egyptian priests, as it did on Balaam * and
Caiaphas ; ^ for these men uttered prophecies
of good things in spite of themselves. This will
suffice on the subject.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Reformation of Abuses at Rome by the Emperor
Theodosius.

The emperor Theodosius during his short
stay in Italy, conferred the greatest benefit on
the city of Rome, by grants on the one hand,
and abrogations on the other. His largesses
were indeed very munificent ; and he removed
two most infamous abuses which existed in the
city. One of them was the following : there
were buildings of immense magnitude, erected

' I Cor. ii. 7, 8; Eph. iii. 5, 6; Col. i. 26.

* Acts xvii. 23. * Num. xxiv. ' John xi. 51.


in ancient Rome in former times, in which bread
was made for distribution among the people.'
Those who had the charge of these edifices,
who Mancipes^ were called in the Latin lan-
guage, in process of time converted them into
receptacles for thieves. Now as the bake-
houses in these structures were placed under-
neath, they build taverns at the side of each,
where they kept prostitutes ; by which means
they entrapped many of those who went thither
either for the sake of refreshment, or to gratify
their lusts, for by a certain mechanical contriv-
ance they precipitated them from the tavern
into the bake-house below. This was practiced
chiefly upon strangers ; and such as were in
this way kidnapped were compelled to work in
the bake-houses, where many of them were im-
mured until old age, not being allowed to go
out, and giving the impression to their friends
that they were dead. It happened that one of
the soldiers of the emperor Theodosius fell into
this snare ; who being shut up in the bake-
house, and hindered from going out, drew a
dagger which he wore and killed those who
stood in his way : the rest being terrified, suf-
fered him to escape. When the emperor was
made acquainted with the circumstance he
punished the Mancipes, and ordered these
haunts of lawless and abandoned characters to
be pulled down. This was one of the disgrace-
ful nuisances of which the emperor purged the
imperial city : the other was of this nature.
When a woman was detected in adultery, they
punished the delinquent not in the way of cor-
rection but rather of aggravation of her crime.
For shutting her up in a narrow brothel, they
obliged her to prostitute herself in a most dis-
gusting manner \ causing little bells to be rung
at the time of the unclean deed that those who
passed by might not be ignorant of what was
doing within. This was doubtless intended to
brand the crime with greater ignominy in public
opinion. As soon as the emperor was apprised
of this indecent usage, he would by no means
tolerate it ; but having ordered the Sistra ^ —
for so these places of penal prostitution were
denominated — to be pulled down, he appointed
other laws for the punishment of adulteresses.*

' In the earlier periods of Roman history the government under-
took to regulate the price of com, so as to protect the poorer classes:
in time of scarcity tne government was to purchase the grain and
sell it at a moderate price. This provision was gradually changed
into a dispensation of public charity, at first by the sale of the grain
below cost, and afterwards by the gratuitous distribution of the
same. Some time before the reign of Aurclian, 270-275 a.u., the
distribution of grain seems to have given place to the distribution
of bread. Such distribution was made after the reign of Constan-
tine at Constantinople as well as at Rome. See Smith, Diet, of the
Greek and Rom. Antiq., art. Leges Frumentarice.

' Originally this name was applied to all farmers-general of the
public revenues. See Smith, Diet, of Greek and Ront. Antiq.,
art. Manceps.

3 Lit. = ' bells.' Cf. Smith, Diet, of Greek and Rom. Antiq.,
art. SiSTRUM.

♦ From a law of Constantine's {Cod. 9. 30) whose genuineness
is, however, disputed, the punishment of adultery was death. The


128


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. i8.


Thus did the emperor Theodosius free the city
from two of its most discreditable abuses : and
when he had arranged all other affairs to liis
satisfiiction, he left the emperor Valentinian at
Rome, and returned himself with his son Hono-
rius to Constantinople, and entered that city of
the loth of November, in the consulate of
Tatian and Symmachus.^


CHAPTER XIX.

Of the Office of Peniientiary Presbyters and its
Abolition.

At this time it was deemed requisite to abol-
ish the office of those presbyters in the churches
who had charge of the penitences : ^ this was
done on the following account. When the No-
vatians separated themselves from the Church
because they would not communicate with those
who had lapsed during the persecution under
Uecius, the bishops added to the ecclesiastical
canon- a presbyter of penitence in order that
those who had sinned after baptism might confess
their sins in the presence of the presbyter thus
appointed.^ And this mode of discipline is still
maintained among other heretical institutions
by all the rest of the sects ; the Homoousians
only, together with the Novatians who hold the
same doctrinal views, have abandoned it. The
latter indeed would never admit of its establish-
ment : * and the Homoousians who are now in
possession of the churches, after retaining this
function for a considerable period, abrogated it
in the time of Nectarius, in consequence of an
event which occurred in the Constantinopolitan
church, which is as follows : A woman of noble
family coming to the penitentiary, made a gen-
eral confession of those sins she had committed
since her baptism : and the presbyter enjoined
fasting and prayer continually, that together with
the acknowledgment of error, she might have
to show works also meet for repentance. Some
time after this, the same lady again presented
herself, and confessed that she had been guilty
of another crime, a deacon of the church having
slept with her. When this was proved the
deacon was ejected from the church : * but the


same punishment appears to have been inflicted in specific cases
mentioned by Am. Marcellinus. Rerum Gestarum, XXVII. i.
28. Whence it appears that Socrates must have been misinformed
concerning the facts mentioned here.

* 391 A.D.

' On account of which he was called the Penitentiary. Cf.
Bingham, Christ. Antiq. XVIII. 3.

* ' The sacerdotal catalogue or order, clerical order, the clergy
in general.' See Sophocles, Greek Lex. of the Rom. and Byzani.
Periods.

' On the discipline of the ancient church, see Bennett, Christ.
Archtro'. p. i8o seg.

« See Euseb. //. R. VI. 43.

5 The regulation of the earliest church was expressed as follows:
' If any bishop, presbyter, or deacon be found guilty of fornication
... let him be deposed." Apostol. Can. ^5.


people were very indignant, being not only
offended at what had taken place, but also
because the deed had brought scandal and
degradation upon the Church. When in con-
sequence of this, ecclesiastics were subjected to
taunting and reproach, Eudaemon a presbyter
of the church, by birth an .\lexandrian, per-
suaded Nectarius the bishop to abolish the
office of penitentiary presbyter, and to leave
every one to his own conscience with regard to
the participation of the sacred mysteries : •* for
thus only, in his judgment, could the Church be
preserved from obloquy. Having heard this ex-
planation of the matter from Eudcemon I have
ventured to put it in the present treatise : for as
I have often remarked," I have spared no pains
to procure an authentic account of affairs from
those who were best acquainted with them, and
to scrutinize every report, lest I should advance
what might be untrue. My observation to
Eudaemon, when he first related the circum-
stance, was this : ' Whether, O presbyter, your
counsel has been profitable for the Church or
otherwise, God knows ; but I see that it takes
away the means of rebuking one another's faults,
and prevents our acting upon that precept of
the apostle,* " Have no fellowship with the un-
fruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them." ' Concerning this affair let this suffice.


CHAPTER XX.

Divisions among the Arians and Other Heretics.

I CONCEIVE it right moreover not to leave un-
noticed the proceedings of the other religious \
bodies, viz. the Arians,' Novatians, and those \
who received their denominations from Mace- !
donius and Eunomius. For the Church once
being divided, rested not in that schism, but the
separatists taking occasion from the slightest and
most frivolous pretences, disagreed among them-
selves. The manner and time, as well as the
causes for which they raised mutual dissensions,
we will state as we proceed. But let it be ob-
served here, that the emperor Theodosius per-
secuted none of them except Eunomius ; but
inasmuch as the latter, by holding meetings in
private houses at Constantinople, where he read

" Although the plural is used here, the reference is, no doubt, to
the .sacrament of the Lord's supper only. The mysteries recog-
nized by Theodorus Studites, Efiist. II. 165, are six; i.e. baptism,
eucharist, unction, orders, monastic tonsure, and the mysteiy of
death or funeral ceremonies. The Greek Church of modern times
enumerates seven: baptism, unction, eucharist, orders, penitence,
marriage, and extreme unction.

' Cf. I. i; 11. I.

' Eph. V. II. Valesius rightly infers from this answer of Soc-
rates to Eudaemon that the former was not a Novatian. For he dis-
approves of the abolition of the penitentiary bishop's office, whereas
as a Novatian he would have been acainst its institution before it was
established, and in fnvor of its abolition afterwards. The Novatians
never admitted either of penitence or of the penitentiary bishop.

' See chap. 23 of this book.


V. 21.] THE NOVATIAN CHURCH DISTURBED BY SABBATIUS. 129


the works he had composed, corrupted many
with his doctrines, he ordered him to be sent
into exile. Of the other heretics he interfered
with no one ; nor did he constrain them to hold
communion with himself; but he allowed them
all to assemble in their own conventicles, and
to entertain their own opinions on points of
Christian faith. Permission to build themselves
churches without the cities was granted to the
rest : but inasmuch as the Novatians held senti-
ments precisely identical with his own as to faith,
he ordered that they should be suffered to con-
tinue unmolested in their churches within the
cities, as I have befofe noticed.^ Concerning
these I think it opportune, however, to give in
this place some farther account, and shall there-
fore retrace a few circumstances in their history.


CHAPTER XXI.

Peculiar Schism among the Novatians}

Of the Novatian church at Constantinople
Agelius was the bishop for the space of forty
years/ viz. from the reign of Constantine until
the sixth year of that of the emperor Theodosius,
as I have stated somewhere previously.^ He
perceiving his end approaching, ordained Sisin-
nius to succeed him in the bishopric.'' This
person was a presbyter of the church over which
Agelius presided, remarkably eloquent, and had
been instructed in philosophy by Maximus, at the
same time as the emperor Julian. Now as the
Novatian laity were dissatisfied with this election,
and wished rather that he had ordained Marcian,
a man of eminent piety, on account of whose in-
fluence their sect had been left unmolested dur-
ing the reign of Valens, Agelius therefore to allay
his people's discontent, laid his hands on Marcian
also. Having recovered a little from his illness,
he went to the church and thus of his own accord
addressed the congregation : ' After my decease
let Marcian be your bishop ; and after Mar-
cian, Sisinnius.' He survived these words but a
short time ; Marcian accordingly having been
constituted bishop of the Novatians, a division
arose in their church also, from this cause.
Marcian had promoted to the rank of presbyter
a converted Jew named Sabbatius, who never-
theless continued to retain many of his Jewish
prejudices ; and moreover he was very ambitious
of being made a bishop. Having therefore con-
fidentially attached to his interest two presbyters,

2 See chap. lo, above.

• The main reason adduced for considering Socrates a Novatian
is his peculiarly detailed account of the Novatian heresy, and the
nearness in which he puts it to the orthodo.v faith. See Introd. p.
ix and chap. 19 of this book, note 8: also II. 38 and VI. 21.

^ See above, chap. 12, note 2. This was in 384 A.D.

^ IV. 9 and 12 of this book.

^ On he irregularity of this action, see chap. 15 above, note i.
Sisinnius is .ngain mentioned in VI. i. 31 ; VII. 6 and 12.


Theoctistus and Macarius, who were cognizant
of his designs, he resolved to defend that inno-
vation made by the Novatians in the time of
Valens, at Pazum a village of Phrygia, concern-
ing the festival of Piaster, to which I have al-
ready adverted.'^ And in the first place, under
pretext of more ascetic austerity, he privately
withdrew from the church, saying that ' he was
grieved on account of certain persons whom he
suspected of being unworthy of participation in
the sacrament.' It was however soon discovered
that his object was to hold assemblies apart.
When Marcian understood this, he bitterly cen-
sured his own error, in ordaining to the presby-
terate persons so intent on vain-glory ; and fre-
quently said, ' That it had been better for him
to have laid his hands on thorns, than to have
imposed them on Sabbatius.' To check his pro-
ceedings, he procured a Synod of Novatian
bishops to be convened at Angarum,® a com-
mercial town near Helenopolis in Bithynia. On
assembling here they summoned Sabbatius, and
desired him to explain the cause of his discon-
tent. Upon his affirming that he was troubled
about the disagreement that existed respecting
the Feast of Easter, and that it ought to be kept
according to the custom of the Jews, and agree-
able to that sanction which those convened at
Pazum had appointed, the bishops present at
the Synod perceiving that this assertion was a
mere subterfuge to disguise his desire after the
episcopal chair, obliged him to pledge himself
on oath that he would never accept a bishopric.
When he had so sworn, they passed a canon re-
specting this feast, which they entitled ' indiffer-
ent,' declaring that ' a disagreement on such a
point was not a sufficient reason for separation
from the church ; and that the council of Pazum
had done nothing prejudicial to the catholic
canon. That although the ancients who lived
nearest to the times of the apostles differed
about the observance of this festival, it did not
prevent their communion with one another, nor
create any dissension. Besides that the Nova-
tians at imperial Rome had never followed the
Jewish usage, but always kept Easter after the
equinox ; and yet they did not separate from
those of their own faith, who celebrated it on a
different day.' From these and many such con-
siderations, they made the ' Indifferent ' Canon,
above-mentioned, concerning Easter, whereby
every one was at liberty to keep the custom
which he had by predilection in this matter, if
he so pleased ; and that it should make no dif-
ference as regards communion, but even though
celebrating differently they should be in accord
in the church. After this rule had been thus


5 Cf. IV. 28.

" Probably the modern Angora. Valesius, however, had conjec-
turally substituted the word Sangarum in this place, supposing that
the place named was a town on ttie banks of the river .Sangarius.


I30


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 21.


established, Sabbatius being bound by his oath,
anticipated the fast by keeping it in private,
whenever any discrepancy existed in the time of
the Paschal solemnity, and having watched all
night, he celebrated the sabbath of the passover ;
then on the next day he went to church, and
with the rest of the congregation partook of the
sacraments. He pursued this course for many
years, so that it could not be concealed from
the people ; in imitation of which some of the
more ignorant, and chiefly the Phrygians and
Galatians, supposing they should be justified by
this conduct imitated him, and kept the pass-
over in secret after his manner. Put Sabbatius
afterwards disregarding the oath by which he
had renounced the episcopal dignity, held schis-
matic meetings, and was constituted bishop of
his followers, as we shall show hereafter.'


CHAPTER XXII. V

The Author's Views respecting the Celebration
of Easter, Baptism, Fasting, Marriage, the
Eucharist, and Other Ecclesiastical Rites.

As we have touched the subject I deem it not
unreasonable to say a few words concerning
Easter. It appears to me that neither the
ancients nor moderns who have affected to fol-
low the Jews, have had any rational foundation
for contending so obstinately about it. For they
have not taken into consideration the fact that
when Judaism was changed into Christianity,
the obligation to observe the Mosaic law and
the ceremonial types ceased. And the proof
of the matter is plain ; for no law of Christ
permits Christians to imitate the Jews. On the
contrary the apostle expressly forbids it ; not
only rejecting circumcision, but also deprecat-
ing contention about festival days. In his
epistle to the Galatians' he writes, 'Tell me,
ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not
hear the law?' And continuing his train of
argument, he demonstrates that the Jews were
in bondage as servants, but that those who have
come to Christ are ' called into the liberty of
sons.' * Moreover he exhorts them in no way
to regard ' days, and months, and years.' '
Again in his epistle to the Colossians ^ he dis-
tinctly declares, that such observances are merely
shadows : wherefore he says, ' Let no man judge
you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of any
holy-day, or of the new moon, or of the sab-
bath-days ; which are a shadow of things to
come.' The same tniths are also confirmed by
him in the epistle to the Hebrews' in these
words : ' For the priesthood being changed,


' Cf. VII. s and 12.
■ Gal. iv. 21.
' Gal. V. 13.


* Gal. iv. 10.

* Col. ii. 16, 17.

* Heb. vii. 12.


there is made of necessity a change also of the
law.' Neither the apostles, therefore, nor the
Gospels,'' have anywhere imposed the ' yoke of
servitude ' ^ on those who have embraced the
truth ; but have left Easter and every other
feast to be honored by the gratitude of the
recipients of grace. Wherefore, inasmuch as
men love festivals, because they afford them
cessation from labor : each individual in every
place, according to his own pleasure, has by a
prevalent custom celebrated the memory of the
saving passion. The Saviour and his apostles
have enjoined us by no law to keep this feast :
nor do the Gospels and apostles threaten us
with any penalty, punishment, or curse for the
neglect of it, as the Mosaic law does the Jews.
It is merely for the sake of historical accuracy,
and for the reproach of the Jews, because they
polluted themselves with blood on their very
feasts, that it is recorded in the Gospels that
our Saviour suffered in the days of 'unleavened
bread.' ^ The aim of the apostles was not to
appoint festival days, but to teach a righteous
life and piety. And it seems to me that just as
many other customs have been established in
individual localities according to usage. So also
the feast of Easter came to be observed in each
place according to the individual peculiarities
of the peoples inasmuch as none of the apostles
legislated on the matter. And that the observ-
ance originated not by legislation, but as a
custom the facts themselves indicate. In Asia
Minor most people kept the fourteenth day of
the moon, disregarding the sabbath : yet they
never separated from those who did otherwise,
until Victor, bishop of Rome, influenced by too
ardent a zeal, fulminated a sentence of excom-
munication against the Quartodecimans' in Asia.
Wherefore also Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons in
France, severely censured Victor by letter for
his immoderate heat ; '" telling him that although
the ancients differed in their celebration of
Easter, they did not desist from intercom-
munion. Also that Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna,
who afterwards suffered martyrdom under Gor-
dian," continued to communicate with Anicetus
bishop of Rome, although he himself, accord-


" o airo<rTo»\o? . . . ra euayyeAia, the two parts of the New Testa-
ment, speaking generally. See Sophocles' Greek Lex. of the Rom.
and Byzant. Periods under oiro<rToAo« and evioyyeAioi'.

' Gal. V. I.

» M.»tt. xxvi. 2; Mark xiv. 1; Luke xxii. i.

" T<<7(rop«<ricoi4««aTiTai, those who observed Eister on the four-
teenth day of the lunar month (Nisan of the Jewish calendar). On
the Quartodeciman controversy, sec Schiirer, a'^ Centrot'ersits Pas-
cltalibus secundo post Chriitum natum Saculo ejcortis : also,
Salmon, Introduction to the Netu Testament, 3 ed. p. 252-267.

'" Ircnzus, H(rr. III. 3, 4.

" Polycarp suffered martyrdom in 156 a.d. (see Lightfoot,
Apostolic Fathers, Part II. Vol. I. p. 629-702, containing conclu-
sive proof of this, as well as a history of the question); whence it
appears that it was under Antoninus Pius that he died. Valesius
therefore infers that Socrates meant to speak of Irena:us as suffer-
inc martyrdom under Gordian, and not of Polycarp. If this be the
case, we must assnine a serious corruption of the text, or an unpar-
alleled confusion in Socrates.


V. 22.]


DIFFERENCES OF USAGE IN REGARD TO EASTER.


131


ing to the usage of his native Smyrna, kept
Easter on the fourteenth clay of the moon, as
Eusebius attests in the fifth book of his Ec-
clesiastical History}'^ While therefore some in
Asia Minor observed the day above-mentioned,
others in the East kept that feast on the sab-
bath indeed, but differed as regards the month.
The former thought the Jews should be followed,
though they were not exact : the latter kept
Easter after the equinox, refusing to celebrate
with the Jews ; * for,' said they, ' it ought to
be celebrated when the sun is in Aries, in the
month called Xanthicus by the Antiochians,
and April by the Romans.' In this practice,
they averred, they conformed not to the modern
Jews, who are mistaken in almost everything,
but to the ancients, and to Josephus according
to what he has written in the third book of his
Jewish Antiquities}'^ Thus these people were
at issue among themselves. But all other Chris-
tians in the Western parts, and as far as the
ocean itself, are found to have celebrated Easter
after the equinox, from a very ancient tradition.
And in fact these acting in this manner have
never disagreed on this subject. It is not true,
as some have pretended, that the Synod under
Constantine altered this festival : " for Constan-
tine himself, writing to those who differed re-
specting it, recommended that as they were few
in number, they could agree with the majority
of their brethren. His letter will be found at
length in the third book of the' Life of Constan-
tine by Eusebius ; but the passage in it relative
to Easter runs thus : ^^

' It is a becoming order which all the churches
in the Western, Southern, and Northern parts of
the world observe, and some places in the East
also. Wherefore all on the present occasion
have judged it right, and I have pledged myself
that it will have the acquiescence of your pru-
dence, that what is unanimously observed in the
city of Rome, throughout Italy, Africa, and the
whole of Egypt, in Spain, France, Britain,
Libya, and all Greece, the diocese of Asia and
Pontus, and Cilicia, your wisdom also will readily
embrace ; considering not only that the number
of churches in the aforesaid places is greater,
but also that while there should be a universal
concurrence in what is most reasonable, it be-
comes us to have nothing in common with the
perfidious Jews.'


'^ Euseb. V. 24.

'^ Josephus, Antiq. III. 10. The passage is worth quoting
entire, running as follows: ' In the month Xanthicus, which is
called Nisap by us, and is the beginning of the year, on the four-
teenth day of the moon, while the sun is in the sign of Aries (the
Ram), for during this month we were freed from bondage under the
Egyptians, he has also appointed that we should sacrifice each year
the sacrifice which, as we went out of Egypt, they commanded us
to offer, it being called the Passover.'

" The Audiani, who averred that the Synod of Nicxa first fixed
the time of Easter.

16 Euseb. Life of Constant. III. 19.


Such is the tenor of the emperor's letter.
Moreover the Quartodecimans affirm that the
observance of the fourteenth day was delivered
to them by the apostle John : while the
Romans and those in the Western parts assure
us that their usage originated with the apostles
Peter and Paul. Neither of these parties how-
ever can produce any written testimony in con-
firmation of what they assert. But that the time
of keeping Easter in various places is dependent
on usage, I infer from this, that those who agree
in faith, differ among themselves on questions of
usage. And it will not perhaps be unseasonable
to notice here the diversity of customs in the
churches.'" The fasts before Easter will be
found to be differently observed among different
people. Those at Rome fast three successive
weeks before Easter, excepting Saturdays and
Sundays.'^ Those in Illyrica and all over Greece
and Alexandria observe a fast of six weeks, which
they term ' The forty days' fast.' '* Others com-
mencing their fast from the seventh week before
Easter, and fasting three five days only, and that
at intervals, yet call that time ' The forty days'
fast.' It is indeed surprising to me that thus
differing in the number of days, they should both
give it one common appellation ; but some as-
sign one reason for it, and others another, ac-
cording to their several fancies. One can see
also a disagreement about the manner of absti-
nence from food, as well as about the number
of days. Some wholly abstain from things that
have life : others feed on fish only of all living
creatures : many together with fish, eat fowl also,
saying that according to Moses, '^ these were like-
wise made out of the waters. Some abstain from
eggs, and all kinds of fruits : others partake of
dry bread only ; still, others eat not even this :
while others having fasted till the ninth hour,^
afterwards take any sort of food without dis-
tinction. And among various nations there are
other usages, for which innumerable reasons are
assigned. Since however no one can produce a
written command as an authority, it is evident
that the apostles left each one to his own free
will in the matter, to the end that each might

'" Cf. Bingham, Christ. Antiq. XX. v.

" Baronius (/J««. 57 and 391 a.d.) finds two mistakes here: first,
in the assertion that the Romans fasted three weeks only before
Easter, and second, in the assertion that during those three weeks
Saturdays were excepted. Cf. also Ceillier, Hist, des Auteurs
Sacres et Ecclesiast. Vol. VIII. p. 523, 524. Valesius, however,
quotes Pope Leo (fourth sermon on the Lent Fast) and Venerable
Beda to prove that Socrates' assertion concerning the exception of
Saturday may be defended. See Quesnell, de Je}unio Sabbati ;
Bingham, Origin. Eccl. XXI. i. 14; also Be»'eridge, a'* Jrjunio
Quadragesimali.

'* T€<T<TapoKO(TT>j = Lent; the Latin equivalent is, of course,
Quadragesima. '" Gen. i. 20.

-" Valesius rightly conjectures that very few observed this mode
of fasting during Lent, basing his opinion on the order of worship
and various deprecatory expressions in ancient authors with respect
to it. It may be noted that the Mohammedan Fast of Ramadan is
observed on the same principle and in a similar manner. The fast
begins with the dawn of the sun and continues until sunset, being
complete for that space of time. With the setting of the sun, how-
ever, every person is at liberty to eat as he may please.


132


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 22.


perform what is good not by constraint or neces-
sity. Such is the difference in the churches on
the subject of fasts. Nor is there less variation
in regard to religious assemblies.^' For although
almost all churches throughout the world cele-
brate the sacred mysteries on the sabbath " of
every week, yet the Christians of Alexandria and
at Rome, on account of some ancient tradition,
have ceased to do this. The Egyptians in the
neighborhood of Alexandria, and the inhabitants
of Thebais, hold their religious assemblies on
the sabbath, but do not participate of the mys-
teries in the manner usual among Christians in
general : for after having eaten and satisfied
themselves with food of all kinds, in the evening
making their offerings ^ they partake of the mys-
teries. At Alexandria again, on the Wednes-
day"'* in Passion week and on Good Friday, the
scriptures are read, and the doctors expound
them ; and all the usual services are performed
in their assemblies, except the celebration of
the mysteries. This practice in Alexandria is
of great antiquity, for it appears that Origen
most commonly taught in the church on those
days. He being a very learned teacher in
the Sacred Books, and perceiving that the
' impotence of the law ' ^ of Moses was weak-
ened by literal explanation, gave it a spiritual
interpretation ; declaring that there has never
been but one true Passover, which the Saviour
celebrated when he hung upon the cross : for
that he then vanquished the adverse powers,
and erected this as a trophy against the devil.
In the same city of Alexandria, readers and
chanters^ are chosen indifferently from the
catechumens and the faithful ; whereas in all
other churches the faithful only are promoted
to these offices. I myself, also, learned of an-
other custom in Thessaly. If a clergyman in
that country, after taking orders, should sleep
with his wife, whom he had legally married
before his ordination, he would be degraded.^


*i <rvvd^tu)v. Sophocles {Creek Lex. of the Rom. and Byzant.
Period) gives the following senses to the word: i. ' Religious
meeting"; 2. ' Religious service '; 3. ' Place of meeting '; 4. 'Con-
gregation.' To these we may add on the authority of Casaubon
{Exercil. XVI. ad Anna!. Baronii, No. 42) 5. ' The celebration
of the Eucharist.' It is in the second sense given by Sophocles
that it is used here.

" i.e. Saturday. Sunday is never called ' the Sabbath ' by the
ancient Fathers and historians, but 'the Lord's day' (<upia<cjj).
Sophocles ( Cr-jv/t Z.?.r. 0/ the Rom. and Byzant. Period) gives
three senses to the word; viz., i. 'The Sabbath' [of the lews] (so
in the LXX and Jewish writers). 2. ' The week.' 3. 'Saturday.'
Many early Christians, however, continued to observe the Jewish
Sabbath along with the first day of the week. Cf. Bingham, Christ.
Antiq. XX. 3.

" 7To.>er<J>tpoi"Tf<r, freely = ' celebrating the Eucharist.' Irena:us,
Contra H<rrei. XVIII. 3; Euseb. Deinonstr. Evan. X. i; Athan.
Apnl. Contr. Arian, 28.

'-* ' If any bishop . . . does not fast on Wednesday or Friday
let him be deposed.' So Afiost. Can. 69. These two days are
universally joined together by the Greek and Roman Catholic
Churches. " Cf. Rom. viii. 3.

•o i>7rofloA«r?, lit. = ' prompters,' whose duty it was to read the
Psalms which the people chanted.

" On the celibacy of the clergy and its gradual growth, see
Bingham, Christ. Antiq. IV. 5; Apost. Can. 51, and Council of
Gangra, Can. i (Hefele, Hist. Ch. Councils, Vol. II. p. 325 seq.).


In the East, indeed, all clergymen, and even
the bishops themselves, abstain from their
wives : but this they do of their own accord,
and not by the necessity of any law ; for there
have been among them many bishops, who have
had children by their lawful wives, during their
episcopate. It is said that the author of the
usage which obtains in Thessaly was Heliodo-
rus bishop of Tricca in that country ; under
whose name there are love books extant, en-
titled Eihiopica^ which he composed in his
youth. The same custom prevails at Thessa-
lonica, and in Macedonia, and in Greece. I
have also known of another peculiarity in Thes-
saly, which is, that they baptize there on the
days of Easter only ; in consequence of which
a very great number of them die without having
received baptism. At Antioch in Syria the site
of the church is inverted ; so that the altar does
not face toward the east, but toward the west.-"^
In Greece, however, and at Jerusalem and in
Thessaly they go to prayers as soon as the can-
dles are lighted, in the same manner as the
Novatians do at .Constantinople. At Caesarea
likewise, and in Cappadocia, and in Cyprus, the
presbyters and bishops expound the Scriptures
in the evening, after the candles are lighted.
The Novatians of the Hellespont do not per-
form their prayers altogether in the same man-
ner as those of Constantinople ; in most things,
however, their usage is similar to that of the
prevailing^' church. In short, it is impossible to
find anywhere, among all the sects, two churches
which agree exactly in their ritual respecting
prayers. At Alexandria no presbyter is allowed
to address the public : a regulation which was .
made after Arius had raised a disturbance in ^
that church. At Rome they fast every Satur-
day.^' At Caesarea of Cappadocia they exclude
from communion those who have sinned after
baptism as the Novatians do. The same disci-
pline was practiced by the Macedonians in the
Hellespont, and by the Quartodecimans in Asia.
The Novatians in Phrygia do not admit such as
have twice married ; ^- but those of Constanti-


^ A novel on the adventures of Theagenes and Chariclea. The
Heliodorus who wrote the Ethiofiica was, according to Photius,
Bihliolh. chap. 94, a native of Phoenicia, hence not the same as the
bishop of Tricca. Others ascribe the Elhiopica to Heliodorus the
Sophist, who flourished under the Emperor Hadrian.

™ According to the Apost. Constit. (II. 57) a church should be
built so as to face the east. This regulation was generally followed,
but there were exceptions. Cf. Bingham, Christ. Antiq. VIII. 3. 2.

30 i.e. the catholic or orthodox church; used pernaps in the
same way as the expression ' established church ' in modern limes.

" Apost. Can. 64, provides that no cleric or layman shall fast on
the Sabbath day (Saturday, see note 22, above), the former on pain
of being deposed, the latter, of being excommunicated. It appears,
however, that the Roman church observed the day as a fast, while
the Greek church held it to be a feast. Socrates, however, seems to
contradict the statement he had made above (see note 17) that at
Rome Saturdays and Sundays were excepted from the list of fasting
days in Lent. From Augustine's Epistles, 36. 31 et al., it appears
that he fasted on Saturday and regarded this the regular and proper
course to be pursued, and actually pursued by members of the
church. Hence the present statement of Socrate^ must be taken as
correct to the exclusion of the former.

'' Apost. Can. 17. ' He who has been twice married after bap-


V. 22.] DIVERSITIES OF USAGE IN EXTERNAL OBSERVANCES. 133


nople neither admit nor reject them openly,
while in the Western parts they are openly re-
ceived. This diversity was occasioned, as I
imagine, by the bishops who in their respective
eras governed the churches ; and those who re-
ceived these several rites and usages, trans-
mitted them as laws to their posterity. How-
ever, to give a complete catalogue of all the
various customs and ceremonial observances in
use throughout every city and country would be
difficult — rather impossible ; but the instances
we have adduced are sufficient to show that the
Easter Festival was from some remote prece-
dent differently celebrated in every particular
province. They talk at random therefore who
assert that the time of keeping Easter was al-
tered in the Nicene Synod ; for the bishops
there convened earnestly labored to reduce the
first dissenting minority to uniformity of prac-
tice with the rest of the people. Now that
many differences existed even in the apostolic
age of the church occasioned by such subjects,
was not unknown even to the apostles them-
selves, as the book of The Acts testifies. For
when they understood that a disturbance occurred
among believers on account of a dissension of
the Gentiles, having all met together, they pro-
mulgated a Divine law, giving it the form of a
letter. By this sanction they liberated Chris-
tians from the bondage of formal observances,
and all vain contention about these things \ and
they taught them the path of true piety, pre-
scribing such things only as were conducive
to its attainment. The epistle itself, which I
shall here transcribe, is recorded in The Acts
of the Apostles P

' The apostles and elders and brethren send
greeting unto the brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia. For-
asmuch as we have heard, that certain which
went out from us have troubled you with words,
subverting your souls, saying. Ye must be cir-
cumcised, and keep the law ; to whom we gave
no such commandment : it seemed good unto
us, being assembled with one accord, to send
chosen men unto you, with our beloved Barna-
bas and Paul, men that have hazarded their
lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

tism . . . cannot become bishop, presbyter, or deacon, or any other
[cleric] included in the sacerdotal list.'

*' Acts XV. 23-39. The quotation is here from the Authorized
Version. The Revised has it slightly altered. We subjoin it for
comparison. ' The apostles and the elder brethren unto the breth-
ren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia,
greeting: Forasmuch as we have heard that certain which went out
from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls; to
whom we gave no commandment; it seemed good unto us, having
come to one accord, to choose out men and send them unto you with
our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their lives
for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have sent therefore
Judas and Silas, who themselves aUo shall tell you the same things
by word of mouth. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;
that ye abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep
yourselves, it shall be well with you. Fare ye well.'


We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who
shall also tell you the same thing by mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to
us, to lay upon you no greater burden than
these necessary things : that ye abstain from
meats offered to idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication ;
from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do
well. Fare ye well.'

These things indeed pleased God : for the
letter expressly says, ' It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost to lay upon you no greater burden
than these necessary things.' There are never-
theless some persons who, disregarding these
precepts, suppose all fornication to be an in-
different matter ; but contend about holy-days
as if their lives were at stake, thus contravening
the commands of God, and legislating for them-
selves, and making of none effect the decree of
the apostles : neither do they perceive that they
are themselves practicing the contrary to those
things which God approved. It is possible
easily to extend our discourse respecting Easter,
and demonstrate that the Jews observe no exact
rule either in the time or manner of celebratmg
the paschal solemnity : and that the Samaritans,
who are an offshoot from the Jews, always cele-
brate this festival after the equinox. But this
subject would require a distinct and copious
treatise : I shall therefore merely add, that
those who affect so much to imitate the Jews,
and are so very anxious about an accurate
observance of types, ought to depart from them
in no particular. For if they have chosen
to be so correct, they must not only observe
days and months, but all other things also,
which Christ (who was 'made under the
law')^ did in the manner of the Jews; or
which he unjustly suffered from them ; or wrought
typically for the good of all men. He entered
into a ship and taught. He ordered the Pass-
over to be made ready in an upper room. He
commanded an ass that was tied to be loosed.
He proposed a man bearing a pitcher of water
as a sign to them for hastening their prepara-
tions for the Passover. [He did] an infinite
number of other things of this nature which are
recorded in the gospels. And yet those who
suppose themselves to be justified by keeping
this feast, would think it absurd to observe any
of these things in a bodily manner. For no doc-
tor ever dreams of going to preach from a ship

— no person imagines it necessary to go up into
an upper room to celebrate the Passover there

— they never tie, and then loose an ass again —
and finally no one enjoins another to carry a
pitcher of water, in order that the symbols might
be fulfilled. They have justly regarded such

■■« Gal. iv. 4.


134


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 22.


things as savoring rather of Judaism : for the
Jews are more solicitous about outward solemni-
ties than the obedience of the heart ; and there-
fore are they under the curse, because they do
not discern the spiritual bearing of the Mosaic
law, but rest in its types and shadows. Those
who favor the Jews admit the allegorical mean-
ing of these things ; and yet they wage a deadly
warfare against the observance of days and
months, without applying to them a similar
sense : thus do they necessarily involve them-
selves in a common condemnation with the
Jews.

But enough I think has been said concerning
these things. Let us now return to the subject
we were previously treating of, the fact that the
Church once divided did not stay with that divi-
sion, but that those separated were again divided
among themselves, taking occasion from the
most trivial grounds. The Novatians, as I have
stated, were divided among themselves on ac-
count of the feast of Easter, the controversy not
being restricted to one point only. For in the
different provinces some took one view of the
question, and some another, disagreeing not only
about the month, but the days of the week also,
and other unimportant matters ; in some places
they hold separate assemblies because of it, in
others they unite in mutual communion.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Ftirther Disseiisions among the Avians at Con-
stantinople. The Psathyrians.

Birr dissension's arose among the Arians ' also
on this account. The contentious questions which
were daily agitated among them, led them to
start the most absurd propositions. For whereas
it has been always believed in the church that
God is the Father of the Son, the Word, it
was asked whether God could be called ' Father'
before the Son had subsistence ? Thus in assert-
ing that the Word of God was not begotten of
the Father, but was created out ' of nothing,'
and thus falling into error on the chief and main
point, they deservedly fell into absurd cavilings
about a mere name. Dorotheus therefore being
sent for by them from Antioch maintained that
God neither was nor could be called Father
before the Son existed. But Marinus whom they
had summoned out of Thrace before Dorotheus,
piqued at the superior deference which was paid
to his rival, undertook to defend the contrary
opinion. In consequence of these things there
arose a schism among them, and being thus di-
vided respecting this term, each party held sepa-
rate meetings. Those under Dorotheus retained

' See above, chap. 20.


their original places of assembly : but the fol-
lowers of Marinus built distinct oratories for
themselves, and asserted that the Father had
always been Father, even when the Son was not.
This section of the Arians was denominated
Psathyrians'^ because one of the most zealous
defenders of this opinion was Theoctistus, a
Syrian by birth, and a cake-seller \_Psathyro-
pdla'\ ^ by trade. Selenas ^ bishop of the Goths
adopted the views of this party, a man of mixed
descent ; he was a Goth by his father's side, but
by his mother's a Phrygian, by which means he
taught in the church with great readiness in both
these languages. This faction however soon
quarreled among themselves, Marinus disagree-
ing with Agapius, whom he himself had preferred
to the bishopric of Ephesus. They disputed,
however, not about any point of religion, but in
narrow-mindedness about precedence, in which
the Goths sided with Agapius. Wherefore many
of the ecclesiastics under their jurisdiction, abom-
inating the vain-glorious contest between these
two, abandoned them both, and became adher-
ents to the ' homoousian ' faith. The Arians
having continued thus divided among themselves
during the space of thirty-five years, were re-
united in the reign of Theodosius the Younger,
under the consulate* of Plintha the commander-
in-chief of the army, he being a member of the
sect of Psathyrians ; these were prevailed on to
desist from contention. They afterwards passed
a resolution, giving it all the cogency of law, that
the question which had led to their separation,
should never be mooted again. But this recon-
ciliation extended no farther than Constanti-
nople ; for in other cities where any of these
two parties were found, they persisted in their
former separation. So much respecting the di-
vision among the Arians.


CHAPTER XXIV.

The Eunomians divide into Several Factions.

But neither did the followers of Eunomius
remain without dissensions : for Eunomius ^ him-
self had long before this separated from Eudoxius
who ordained him bishop of Cyzicus, taking oc-
casion from that bishop's refusal to restore to
communion his master Aetius who had been
ejected. But those who derived their name
from him were subsequently divided into several
factions. For first Theophronius a Cappado-
cian, who had been instructed in the art of dis-
putation by Eunomius, and had acquired a smat-

' Cf. Theodoret, Hieret. Fabal. IV. 4: also Sozomen (probably
dependent on Socrates), VII. 17.

3 J/aflupioi', a species of cake; hence liaSupoirwAj)?, ' cake-seller.'

* Sozomen (Vll. 17) adds that Selenas w.ts a secretary of Ul-
filas and had been promoted to be his successor.

« 419 A.D. ' Cf. IV. 7 and 13.


V. 250


THE USURPER EUGENIUS.


^35


tering of Aristotle's Categories, and his Book of
Jntcrpretation, composed some treatises which he
entitled, On the Exercise of the Mind. Having,
however, drawn down upon himself the reproba-
tion of his own sect, he was ejected as an apostate.
He afterwards held assemblies apart from them,
and left behind him a heresy which bore his own
name. Furthermore at Constandnople a cer-
tain Eutychiiis from some absurd dispute, with-
drew from the Eunomians, and still continues to
hold separate meetings. The followers of Theo-
phronius are denominated ' Eunomiotheophro-
nians ' ; and those of Eutychius have the appel-
lation of ' Eunomieutychians.' What those
nonsensical terms were about which they dif-
fered I consider unworthy of being recorded in
this history, lest I should go into matters foreign
to my purpose. I shall merely observe that they
adulterated bapdsm : for they do not baptize in
the name of the Trinity, but into the death of
Christ.^ Among the Macedonians also there
was for some time a division, when Eutropius a
presbyter held separate assemblies, and Carte-
rius did not agree with him. There are possibly
in other cities sects which have emanated from
these : but living at Constantinople, where I was
born and educated, I describe more particularly
what has taken place in that city ; both because
I have myself witnessed some of these transac-
tions, and also because the events which have
there occurred are of pre-eminent importance,
and are therefore more worthy of commemora-
tion. Let it however be understood that what I
have here related happened at different periods,
and not at the same time. But if any one should
be desirous of knowing the names of the various
sects, he may easily satisfy himself, by reading a
book entitled Ancoraius^ composed by Epipha-
nius, bishop of Cyprus : but I shall content
myself with what I have already stated. The
public affairs were again thrown into agitation
from a cause I shall now refer to.


CHAPTER XXV.

The Usurper Eiigeniiis co?npasses the Death of
Valentinian the Younger. Theodosius obtains
a Victory over him.

There was in the Western regions a gramma-


^ Apost. Can. 50 reads: ' If any bishop or presbyter docs not
perform the one initiation with three immersions, but with one im-
mersion only into the death of the Lord, let him be deposed.' Also
the Second General Synod (that of Constantinople, 381) in its
7th Canon passed the following: ' But the Eunomians, who only
baptize ivitli one immersion, and the Montanists, who are here
called Phrygians, and the Sabellians, who teach the doctrine of the
Fatherhood of the Son . . . (if they wish to be joined to the Ortho-
dox faith) we receive as heathen; on the first day we make them
Christians, on the second, catechumens, &c.' See Hefele, Hist, of
the Church Councils, Vol. II. p. 367, 368.

' Epiphan. Ancoratus, 13. Photius calls the Ancoraius a
synopsis of the treatise of Epiphanius on Heresies {Biblioth. 123).


rian named Eugenius,' who after having for some
time taught the Latin language, left his school,
and was appointed to service at the palace, being
constituted chief secretary to the emperor. Pos-
sessing a considerable degree of eloquence, and
being on that account treated with greater dis-
tinction than others, he was unable to bear his
good fortune with moderation. For associating
with himself Arbogastes, a native of Galatia
Minor, who then had the command of a division
of the army, a man harsh in manner and very
bloodthirsty, he determined to usurp the sover-
eignty. These two therefore agreed to murder
the Emperor Valentinian, having corrupted the
eunuchs of the imperial bed-chamber. These,
on receiving tempting promises of promotion,
strangled the emperor in his sleep. Eugenius
immediately assuming the supreme authority in
the Western parts of the empire, conducted him-
self in such a manner as might be expected from
a usurper. When the Emperor Theodosius was
made acquainted with these things, he was ex-
ceedingly distressed, because his defeat of Maxi-
mus had only prepared the way for fresh troubles.
He accordingly assembled his military forces,
and having proclaimed his son Honorius Augus-
tus, on the loth of January, in his own third
consulate " which he bore with Abundantius, he
again set out in great haste toward the Western
parts, leaving both his sons invested with imperial
authority at Constantinople. As he marched
against Eugenius a very great number of the
barbarians beyond the Danube volunteered their
services, and followed him in this expedition.
After a rapid march he arrived in the Gauls with
a numerous army, where Eugenius awaited him,
also at the head of an immense body of troops.
Accordingly an engagement took place near the
river Frigidus, which is [about thirty-six miles]
distant [from Aquileia]. In that part of the
battle where the Romans fought against their
own countrymen, the conflict was doubtful : but
where the barbarian auxiliaries of the Emperor
Theodosius were engaged, the forces of Eugenius
had greatly the advantage. When the emperor
saw the barbarians perishing, he cast himself in
great agony upon the ground, and invoked the
help of God in this emergency : nor was his re-
quest unheeded ; for Bacurius ^ his principal
ofificer, inspired with sudden and extraordinary
ardor, rushed with his vanguard to the part
where the barbarians were hardest pressed, broke
through the ranks of the enemy, and put to flight
those who a little before were themselves engaged
in pursuit. Another marvelous circumstance


The subject here referred to was treated by Epiphanius in Htrr.
LXVI.and LXVIII.

' This account of Arbogastes and Eugenius is also given by
Zosimus (IV. 53-58), who adds that Arbocastes was a Frank: and
also by Philortorgius (XI. i), who says that Eugenius was a pagan.


393 A.D.


^ Cf. Zosimus, IV. 57.


136


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[V. 25.


also occurred. A violent wind suddenly arose,
which retorted upon themselves the darts cast
by the soldiers of Eugenius, and at the same
time drove those hurled by the imperial forces
with increased impetus against their adversaries.^
So prevalent was the emperor's prayer. The
success of the stniggle being in this way turned,
the usurper threw himself at the emperor's feet,
and begged that his life might be spared : but
as he lay a prostrate suppliant at the feet [of the
emperor] he was beheaded by the soldiers, on
the 6th of September, in the third consulate of
.■\rcadius, and the second of Honorius.' Arbo-
gastes, who had been the chief cause of so much
mischief, having continued his flight for two days
after the battle, and seeing no chance of escape,
despatched himself with his own sword.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Illness and Death of Theodosiiis the Elder.

The Emperor Theodosius was in consequence
of the anxiety and fatigues connected with this


* Cf. Zosimiis, IV. 58, who gives the additional item that the
sun was eclipsed during this battle.
= 394 A.D.


war thrown into bodily illness ; and believing
the disease which had attacked him would be
fatal, he became more concerned about the pub-
lic affairs than his own life, considering how
great calamities often overtook the people after
the death of their sovereign. He therefore
hastily summoned his son Honorius from Con-
stantinople, being principally desirous of setting
in order the state of things in the western parts
of the empire. After his son's arrival at Milan,
he seemed to recover a little, and gave directions
for the celebration of the games of the hippo-
drome on account of his victory. Before dinner
he was pretty well, and a spectator of the sports ;
but after he had dined he became suddenly too
ill to return to them, and sent his son to preside
in his stead ; when the night came on he died,
it being the seventeenth of January, during con-
sulate of Olybrius and Probus.' This was in the
first year of the two hundred and ninety-fourth
Olympiad. The emperor Theodosius lived
sixty years,- and reigned sixteen. This book
therefore comprehends the transactions of six-
teen years and eight months.

1 395 A.p.

2 There is some doubt as to the length of Theodosius' life; most
of the ancient historians (Sozomcn, Tneophanes, Cedrenus) agree
with Socrates in giving it as sixty years. Am. Marcellinus, Rerum
Gestarum, XXIX. 6. 15, and Victor, Epit. XLVll., leave the
impression that he was fifty.


END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.


BOOK VI.


INTRODUCTION.

The commission with which you charged us,
O holy man of God, Theodore, we have exe-
cuted in the five foregoing books ; in which to
the best of our abihty, we have comprised the his-
tory of the Church from the time of Constan-
tine. Notice, however, that we have been by
no means studious of style ; for we considered
that had we showed too great fastidiousness
about elegance of expression we might have de-
feated the object in view.^ But even supposing
our purpose could still have been accomplished,
we were wholly precluded from the exercise of
that discretionary power of which ancient his-
torians seem to have so largely availed them-
selves, whereby any one of them imagined
himself quite at liberty to amplify or curtail
matters of fact. Moreover, refined composi-
tion would by no means be edifying to the
masses and illiterate men, who are intent
merely on knowing the facts, and not on admir-
ing beauty of diction. In order therefore not
to render my production unprofitable to both
classes of readers, — to the learned on the one
hand, because no elaboration of language could
satisfy them to rank it with the magniloquence
of the writers of antiquity, and to the unlearned
on the other, because they could not understand
the facts, should they be clouded by a parade of
words, — we have purposely adopted a style,
divested indeed of all affectation of sublimity,
but at the same time clear and perspicuous.

As we begin, however, our sixth book, we
must premise this, that in undertaking to detail
the events of our own age, we are apprehensive
of advancing such things as may be unpalatable
to many : either because, according to the pro-
verb, ' Truth is bitter ; ' on account of our not
mentioning with encomium the names of those
whom some may love ; or from our not magni-
fying their actions. The zealots of our churches
will condemn us for not calling the bishops
' Most dear to God,' ' Most holy,' and such like.
Others will be litigious because we do not be-
stow the appellations ' Most divine,' and ' Lords '
on the emperors, nor apply to them such other
epithets as they are commonly assigned. But
since I could easily prove from the testimony of

1 Cf. V. Int.


ancient authors,'^ that among them the servant
was accustomed to address his master simply
by name, without reference to his dignity or
titles, on account of the pressure of business, I
shall in like manner obey the laws of history,
which demand a simple and faithful narration,
unobscured by a veil of any kind. I shall pro-
ceed to record accurately what I have either
myself seen, or have been able to ascertain from
actual observers ; having tested the truth by the
unanimity of the witnesses that spoke of the
same affairs, and by every means I could possi-
bly command. The process of ascertaining the
tmth was indeed laborious, inasmuch as many
and different persons gave different accounts
and some claimed to be eyewitnesses, while
others professed to be more intimately ac-
quainted with these things than any others.


CHAPTER I.

On the Death of Theodosius his Two Sons
divide the Empire. Riifinus is slain at the
Feet of Arcadius.

After the death of the Emperor Theodosius,
in the consulate of Olybrius and Probinus or
the seventeenth of January, his two sons under-
took the administration of the Roman empire.
Thus Arcadius assumed the government of the
East, and Honorius of the West.' At that
time Damasus was bishop of the church at
Imperial Rome, and Theophilus of that of
Alexandria, John of Jerusalem, and Flavian of
Antioch ; while the episcopal chair at Constan-
tinople or New Rome was filled by Nectarius,
as we mentioned in the foregoing book.- The
body of the Emperor Theodosius was taken to
Constantinople on the 8th of November in the
same consulate, and was honorably interred by
his son Arcadius with the usual funeral solemni-
ties.' Not long afterwards on the 28th day of
the same month the army also arrived, which
had served under the Emperor Theodosius in
the war against the usurper. When therefore


2 The comic poets, e.g. Menander, Plautiis, Terence.

' Cf. (jibbon, Decline and Fall of the Rom. Etii/>irr. chao. 20.

2 V 8. / ' y J

^ See Bennett, Christian Archcrology, p. 210 set;., and r.ini;-
\\zm\, Christ. Antiq. XXII. i and 2, for details on the burial of ilic
dead in the early Cniirch.


138


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. I.


according to custom the Emperor Arcadius met
the army without the gates, the soldiery slew
Rufinus the Praetorian prefect. For he was sus-
pected of aspiring to the sovereignty, and had
the reputation of having invited into the Roman
territories the Huns,^ a barbarous nation, who
had already ravaged Armenia, and were then
making predatory incursions into other provinces
of the East. On the very day on which Rufinus
was killed, Marcian bishop of the Novatians
died, and was succeeded in the episcopate by
Sisinnius, of whom we have already made men-
tion.*

CHAPTER II.

Death of NectaiHus and Ordination of John.

A SHORT time after Nectarius ' also, bishop of
Constantinople died, during the consulate of
Caesarius and Atticus,- on the 27th of September.
A contest thereupon immediately arose respect-
j ing the appointment of a successor, some pro-
' posing one person, and some another : at length
however it was determined to send for John,"
a presbyter of the church at Antioch, for there
was a report that he was very instructive, and at
the same time eloquent. By the general con-
sent therefore of both the clergy and laity, he
was summoned very soon afterwards to Con-
stantinople by the Emperor Arcadius : and to
render the ordination more authoritative and
imposing, several prelates were requested to be
present, among <vhom also was Theophilus bishop
of Alexandria.* This person did everything he
could to detract from John's reputation, being
desirous of promoting to that see, Isidore* a
presbyter of his own church, to whom he was
greatly attached, on account of a very delicate
and perilous affair which Isidore had undertaken
to serve his interests. What this was I must
now unfold. While the F2mperor Theodosius
was preparing to attack the usurper Maximus,
Theodosius sent Isidore with gifts giving twofold
letters, and enjoining him to present both the


< Zosimus (V. 5) says Rufinus invited Alaric and the Goths to
invade the Roman territories; Valesius reconciles Socrates' and
Zosimus" statements by assuming that they are partial and supple-
mentary to one another; Rufinus, according to him, invited both
the Huns and the Goths.

0 V. 10, 21, et al. « Cf. V. 8. ' 397 a.d.

3 The well-known bishop of Antioch and Constantinople, who
on account of his extraordinary gift of eloquence was surnamed
Chryststom, 'the Golden-mouth." See The Nicene and I'osi-Ni-
cene Fathers, Vol. IX. Prolegomena on the life and writings of
St. John Chrysostom by Dr. SchafT. Also cf. ancient authorities:
Palladius, Dialogiis historicus de vita et coin'ersatione beati
yoanttis Chrysostomi cum Theodora Ecclcsia Romaiia diacoiio;
Jerome, de Virii Itlustribus, c. 129; Sozomen, VIII. 2-23; Theo-
doret, H. E. V. 27-36; and modern Smith & Wacc, Diet, of Christ.
Biog.: F. W. Farrar, Lives 0/ the Fathers, Vol. II. p. 460-527,
and many monograms and longer or briefer notices in the standard
church histories.

* Cf. Theodoret, V. 22, under this Theophilus the pagan temples
of Mithras and Serapis were attacked, as related above in V. 16 and
17. For a fuller notice of Theophilus, see Smith & Wace, Diet. 0/
Christ. Biog.

' Cf. chap. 9 of this book.


gifts and the proper letters to him who should
become the victor. In accordance with these
injunctions Isidore on his arrival at Rome
awaited there the event of the war. But this
business did not long remain a secret : for a
reader who accompanied him privately seques-
tered the letters ; upon which Isidore in great
alarm returned to Alexandria. This was the
reason why Theophilus so warmly favored Isi-
dore. The court however gave the preference
to John : and inasmuch as many had revived
the accusations against Theophilus, and prepared
for presentation to the bishops then convened
memorials of various charges, Eutropius* the
chief officer of the imperial bed-chamber col-
lected these documents, and showed them to
Theophrlus, bidding him ' choose between or-
daining John, and undergoing a trial on the
charges made against him.' Theophilus terri-
fied at this alternative, consented to ordain
John. Accordingly John was invested with the
episcopal dignity on the 26th of February, under
the following consulate,' which the Emperor
Honorius celebrated with public games at Rome,
and Eutychian, then Praetorian prefect, at Con-
stantinople. But since the man is famous, both
for the writings he has left, and the many
troubles he fell into, it is proper that I should
not pass over his affairs in silence, but to relate
as compendiously as possible whence he was,
and from what ancestry ; also the particulars of
his elevation to the episcopate, and the means
by which he was subsequently degraded ; and
finally how he was more honored after his death,
than he had been during his life.


CHAPTER III.

Birth and Education of John Bishop of Con-
stantinople.

John was a native of Antioch in Syria-Ccele,
son of Secundus and Anthusa, and scion of a
noble family in that country. He studied rhet-
oric under Libanius the sophist, and philosophy
under Andragathius the i)hilosopher.^ Being on
the point of entering the practice of civil law,
and reflecting on the restless and unjust course
of those who devote themselves to the practice
of the forensic courts, he was turned to the
more tranquil mode of life, which he adopted,
following the example of Evagrius.^ Evagrius


« Cf. Zosimus, V. 3, 8, lo, 17, 18, and Eunapius, Fragnt. 53, 56.

' -»98 A.D.

• Sozomen (VIII. 2) also says that Chrysostom went from the
school of Libanius to a private life instead of the legal profession as
was expected of him, but from some utterances of Libanius, as well
as from Chrysostom"s own representation, de Sacerdot. I. i. 4, it
appears that he had spent some time in the practice of the law.

2 It is not certain who this Evagrius was. Valesius thinks he
was the presbyter of that name mentioned by Jerome, de Scriptor.
Eccl.


VI. 4.] JOHN CHRYSOSTOM AND SERAPION T^E DEACON. 139


himself had been educated under the same
masters, and had some time before retired to a
private mode of hfe. Accordingly he laid aside
his legal habit, and applied his mind to the
reading of the sacred scriptures, frequenting the
church with great assiduity. He moreover in-
duced Theodore and Maximus, who had been
his fellow-students under Libanius the sophist,
to forsake a profession whose primary object
was gain, and embrace a life of greater simplic-
ity. Of these two persons, Theodore afterwards
became bishop of Mopsuestia^ in Cilicia, and
Maximus of Seleucia in Isauria. At that time
being ardent aspirants after perfection, they
entered upon the ascetic life, under the guid-
ance of Diodorus * and Carterius, who then pre-
sided over a monastic institution. The former
of these was subsequently elevated to the bish-
opric of Tarsus, and wrote many treatises, in
which he limited his attention to the literal
sense of scripture, avoiding that which was mys-
tical.^ But enough respecting these persons.
Now John was then living on the most inti-
mate terms with Basil,^ at that time constituted
a deacon by Meletius, but afterwards ordained
bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. Accord-
ingly Zeno' the bishop on his return from Jeru-
salem, appointed him a reader in the church at
Antioch. While he continued in the capacity
of a reader he composed the book Against the
Jezos. Meletius having not long after conferred
on him the rank of deacon, he produced his
work On the Priesthood,^ and those Against
Stagirius ; and moreover those also On the
Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature, and
On the IVomen'^ who lived with the Ecclesias-


' It has been supposed by some that this was the Theodore ad-
dressed in II. I, VI. Int. and VII. 47; but not with good reason.
Cf. note 4, p. xii. of Int. On Theodore of Mopsuestia, the great
' Exegete ' and theologian, see Smith & Wace; also Siefiert, Theo-
dor. Mopsuesienus l^et. Test. Sobrie Interpret. I'itidex and
H. B. Swete, Theodori Episc. Mopsuesiiiz in Epp.B. Pauti. Com-
meiitarii.

* Sozomen also attests the simplicity of Diodorus' interpretations
of the Old Testament. The principle which he adopted, of seeking
for a literal and historical meaning in preference to the allegorical
and mystical interpretations attached to the Old Testament by
Origen and the Alexandrians, became the corner-stone of the An-
tiochian system of interpretation as elaborated by his pupils Theo-
dore of Mopsuestia and Theodoret.

s flfcopia?, lit. ' speculations,' by which are evidently meant the
allegorical and subjective or contemplative explanations of the Alex-
andrians.

6 ' Socrates and Kurtz (in the tenth edition of his Kirchcn-
geschichte, I. 223) confound this Basil with Basil the Great of
Cappadocia, who was eighteen years older than Chrysostom, and
died in 379. Chrysostom's friend was probably (as Baronius and
Montfaucon conjecture) identical with Basil, bishop of Raphanea in
Syria, near Antioch, who attended the Council of Constantinople in
381.' Comp. Venables in Smith and Wace; SchafT in Prolegomena
to Vol. IX. of The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers y p. 6, note 2.
The conjecture of Baronius is assented to also by Valesius.

' According to Baronius, this Zeno was bishop of Tyre, but
Valesius makes an ingenious objection to this view, and asserts that
some other city must have been the real see of Zeno.

S This treatise, commonly termed de Saccrdotio, and the Homi-
lies are the most famous of Chrysostom's works; for a full account,
as well as translation, of these works, see Nicene and Post-Nicene
Fathers, Vol. IX.

8 These were women who lived in the houses of the clergy as sis-
ters, and exercised themselves in works of piety and charity. At a very
early period, however, scandal seems to have arisen from this prac-
tice, and strong measures were repeatedly adopted by the Church


tics. Afterwards, upon the death of Meletius
at Constantinople, — for there he had gone on
account of Gregory Nazianzen's ordination, —
John separated himself from the Meletians, with-
out entering into communion with Paulinus, and
spent three whole years in retirement. Later,
when Paulinus was dead, he was ordained a
presbyter by Evagrius the successor of Pauli-
nus. Such is a brief outline of John's career
previous to his call to the episcopal office. It
is said that on account of his zeal for temper-
ance he was stern and severe ; and one of his
early friends has said ' that in his youth he mani-
fested a proneness to irritability, rather than to
modesty.' Because of the rectitude of his life,
he was free from anxiety about the future,
and his simplicity of character rendered him
open and ingenuous ; nevertheless the liberty
of speech he allowed himself was offensive to
very many. In public teaching he was power-
ful in reforming the morals of his auditors ; but
in private conversation he was frequently thought
haughty and assuming by those who did not
know him.

CHAPTER IV.

Of Serapion the Deacon on whose Account John
becomes Odious to his Clergy.

Being such in disposition and manners, and
promoted to the episcopacy, John was led to
conduct himself toward his clergy with more
than proper superciliousness, designing to cor-
rect the morals of the clergy under him. Hav-
ing thus chafed the temper of the ecclesiastics,
he was disliked by them ; and so many of them
stood aloof from him as a passionate man, and
others became his bitter enemies. Serapion, a
deacon of his retinue, led him to alienate their
minds still more from him ; and once in pres-
ence of the whole assembled clergy he cried out
with a loud voice to the bishop — ' You will never
be able to govern these men, my lord, unless you
drive them all with a rod.' This speech of his
excited a general feeling of animosity against the
bishop ; the bishop also not long after expelled
many of them from the church, some for one
cause, and some for another. And, as it usually
happens when persons in office adopt such vio-
lent measures, those who were thus expelled by
him formed combinations and inveighed against
him to the people. What contributed greatly to
gain credence for these complaints was the fact
that the bishop was not willing to eat with any
one else, and never accepted an invitation to a

for their suppression. Paul of Samosata was, according to Eusebius
(//. E. VII. 30), deposed -partly for keeping these sisters in hii
house. They were called Syneisacta; (Swi'€i<Ta<cToi). Cf. Bingham,
Christ. Antig. XVII. 5. 20, and Council of Nicsea, Can. 3.
Hefele, Hist. 0/ Ch. Councils, Vol. I. p. 379.


140


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. 4-


feast. On account of this the plot against him
became widespread. His reasons for not eating
with others no one knew with any certainty,^ but
some persons in justification of his conduct state
that he had a very delicate stomach, and weak
digestion, which obliged him to be careful in his
diet, and therefore he ate alone ; while others
thought this was due to his rigid and habitual
abstinence. Whatever the real motive may have
been, the circumstance itself contributed not a
little to the grounds of accusation by his calum-
niators. The people nevertheless continued to
regard him with love and veneration, on account
of his valuable discourses in the church, and
therefore those who sought to traduce him, only
brought themselves into contempt. How elo-
quent, convincing, and persuasive his sermons
were, both those which were published by him-
self, and such as were noted down by short-hand
writers as he delivered them, why should we stay
to declare ? Those who desire to form an ade-
quate idea of them, must read for themselves,
and will thereby derive both pleasure and profit.


CHAPTER V. j

j^ohn draws down upon Himself the Displeasure
of Many Persons of Rank and Power. Of the
Eunuch Eutropius.

As long as John was in conflict with the clergy
only, machinations against him were utterly pow-
erless ; but when he proceeded to rebuke many
of those in public office also with immoderate
vehemence, the tide of unpopularity began to
set against him with far greater impetus. Hence
many stories were told to his disparagement.
And most of these found attentive and believing
listeners. This growing prejudice was not a little
increased by an oration which he pronounced at
that time against Eutropius. For Eutropius was
the chief eunuch of the imperial bed-chamber,
and the first of all eunuchs that was admitted to
the dignity of consul. He, desiring to inflict
vengeance on certain persons who had taken
refuge in the churches, induced the emperors
to make a law ' excluding delinquents from the
privilege of sanctuary, and authorizing the seizure
of those who had sought the shelter of the sa-
cred edifices. But its author was punished for

' These reasons are given by Palladius as follows: ' He was
accustomed to eat alone, as I partially know, for these reasons:
first, he drank no wine . . secondly, his stomach was, on account of
certain infirmities, irregular, so that often the food prepared for him
was repugnant, and other food not put before him was desired.
Again he at times neglected to eat, lengthening out his meal until
evening, sometimes being absorbed in ecclesiastical cares and some-
times in contemplation; . . . but it is a custom with table companions
if we do not relish the same articles of food which they do, or laugh
at insii^nificant witticisms ... to make this an occasion of ill-speech.'
Palladius, de Vita S. Joannis, 12.

' Sozomen (VIII. 7) says that this law was rescinded very soon
afterwards.


this almost immediately ; for scarcely had the
law been promulgated, before Eutropius himself,
having incurred the displeasure of the emperor,
fled for protection to the church.^ The bishop
therefore, while Eutropius trembling with fear
lay under the table of the altar, mounting the
pulpit^ from which he was accustomed to ad-
dress the people in order to be the more dis-
tinctly heard, uttered an invective against him :
wherefore he seemed to create greater displeasure
in some, as he not only denied compassion to
the unfortunate, but added insult to cruelty. By
the emperor's order however, for certain of-
fences committed by him, Eutropius, though
bearing the consulate, was decapitated, and his
name effaced from the list of consuls, that of
Theodore his colleague being alone suffered to
remain as in office for that year.* It is said that
John afterwards used the same license towards
Gai'nas also, who was then commander-in-chief
of the army; treating him with characteristic
rudeness, because he had presumed to request
the emperor to assign the Arians, with whom he
agreed in sentiment, one of the churches within
the city. Many others also of the higher orders,
for a variety of causes, he censured with the same
unceremonious freedom, so that by these means
he created many powerful adversaries. Where-
fore Theophilus bishop of Alexandria, immedi-
ately after his ordination, was plotting his over-
throw ; and concerted measures for this purpose
in secret, both with the friends who were around
him, and by letter with such as were at a dis-
tance. For it was not so much the boldness
with which John lashed whatever was obnoxious
to him, that affected Theophilus, as his own fail-
ure to place his favorite presbyter Isidore in the
episcopal chair of Constantinople. In such a
state were the affairs of John the bishop at that
time ; mischief thus threatened him at the very
commencement of his episcopate. But we shall
enter into these things more at large as we pro-
ceed.

CHAPTER VI.

Gdinas the Goth attempts to usurp the Sovereign
Power ; aftcK filling Constantinople with Dis-
order, he is slain.

I SHALL now narrate some memorable circum-
stances that occurred at that period, in which it

' See also Chrysostom, Oral, in Eutropium, I. 3 {Nicette and
Post-Nicene Fathers, Vol. IX. p. 251). From these statements
it appears that Zosimus is in error when he says (V. i8) that Eutro-
pius was seized in violation of the law of sanctuary and taken out
of the church. Chrysostom assigns his seizure to a time when he
had left the church for some purpose or other.

' an^tui', high reading-desk from which the Scripttires were
recited, situated toward the middle of the church and distinguished
from the altar, where the main service of worship was chanted.
Bishops were accustomed to preach from the steps of the altar (cf.
Bingham, Christ. Antiq. VIII. 4. 5); but Chrysostom, on account
of his little stature, as some say, used the ' ambon ' as a pulpit.

* 399 A.D.


VI. 6.]


THE REBELLION OF GAINAS.


141


f f will be seen how Divine Providence interposed
/ by extraordinary agencies for the preservation
i of the city and Roman empire from the utmost
I peril. Gainas was a barbarian by extraction,
but after becoming a Roman subject, and hav-
ing engaged in military service, and risen by
degrees from one rank to another, he was at
length appointed general-in-chief both of the
Roman horse and foot. When he had obtained
this lofty position, he forgot his position and
relations, and was unable to restrain himself,
and on the other hand according to the common
saying ' left no stone unturned ' in order to gain
control of the Roman government. To accom-
plish this he sent for the Goths out of their own
country, and gave the principal commissions in
the army to his relations. Then when Tribi-
gildus, one of his kinsmen who had the com-
mand of the forces in Phrygia, had at the insti-
gation of Gainas broken out into open revolt,
and was filling the people of Phrygia with con-
fusion and dismay, he managed to have deputed
to him the oversight of matters in the disturbed
province. Now the Emperor Arcadius not sus-
pecting [any harm] committed the charge of
these affairs to him. Gainas therefore immedi-
ately set out at the head of an immense number
of the barbarous Goths, apparently on an expe-
dition against Tribigildus, but with the real in-
tention of establishing his own unjust domination.
On reaching Phrygia he began to subvert every-
thing. Consequently the affairs of the Romans
were immediately thrown into great consterna-
tion, not only on account of the vast barbarian
force which Gainas had at his command, but also
because the most fertile and opulent regions of
the East were threatened with desolation. In
this emergency the emperor, acting with much
prudence, sought to arrest the course of the
barbarian by address : he accordingly sent him
an embassy with instructions to appease him for
the present by every kind of concession. Gainas
having demanded that Saturninus and Aurelian,
two of the most distinguished of the senatorial
order, and men of consular dignity, whom he
knew to be unfavorable to his pretensions,
should be delivered up to him, the emperor
most unwillingly yielded to the exigency of the
crisis ; and these two persons, prepared to die
for the public "good, nobly submitted themselves
to the emperor's disposal. They therefore pro-
ceeded to meet the barbarian, at a place used
for horse-racing some distance from Chalcedon,
being resolved to endure whatever he might be
disposed to inflict ; but however they suffered
no harm. The usurper simulating dissatisfaction,
advanced to Chalcedon, whither the emperor
Arcadius also went to meet him. Both then
entered the church where the body of the mar-
tyr Euphemia is deposited, and there entered


into a mutual pledge on oath that neither
would plot against the other. The emperor
indeed kept his engagement, having a religious
regard to an oath, and being on that account
beloved of God. But Gainas soon violated it,
and did not swerve from his original pur-
pose ; on the contrary he was intent on car-
nage, plunder, and conflagration, not only
against Constantinople, but also against the whole
extent of the Roman empire, if he could by any
means carry it into effect. The city was accord-
ingly quite inundated by the barbarians, and its
residents were reduced to a condition equivalent
to that of captives. Moreover so great was the
danger of the city that a comet of prodigious
magnitude, reaching from heaven even to the
earth, such as was never before seen, gave fore-
warning of it.' Gainas first most shamelessly
attempted to make a seizure of the silver pub-
licly exposed for sale in the shops : but when
the proprietors, advised beforehand by report of
his intention, abstained from exposing it on their
counters, his thoughts were diverted to another
object, which was to send an immense body of
barbarians at night for the purpose of burning
down the palace. Then indeed it appeared dis-
tinctly that God had providential care over the
city : for a multitude of angels appeared to the
rebels, in the form of armed men of gigantic
stature, before whom the barbarians, imagining
them to be a large army of brave troops, turned
away with terror and departed. When this was
reported to Gainas, it seemed to him quite in-
credible — for he knew that the greatest part of
the Roman army was at a distance, dispersed as
a garrison over the Eastern cities — and he sent
others on the following night and repeatedly
afterwards. Now as they constantly returned
with the same statement — for the angels of God
always presented themselves in the same form —
he came with a great multitude, and at length
became himself a spectator of the prodigy.
Then supposing that what he saw was really a
body of soldiers, and that they concealed them-
selves by day, and baffled his designs by night,
he desisted from his attempt, and took another
resolution which he conceived would be detri-
mental to the Romans ; but the event proved it
to be greatly to their advantage. Pretending to
be under demoniacal possession, he went forth
as if for prayer to the church of SL Jofnt the
Apostle, which is seven miles distant from the
city. Together with him went barbarians who
carried out arms, having concealed them in
casks and other specious coverings. And when
the soldiers who guarded the city gates detected
these, and would not suffer them to pass, the
barbarians drew their swords and put them to

' Cf. Vergil, Georg. T. 488, 'Nee diri toties arsere cometx';
and Am. X. 272-274.


142


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. 6.


death. A fearful tumult thence arose in the city,
and death seemed to threaten every one ; never-
theless the city continued secure at that time, its
gates being every where well defended. The
emperor with timely wisdom proclaimed Gainas
a public enemy, and ordered that all the bar-
barians who remained shut up in the city should
be slain. Thus one day after the guards of the
gates had been killed, the Romans attacked the
barbarians within the walls near the church of
the Goths — for thither such of them as had
been left in the city had betaken themselves —
and after destroying a great number of them,
they set the church on fire, and burnt it to the
ground. Gainas being informed of the slaughter
of those of his party who did not manage to get
out of the city, and perceiving the failure of all
his artifices, left St. John's church, and advanced
rapidly towards Thrace. On reaching the Cher-
sonnese he endeavored to pass over from thence
and take I^mpsacus, in order that from that
place he might make himself master of the East-
ern parts. As the emperor had immediately dis-
patched forces in pursuit both by land and by
sea, another wonderful mterposition of Divine
Providence occurred. For while the barbarians,
destitute of ships, hastily put together rafts and
were attempting to cross on them, suddenly the
Roman fleet appeared, and the west wind began
to blow hard. This afforded an easy passage to
the Romans ; but the barbarians with their
horses, tossed up and down in their frail barks
by the violence of the gale, were at length
overwhelmed by the waves ; many of them also
were destroyed by the Romans. In this manner
during the passage a vast number of the bar-
barians perished ; but Gainas departing thence
fied into Thrace, where he fell in with another
body of the Roman forces and was slain by them
together with the barbarians that attended him.-
Let this cursory notice of Gainas suffice here.

Those who may desire more minute details
of the circumstances of that war, should read
The Gdinea of Eusebius Scholasticus,^ who was
at that time a pupil of Troilus the sophist;
and having been a spectator of the war, related
the events of it in an heroic poem consisting of
four books ; and inasmuch as the events alluded
to had but recently taken place, he acquired for
himself great celebrity. The poet Ammonius has
also very lately composed another description
in verse of the same transactions, which he re-
cited before the emperor in the sixteenth con-
sulate * of Theodosius the younger, which he
bore with Faustus.


* Cr. an account of Gainas and his rebellion in Zosimus, V.
18-22.

' On the surname of ' Scholasticus,' see Introd. p. ix. note 20,
also Macar. Homil. 15, § 24. On Eusebius Scholasticus, see Smith
and Wace, Eusebius (134) SiAo/asti'cus.

* 438 A.D.


This war was terminated under the consulate
of Stilicho and Aurelian.* The year following,*
the consulate was celebrated by Fravitus also a
Goth by extraction, who was honored by the Ro-
mans, and showed great fidelity and attachment
to them, rendering important services in this
very war. For this reason he attained to the
dignity of consul. In that year on the tenth of
April there was born a son to the Emperor Arca-
dius, the good Theodosius.

But while the affairs of the state were thus
troubled, the dignitaries of the Church refrained
not in the least from their disgraceful cabals
against each other, to the great reproach of the
Christian religion ; for during this time the ec-
clesiastics incited tumults against each other.
The source of the mischief originated in Egypt
in the following manner.


CHAPTER VII.

Dissejision between Theophilus Bishop of Alex-
andria and the Monks of the Desert. Con-
demnation of Origeh's Books.

The question had been started a little before,'
whether God is a corporeal existence, and has
the form of man ; or whether he is incorporeal,
and without human or, generally speaking, any
other bodily shape ? From this question arose
strifes and contentions among a very great num-
ber of persons, some favoring one opinion on
the subject, and others patronizing the opposite.
Very many of the more simple ascetics as-
serted that God is corporeal, and has a human
figure : but most others condemn their judg-
ment, and contended that God is incorporeal,
and free of all .form whatever. With these
latter Theophilus bishop of Alexandria agreed
so thoroughly that in the church before all the
people he inveighed against those who attrib-
uted to God a human form, expressly teaching
that the Divine Being is wholly incorporeal.
When the Egyptian ascetics were apprised of
this, they left their monasteries and came to
Alexandria ; where they excited a tumult against
the bishop, accusing him of impiety, and threat-
ening to put him to death. Theophilus becom-
ing aware of his danger, after some considera-
tion had recourse to this expedient to extricate
himself from the threatened death. Going to
the monks, he in a conciliatory tone thus
addressed them : ' In seeing you, I behold
the face of God.' The utterance of this
saying moderated the fury of these men

* 400 A.D. • 401 A.D.

' hy Audius or Audscus, the founder of the Audian heresy. Cf.
Epiphan. Hatr. LXX. ; Walch, Histor. der Ketzereien, Vol. III.
p. 300; also Iselin, Audios und die Audianer, in yahrbiicher
Jur Protestant. Theologie, April, 1890, p. 298 seq.


VI. 7-]


THE TALL MONKS.


143


and they replied : ' If you really admit that
God's countenance is such as ours, anathema-
tize Origen's book ; - for some drawing argu-
ments from them oppose themselves to our
opinion. If you will not do this, expect to be
treated by us as an impious person, and the
enemy of God.' ' But as far as I am con-
cerned,' said Theophilus, ' I will readily do what
you require : and be ye not angry with me, for
I myself also disapprove of Origen's works,
and consider those who countenance them de-
serving of censure.' Thus he succeeded in ap-
peasing and sending away the monks at that
time ; and probably the whole dispute respect-
ing this subject would have been set at rest,
had it not been for another circumstance which
happened immediately after. Over the monas-
teries in Egypt there were four devout persons
as superintendents named Dioscorus, Ammonius,
Eusebius, and Euthymius : these men were
brothers, and had the appellation of ' the Tall
Monks ' given them on account of their stature.
They were moreover distinguished both for the
sanctity of their lives, and the extent of their
erudition, and for these reasons their reputation
was very high, at Alexandria. Theophilus in
particular, the prelate of that city, loved and
honored them exceedingly : insomuch that he
constituted one of them, Dioscorus, bishop of
Hermopolis^ against his will, having forcibly
drawn him from his retreat. Two of the others
he entreated to continue with him, and with
difficulty prevailed upon them to do so ; still by
the exercise of his authority as bishop he ac-
complished his purpose : when therefore he had
invested them with the clerical office, he com-
mitted to their charge the management of
ecclesiastical affairs. They, constrained by neces-
sity, performed the duties thus imposed on them
successfully ; nevertheless they were dissatisfied
because they were unable to follow philosophical
pursuits and ascetic exercises. And as in process
of time, they thought they were being spiritu-
ally injured, observing the bishop to be devoted
to gain, and greedily mtent on the acquisition
of wealth, and according to the common saying
* leaving no stone unturned ' for the sake of gain,
they refused to remain with him any longer,
declaring that they loved solitude, and greatly
preferred it to living in the city. As long as he
was ignorant of the true motive for their depart-
ure, he earnestly begged them to abide with
him ; but when he perceived that they were
dissatisfied with his conduct, he became exces-
sively irritated, and threatened to do them all
kinds of mischief. But they making little ac-

' On the dispute concerning Origen's views, see below, chap. 13

* There were two cities named Hermopolis in Egypt; the most

important of these in the Thebaid was known as Hermopolis proper,

whereas the other (the one here alluded to) was situated in lower

Egypt and designated Hermopolis parva.


count of his menaces retired into the desert ;
upon which Theophilus, who was evidently of a
hasty and malignant temperament, raised not a
small clamor against them, and by every con-
trivance earnestly sought to do them injury.
He also conceived a dislike against their brother
Dioscorus, bishop of Hermopolis. He was
moreover extremely annoyed at the esteem
and veneration in which he was held by
the ascetics. Being aware, however, that he
would be able to do no harm to these persons
unless he could stir up hostility in the minds of
the monks against them, he used this artifice to
effect it. He well knew that these men in their
frequent theological discussions with him, had
maintained that the Deity was incorporeal, and
by no means had a human form ; because [they
argued] such a constitution would involve the
necessary accompaniment of human passions.
Now this has been demonstrated by the ancient
writers and especially Origen. Theophilus, how-
ever, though entertaining the very same opinion
respecting the Divine nature, yet to gratify his
vindictive feelings, did not hesitate to pervert
what he and they had rightly taught : but im-
posed upon the majority of the monks, men
who were sincere but * rude in speech,' * the
greater part of whom were quite illiterate.
Sending letters to the monasteries in the desert,
he advised them not to give heed either to
Dioscorus or to his brothers, inasmuch as they
affirmed that God had not a body. * Whereas,'
said he, ' according to the sacred Scripture God
has eyes, ears, hands, and feet, as men have ;
but the partisans of Dioscorus, being followers
of Origen, introduce the blasphemous dogma
that God has neither eyes, ears, feet, nor hands.'
By this sophism he took advantage of the sim-
plicity of these monks and thus a hot dissension
was stirred up among them. Such as had a
cultivated mind indeed were not beguiled by
this plausibility, and therefore still adhere to
Dioscorus and Origen ; but the more ignorant
who greatly exceeded the others in number,
inflamed by an ardent zeal without knowledge,
immediately raised an outcry against their breth-
ren. A division being thus made, both parties
branded each other as impious ; and some lis-
tening to Theophilus called their brethren ' Ori-
genists,' and ' impious ' and the others termed
those who were convinced by Theophilus ' An-
thropomorphitae.' On this account violent alter-
cation arose, and an inextinguishable war between
the monks. Theophilus on receiving intimation
of the success of his device, went to Nitria
where the monasteries are, accompanied by a
multitude of persons, and armed the monks
against Dioscorus and his brethren ; who being

* 2 Cor. xi. 6.


144


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. 7.


in danger of losing their lives, made their escape
with great difficulty.

While these things were in progress in Egypt
John bishop of Constantinople was ignorant of
them, but flourished in eloquence and became
increasingly celebrated for his discourses. More-
over he first enlarged the prayers contained in
the nocturnal hymns, for the reason I am about
to assign.

CHAPTER VIIL

The Arians and the Supporters of the ' Homoou-
sion ' hold Nocturnal Assemblies and sing
Ahtiphonal Hymns, a Species of Composition
ascribed to Ignatius, surnatned Theophorus}
Conflict between the Two Parties.

The .\rians, as we have said, held their meet-
ings without the city. As often therefore as the
festal days occurred — I mean Saturday - and
Lord's day — in each week, on which assemblies
are usually held in the churches, they congre-
gated within the city gates about the public
squares, and sang responsive verses adapted to
the Arian heresy. This they did during the
greater part of the night : and again in the
morning, chanting the same songs which they
called responsive, they paraded through the
midst of the city, and so passed out of the gates
to go to their places of assembly. But since
they did not desist from making use of insulting
expressions in relation to the Homoousians,
often singing such words as these : ' Where are
they that say three things are but one power?'
— John fearing lest any of the more simple
should be drawn away from the church by
such kind of hymns, opposed to them some
of his own people, that they also employing
themselves in chanting nocturnal hymns,
might obscure the effort of the Arians, and con-
firm his own party in the profession of their
faith. John's design indeed seemed to be good,
but it issued in tumult and dangers. For as the
Homoousians performed their nocturnal hymns
with greater display, — for there were invented
by John silver crosses for them on which lighted
wax-tapers were carried, provided at the expense
of the empress Eudoxia, — the Arians who were
very numerous, and fired with envy, resolved to
revenge themselves by a desperate and riotous
attack upon their rivals. For from the remem-


' <4(dij>opo( = ' borne by God,' used in the sense of being ' pos-
sessed by 3 god," ' inspired,' by j'Esch. Aga>n. 1150; but here ' borne
in the arms of God ' or ' carried by God,' and applied to Ignatius
because tradition made him the very child whom the Saviour ' took
up in his arms," and set in the midst of his disciples. Cf. Mark ix.
36; to be distinguished therefore from Wfo^dpot, 'bearing' or
' carrying a god.'

- The ancient Christians observed the Lord's day as the greatest
day of the week, and also in the second place the Jewish Sabbath or
Saturday. See Bmgham, Christ. Autiq. XX. 2, on the Lord's
day, and 3, on the Sabbath.


brance of their own recent domination, they were
full of confidence in their ability to overcome,
and of contempt for their adversaries. Without
delay therefore, on one of these nights, they
engaged in a conflict ; and Briso, one of the
eunuchs of the empress, who was at that time
leading the chanters of these hymns, was wounded
by a stone in the forehead, and also some of the
people on both sides were killed. Whereupon
the emperor being angered, forbade the Arians
to chant their hymns any more in public. Such
were the events of this occasion.

We must now however make some allusion to
the origin of this custom in the church of re-
sponsive singing. Ignatius'' third bishop of An-
tioch in Syria from the apostle Peter, who also
had held intercourse with the apostles them-
selves, saw a vision of angels hymning in alter-
nate chants the Holy Trinity. Accordingly he
introduced the mode of singing he had observed
in the vision into the Antiochian church ; whence
it was transmitted by tradition to all the other
churches. Such is the account [we have re-
ceived] in relation to these responsive hymns.

CHAPTER IX.

Dispute between Theophilus and Peter leading to
an Attempt on the Part of the Former to de-
pose John Bishop of Constantinople.

Not long after this, the monks of the desert,
together with Dioscorus and his brothers, came
to Constantinople. There was also with them Isi-
dore,' formerly the most intimate friend of the
bishop Theophilus, but then become his bitterest
enemy, on account of the following circumstance :
A certain man named Peter was at that time the
archpresbyter ^ of the Alexandrian church ; The-
ophilus being irritated against this person, de-
termined to eject him from the church ; and as
the ground of expulsion, he brought the charge
against him of having admitted to a participation
of the sacred mysteries, a woman of the Mani-
chjean sect, without first compelling her to re-
nounce her Manichoean heresy. As Peter in his
defence declared, that not only had the errors
of this woman been previously abjured, but that
Theophilus himself had sanctioned her admis-
sion to the eucharist, Theophilus became indig-
nant, as if he had been grievously calumniated ;
whereupon he affirmed that he was altogether

3 There has been some difference of opinion as to whether Socra-
tes is correct in here ascribing the instituiion of responsive chants to
Ignatius. Valesius doubts Socrates" accuracy, but other authorities
are inclined to the view that Ignatius did introduce these chants,
and Flavian and Diodorus, during the reign of Constantine, to
whom Valesius ascribes iheir origin, simply developed them. Cf.
Bingham, Christ. Antiq. XIV. i.

' For an account of Theophilus' outrageous treatment of Isidore,
see Palladius, Vita S. Joaiiiiis Chrysost. chap. 6.

' See Bingham, Christ. Antiq. 11. 19. 18, for a statement of the
functions of this office.


VI. II.]


INTRIGUES OF THEOPHILUS.


145


unacquainted with the circumstance. Peter there-
fore summoned Isidore to bear witness to the
bishop's knowledge of the. facts concerning the
woman. Now Isidore happened to be then at
Rome, on a mission from Theophihis to Damasus
the prelate of the imperial city, for the purpose
of affecting a reconciliation between him and
Flavian bishop of Antioch ; for the adherents of
Meletius had separated from Flavian in detesta-
tion of his perjury, as we have already observed.^
When Isidore had returned from Rome, and was
cited as a witness by Peter,, he deposed that the
woman was received by consent of the bishop ;
and that he himself had administered the sacra-
ment to her. Upon this Theophilus became en-
raged and in anger ejected them both. This
furnished the reason for Isidore's going to Con-
stantinople with Diosconis and his brethren, in
order to submit to .the cognizance of the em-
peror, and John the bishop, the injustice and
violence with which Theophilus had treated them.
John, on being informed of the facts, gave the
men an honorable reception, and did not exclude
them from communion at prayers, but postponed
their communion of the sacred mysteries, until
their affairs should be examined into. Whilst
matters were in this posture, a false report was
brought to Theophilus' ears, that John had both
admitted them to a participation of the myster-
ies, and was also ready to give them assistance ;
wherefore he resolved not only to be revenged
on Isidore and Dioscorus, but also if possible to
cast John out of his episcopal chair. With this
design he wrote to all the bishops of the various
cities, and conceahng his real motive, ostensibly
condemned therein the books of Origen merely :
which Athanasius,^ his predecessor, had used in
confirmation of his own faith, frequently appeal-
ing to the testimony and authority of Origen's
writings, in his orations against the Arians.

CHAPTER X.

Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus convenes a Synod
to couih'inn the Books of Origen.

He moreover renewed his friendship with
Epiphanius ' bishop of Constantia in C'yprus,
with whom he had formerly been at variance.
For Theophilus accused Epiphanius of enter-
taining low thoughts of God, by supposing him
to have a human form.* Now although The-


3 See above, V. 15. * Cf. Athan. de Deer. Nic. 27.

* There were thirty-five bishops, besides sever.1l presbyters and
laymen of some distinction in the ancient church, who bore the
name of Epiphanius. The bishop here mentioned is the most illus-
trious of them all, being the author of the well-known treatise df
Hxres. His see — that of Constantia in Cyprus — was the old
'Salamis' of Acts xiii. 5.

2 It seems strange that Epiphanius should be classed with the
Anthropomorphita; as Epiphanius himself repudiates their views
according to the testimony of Jerome. Cf- Jerome, ad Patnmach-
ium, 1 et seq. Socrates must have been imposed upon by some


ophilus was really unchanged in sentiment, and
had denounced those who thought that the di-
vinity was human in form, yet on account of his
hatred of others, he openly denied his own con-
victions ; and he now professed to be friendly
with Epiphanius, as if he had altered his mind
and agreed with him in his views of God. He
then managed it so that Epiphanius by letter
should convene a Synod of the bishops in
Cyprus, in order to condemn the writings of
Origen. Epiphanius being on account of his
extraordinary piety a man of simple mind and
manners was easily influenced by the letters of
Theophilus : having therefore assembled a coun-
cil of bishops in that island, he caused a prohi-
bition to be therein made of the reading of Ori-
gen's works. He also wrote to John, exhorting
him to abstain from the study of Origen's books,
and to convoke a Synod for decreeing the same
thing as he had done. Accordingly when The-
ophilus had in this way deluded Epiphanius, who
was famous for his piety, seeing his design pros-
per according to his wish, he became more
confident, and himself also assembled a great
number of bishops. In that convention, pur-
suing the same course as Epiphanius, he caused
a like sentence of condemnation to be pro-
nounced on the writings of Origen, who had
been dead nearly two hundred years : not hav-
ing this as his first object, but rather his pur-
pose of revenge on Dioscorus and his brethren.
John paying but little attention to the commu-
nications of Epiphanius and Theophilus, was
intent on instructing the churches ; and he
flourished more and more as a preacher, but
made no account of the plots which were laid
against him. As soon, however, as it became
apparent to every body that Theophilus was en-
deavoring to divest John of his bishopric, then
all those who had any ill-will against John, com-
bined in calumniating him. And thus many of
the clergy, and many of those in office, and of
those who had great influence at the court,
believing that they had found an opportunity
now of avenging themselves upon John, exerted
themselves to procure the convocation of a
Grand Synod at Constantinople, partly by send-
ing letters and partly by dispatching messengers
in all direction's for that purpose.

CHAPTER XI.

Of Severian and Antiochus : their Disagree-
ment from John.

The odium against John Chrysostom was con-
siderably increased by another additional event
as follows : two bishops flourished at that time,

Origenist, as the Origenists were accustomed to call all who con-
demned their views Anthropomorphitx. Cf. above, chap. 7.


146


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI.


II.


Syrians by birth, named Severian and Antiochus ;
Severian presided over the church at Gabala, a
city of Syria, and Antiochus over that of Ptole-
mais in Phoenicia. They were both renowned
for their eloquence ; but although Severian was
a very learned man, he did not succeed in using
the Greek language perfectly ; and so while
speaking Greek he betrayed his Syrian origin.
Antiochus came first to Constantinople, and hav-
ing preached in the churches for some time with
great zeal and ability, and having thus amassed
a large sum of money,' he returned to his own
church. Severian hearing that Antiochus had
collected a fortune by his visit to Constantinople,
determined to follow his example. He therefore
exercised himself for the occasion, and having
composed a number of sermons, set out for Con-
stantinople. Being most kindly received by
John, to a certain point, he soothed and flattered
the man, and was himself no less beloved and
honored by him : meanwhile his discourses
gained him great celebrity, so that he attracted
the notice of many persons of rank, and even
of the emperor himself. And as it happened at
that time that the bishop of Ephesus died, John
was obliged to go to Ephesus for the purpose of
ordaining a successor. On* his arrival at that
city, as the people were divided in their choice,
some proposing one person, and some another,
John perceiving that both parties were in a con-
tentious mood, and that they did not wish to
adopt his counsel, he resolved without much ado
to end their dispute by preferring to the bishop-
ric a certain Heraclides, a deacon of his own,
and a Cypriot by descent. And thus both parties
desisting from their strife with each other had
peace.- Now as this detention [at Ephesus]
was lengthened, Severian continued to preach
at Constantinople, and daily grew in favor with
his hearers. Of this John was not left ignorant,
for he was promptly made acquainted with what-
ever occurred, Serapion, of whom we have be-
fore spoken,' communicating the news to him
and asserting that the church was being troubled
by Severian ; thus the bishop was aroused to a
feeling of jealousy. Having therefore among
other matters deprived many of the Novatians
and Quartodecimans of their churches, he re-
turned to Constantinople.'* Here he resumed


> The oflerings of the congregations seem to have been divided
usually among the officiating clergymen. Cf. Bingham, Christ.
Antia. V. 4. i.

' In another version of this eleventh chapter of the sixth book,
appended at the end of the sixth book in the Greek text of Bright,
instead of the sentence beginning ' And thus both parties,' &c. is
found the following more consistent statement: ' Inasmuch, how-
ever, as on this account a tumult arose at Ephesus, on the grmind
that Heraclides was not worthy of the bishopric, it became neces-
sary for John to remain in Ephesus for a long time."

•• The alternative version inserts here the following sentence:
'And who was very much beloved by John and had been intrusted
with the whole care of the episcopal administration, on account of
his piety and faithfulness and watchfulness in respect to details
of every sort, and diligence in matters pertaining to the interests
of the bishop.'


himself the care of the churches under his own
especial jurisdiction. But Serapion's arrogance
no one could bear ; for thus having won John's
unbounded confidence and regard, he was so
puffed up by it that he treated every one with
contempt. And on this account also animosity
was inflamed the more against the bishop. On
one occasion when Severian passed by him, Sera-
pion neglected to pay him the homage due to a
bishop, but continued seated [instead of rising],
indicating plainly how little he cared for his pres-
ence. Severian, unable to endure patiently this
[supposed] rudeness and contempt, said with a
loud voice to those present, ' If Serapion should
die a Christian, Christ has not become incarnate.'
Serapion, taking occasion from this remark, pub-
licly incited Chrysostom to enmity against Seve-
rian : for suppressing the conditional clause of
the sentence, ' If Serapion die a Christian,' and
saying that he had made the assertion that ' Christ
has not become incarnate,' he brought several
witnesses of his own party to sustain this charge.
But on being informed of this the Empress Eu-
doxia severely reprimanded John, and ordered
that Severian should be immediately recalled
from Chalcedon in Bithynia. He returned forth-
with ; but John would hold no intercourse what-
ever with him, nor did he listen to any one urging

* From this point to within one or two sentences of the end of
the chapter the parallel version is so different at times that it will
be well to insert it entire here for the purpose of comparison. It
runs thtis: ' Not long afterward John came to Constantinople and
assumed himself the churches which belonged to his jurisdiction.
But between Serapion, the deacon, and Severian there had arisen a
certain coolness; Serapion was opposed to Severian because the
latter seemed desirous of excelling John in public speaking, and
Severian was jealous of Serapion because the bishop John favored
him, and the care of the bishopric had been intrusted to him. They
being thus disposed toward one another, it happened that the evil of
hatred was increased from the following cause. As Severian was
passing by on one occasion Serapion did not render him the homage
due to a bishop, but he continued sitting; whether because he had
not noticed him, as he afterwards affirmed upon oath before a coun-
cil, or because he cared little for him, being himself the vicegerent
of a bishop, as Severian asserted, I am unable to say; God only
knows. At the time, however, Severian did not tolerate the con-
tempt; but immediately, and in anticipation of a public investigation
before a council, he condemned Serapion upon oath, and not only
declared him deposed from the dignity of the diaconaie, but also
put him out of the church. John upon learning this was very much
grieved. As the matter afterwards was investigated by a council
and Serapion defended himself declaring that he had not perceived
[the approach of the bishop], and summoned witnesses to the fact,
the common verdict of the assembled bishops >»as in favor of ac-
quitting him and urging Severian to accept the apology of Serapion.
The Bishop John, for his part, to satisfy Severian, suspended Sera-
pion from the diaconate for a week; although he used him in all
his affairs as his right hand, because he was very keen and diligent
in ecclesiastical disputation. Severian however was not satisfied
with these measures, but used all means to effect the permanent
deposition of Serapion from the diaconate and his excommunication.
John was extremely grieved at these words and arose from the
council, leaving the adjudication of the case to the bishops present,
saying to them, " Do you examine the matter in hand and render
judgment according to your own conclusions; as for me I resign
my part in the arbitration between them." These things having
been said by John as he arose, the council likewise arose and left
the cas«,as it stood, blaming .Severian the more for not yielding to
the request of the Bishop John. After this John never received
Severian into a private interx'iew; but advised nim to return to his
own country, communicating to him the following message: " It is
not expedient, Severian," said he, " that the parish intrusted to
you should remain for so long without care and bereft of a bishop;
wherefore hasten and take charge of your churches, and do not
neglect the gift which is in you." As he now prepared for his
journey and started, the Empress Eudoxia, on being informed of
the facts,' &c. From this pomt the variations are few, verbal, and
unimportant.


VI. 13.]


EPIPHANIUS OFFENDS CHRYSOSTOM.


M7


him to do so, until at length the Empress Eu-
doxia herself, in the church called The Apostles,
placed her son Theodosius, who now so happily
reigns, but was then quite an infant, before John's
knees, and adjuring'' him repeatedly by the young
prince her son, with difficulty prevailed upon him
to be reconciled to Severian. In this manner
then these men were outwardly reconciled ; but
they nevertheless continued cherishing a rancor-
ous feeling toward each other. Such was the
origin of the animosity [of John] against Seve-
rian.

CHAPTER XIL

Epiphanius, in order to gratify Theophilus, per-
forms Ordinations at Constantinople without
John's Permissio7i.

Not long after this, at the suggestion of The-
ophiliis, the bishop Epiphanius again came from
Cypnis to Constantinople ; he brought also with
him a copy of the synodical decree in which
they did not excommunicate Origen himself,
but condemned his books. On reaching St.
John's church, which is seven miles distant
from the city, he disembarked, and there cele-
brated a service ; then after having ordained a
deacon/ he , again entered the city. In com-
plaisance to Theophilus he declined John's
courtesy, and engaged apartments in a private
house. He afterwards assembled those of the
bishops who were then in the capital, and pro-
ducing his copy of the synodical decree con-
demnatory of Origen's works, recited it before
them ; not being able to assign any reason for
this judgment, than that it seemed fit to The-
ophilus and himself to reject them. Some indeed
from a reverential respect for Epiphanius sub-
scribed the decree ; but many refused to do so ;
among whom was Theotimus bishop of Scythia,
who thus addressed Epiphanius : — 'I neither
choose, Epiphanius,' said he, ' to insult the
memory of one who ended his life piously long
ago ; nor dare I be guilty of so impious an act,
as that of condemning what our predecessors
did not reject : and especially when I know of
no evil doctrine contained in Origen's books.'

'^ The ancients often swore by their children, especially when
they wished to entreat others most earnestly. Cf. Vergil, .Eueid, VI.
364, ' Per caput hoc juro, per spent sureentis Juli.'' The ("orm
of abjuration used by Eudoxia was probably this: ' By this little
child of mine, and your spiritual son, whom I brought forth and
whom you received out of the sacred font, be reconciled to Severian.'
Valesius, however, doubts the reality of this affair.

1 It was contrary to the canons of the church for a bishop to
ordain a presbyter or a deacon io another's diocese. Cf Apostol.
Can. -ii. ' Let not a bishop dare to ordain beyond his own limits,
in cities and places not subject to him. But if he be convicted of
doing so without the consent of those persons who have authority
over such cities and places, let him be deposed, and those also
whom he has ordained.' Also Can. 16 of the Council of Nicaea; ' If
any one should dare to steal, as it were, a person who belongs to
another [bishop], and to ordain him for his own church, without
permission of the bishop from whom he was withdrawn, the ordina-
tion shall be void.'


Having said this, he brought forward one of
that author's works, and reading a few passages
therefrom, showed that the sentiments pro-
pounded were in perfect accordance with the
orthodox faith. He then added, 'Those who
speak evil of these writings are unconsciously
casting dishonor upon the sacred volume whence
their principles are drawn.' Such was the reply
which Theotimus, a bishop celebrated for his
piety and rectitude of life, made to Epiphanius.


CHAPTER XIII.
The Author's Defence of Origen}

But since carping detractors have imposed
upon many persons and have succeeded in deter-
ring them from reading Origen, as though he
were a blasphemous writer, I deem it not un-
seasonable to make a few observations respect-
ing him. Worthless characters, and such as are
destitute of ability to attain eminence them-
selves, often seek to get into notice by decrying
those who excel them. And first Methodius,
bishop of a city in Lycia named Olympus,
labored under this malady ; next Eustathius,
who for a short time presided over the church
at Antioch ; after him Apollinaris ; and lastly
Theophilus. This quaternion of revilers has
traduced Origen, but not on the same grounds,
one having found one cause of accusation
against him, and another another ; and thus
each has demonstrated that what he has taken
no objection to, he has fully accepted. For
since one has attacked one opinion in particular,
and another has found fault with Mother, it is
evident that each has admitted as tnie what he
has not assailed, giving a tacit approbation to
what he has not attacked. Methodius indeed,
when he had in various places railed against
Origen, afterwards as if retracting all he had
previously said, expresses his admiration of the
man, in a dialogue which he entitled Xenon?
But I affirm that from the censure of these
men, greater commendation accrues to Origen.
For those who have sought out whatever they
deemed worthy of reprobation in him, and yet
have never charged him with holding unsound
views respecting the holy Trinity, are in this
way most distinctly shown to bear witness to
his orthodox piety : and by not reproaching
him on this point, they commend him by their
own testimony. But Athanasius the defender

• The views of Origen met with opposition from the very outset.
During his own lifetime he was condemned at Alexandria, and after
his death repeatedly until 541 a.d., and perhaps also by the fifth
general council held at Constantinople in 553. For a full account
of the Orlgenistic Controversy, see Smith and Wace, Diet, of
Christ. Bipg. and Antiq., art. Origenistic Controversies.

2 ' The house of entertainment for strangers.' Methodius' ^yorks
were in the literary form of the dialogue. Cf. his Conviz'utn decent
I'irginitvt in Migne's Patrologia Graca, Vol. XVIII.


148


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. 13.


of the doctrine of consubstantiality, in his Dis-
courses against the Arians^ continually cites
this author as a witness of his own faith, inter-
weaving his words with his own, and saying,
'The most admirable and assiduous Origen,'
says he, ' by his own testimony confirms our
doctrine concerning the Son of God, affirming
him to be co-eternal with the Father.' Those
therefore who load Origen with opprobrium,
overlook the fact that their maledictions fall at
the same time on Athanasius, the eulogist of Ori-
gen. So much will be enough for the vindication
of Origen ; we shall now return to the course of
our history.

CHAPTER XIV.

Epiphanius is asicd to meet John ; on refusing
he is admonished concerning his Anticanonicai
Proceedings ; a/armed at this he leaves Con-
statitifiople.

John was not offended because Epiphanius,
contrary to the ecclesiastical canon, had made
an ordination in his church ; ' but invited him to
remain with him at the episcopal palace. He,
however, replied that he would neither stay nor
pray with him, unless he would expel Dioscorus
and his brethren from the city, and with his own
hand subscribe the condemnation of Origen's
books. Now as John deferred the performance
of these things, saying that nothing ought to be
done rashly before investigation by a general
council, John's adversaries led Epiphanius to
adopt another course. For they contrived it so
that as a meeting was in the church named The
Apostles, Epiphanius came forth and before all
the people condemned the books of Origen,
excommunicated Dioscorus with his followers,
and charged John with countenancing them.
These things were reported to John ; whereupon
on the following day he sent the appended mes-
sage to Epiphanius just as he entered the church :

' You do many things contrary to the canons,
Epiphanius. In the first place you have made
an ordination in the churches under my jurisdic-
tion : then without my appointment, you have
on your own authority officiated in them. More-
over, when heretofore I invited you hither, you
refused to come, and now you take that liberty
yourself. Beware therefore, lest a tumult being
excited among the people, you yourself should
also incur danger therefrom.'

Epiphanius becoming alarmed on hearing
these admonitions, left the church ; and after
accusing John of many things, he set out on his
"return to Cyprus. Some say that when he was
about to depart, he said to John, ' I hope that


' Athan. tie Deer. Nie. 27.

' See above, chap. 12 and note i.


you will not die a bishop ' : to which John re-
plied, ' Expect not to arrive at your own coun-
try.' I cannot be sure that those who reported
these things to me spoke the truth ; but never-
theless the event was in the case of both as
prophesied above. For Epiphanius did not
reach Cyprus, having died on board the ship
during his voyage ; and John a short time after-
wards was driven from his see, as we shall show
in proceeding.

CHAPTER XV.

John is expelled from his Church by a Synod
held at Chalcedon on accou?it of his Dispraise
of Womefi.

When Epiphaniuswas gone, John was informed
by some person that the Empress Eudoxia had
stimulated Epiphanius against him. And being
of a fiery temperament, and of a ready utter-
ance) he soon after pronounced a public invec-
tive against women in general. The people
readily took this as uttered indirectly against
the empress and so the speech was laid hold of
by evil-disposed persons, and reported to those
in authority. At length on being informed of
it the empress immediately complained to her
husband, telling him that the insult offered to
herself was equally an insult against him. The
emperor therefore authorized Theophilus to con-
voke a Synod without delay against John ; Se-
verian also co-operated in promoting this, for he
still retained his grudge against Chrysostom.
Not long time accordingly intervened before
Theophilus arrived, having induced several
bishops from different cities to accompany him ;
these however had been summoned by the em-
peror's orders also. Many of the bishops in
Asia John had deposed when he went to Ephesus
and ordained HeracHdes. Accordingly they all
by previous agreement assembled at Chalcedon
in Bithynia. Cyrinus was at that time bishop of
Chalcedon, an Egyptian by birth, who said many
things to the bishops in disparagement of John,
denouncing him as ' the impious,' * the haughty,'
' the inexorable.' They indeed were very much
satisfied at these denunciations. But Maruthas
bishop of Mesopotamia having involuntarily trod
on Cyrinus' foot, he was severely hurt by it and
was unal)le to embark with the rest for Constanti-
nople, but remained behind at Chalcedon. The
rest crossed over. Now Theophilus had so
openly avowed his hostility to John, that none
of the clergy would go forth to meet him, or
pay him the least honor ; but some Alexandrian
sailors happening to be on the spot — for at that
time the grain transporting vessels were there —
greeted him with joyful acclamations. He ex-
cused himself from entering the church, and


Yi. 17] CHRYSOSTOM CONDEMNED, BANISHED, AND RECALLED. 149


took up his abode at one of the imperial man-
sions called ' The Placidian.' Then on this ac-
count a torrent of accusations began to be
poured forth against John ; for no mention
was now made of Origen, but all were intent
on urging a variety of criminations, many of
which were ridiculous. Preliminary matters
being thus settled, the bishops were convened
in one of the suburbs of Chalcedon, a place
called ' The Oak,' ' and immediately cited
John to answer the charges which were brought
against him. He also summoned Serapion
the deacon ; Tigris the eunuch presbyter,
and Paul the reader, were likewise summoned
to appear there with him, for these men were
included in the impeachments, as participators
in his guilt. And since John taking exception
to those who had cited him, on the ground of
their being his enemies, refused to attend,^ and
demanded a general council, without delay they
repeated their citation four times in succession ;
and as he persisted in his refusal to meet them
as his judges, always giving the same answer,
they condemned him, and deposed him without
assigning any other cause for his deposition but
that he refused to obey the summons. This
decision on being announced towards evening,
incited the people to a most alarming sedition ;
insomuch that they kept watch all night, and
would by no means suffer him to be removed
from the church, but cried out that his cause
ought to be determined in a larger assembly.
A decree of the emperor, however, commanded
that he should be immediately expelled, and sent
into exile ; which as soon as John was apprised
of, he voluntarily surrendered himself about noon
unknown to the populace, on the third day after
his condemnation : for he dreaded any insurrec-
tionary movement on his account, and was ac-
cordingly led away.


CHAPTER XVI.

Sedition on Account of John C/uysostojn's Ban-
ishment. He is recalled.

The people then became intolerably tumult-
uous ; and as it frequently happens in such
cases, many who before were adversely disposed
against him, now changed their hostility into
compassion, and said of him whom they had so
recently desired to see deposed, that he had been
traduced. By this means therefore they became
very numerous who exclaimed against both the
emperor and the Synod of bishops ; but the ori-


• Hence this is called the Sytiod at 'the Oak' {Synodus ad
Quercuiit). See Hefele, History of the Church Councils, Vol.
II. p. 430.

- For a similar action of Athanasius based on the same reason,
see I. 31.


gin of the intrigue they more particularly referred
to Theophilus. For his fraudulent conduct could
no longer be concealed, being exposed by many
other indications, and especially by the fact of
his having held communion with Dioscorus, and
those termed ' the Tall Monks,' ' immediately
after John's deposition. But Severian preaching
in the church, and thinking it a suitable occasion
to declaim against John, said : ' If John had been
condemned for nothing else, yet the haughtiness
of his demeanor was a crime sufficient to justify
his deposition. Men indeed are forgiven all
other sins : but " God resisteth the proud," ^ as
the Divine Scriptures teach us.' These reproaches
made the people still more inclined to opposi-
tion ; so that the emperor gave orders for his
immediate recall. Accordingly Briso a eunuch
in the service of the empress '^ was sent after him,
who finding him at Praenetum — a commercial
town situated over against Nicomedia — brought
him back toward Constantinople. And as he
had been recalled, John refused to enter the
city, declaring he would not do so until his in-
nocence had been admitted by a higher tribunal.
Thus he remained at a suburb called Marianae.
Now as he delayed at that place the commotion
increased, and caused the people to break forth
into very indignant and opprobrious language
against their rulers, wherefore to check their
fury John was constrained to proceed. On his
way a vast multitude, with veneration and honor,
conducted him immediately to the church ; there
they entreated him to seat himself in the episco-
pal chair, and give them his accustomed bene-
diction. When he sought to excuse himself,
saying that * this ought to be brought about by
an order from his judges, and that those who
condemned him must first revoke their sentence,'
they were only the more inflamed with the desire
of seeing him reinstated, and of hearing him ad-
dress them again. The people finally prevailed
on him to resume his seat, and pray as usual for
peace upon them ; after which, acting under the
same constraint, he preached to them. This
compliance on John's part afforded his adversa-
ries another ground of crimination ; but respect-
ing this they took no action at that time.


CHAPTER XVII.

Conflict betiiieen the Constantinopolitans and
Alexandrians on Account of Heraclides ;
Flight of Theophilus arid the Bishops of his
Party. v,'

In the first place, then, Theoph'lus attempted
to investigate the case, of the ordination of Her-


' See above, chap. 7.
3 Chap. 8.


- I Pet. V. 5; James iv. 6.


I50


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. .7.


aclides,^ that thereby he might if possible find oc-
casion of again deposing John. HeracUdes was
not present at this scrutiny. He was neverthe-
less judged in his absence, on the charge of
having unjustly beaten some persons, and after-
wards dragged them in chains through the midst
of the city of Ephesus. As John and his ad-
herents remonstrated against the injustice of
passing sentence upon an absent person, the
Alexandrians contended that they ought to hear
the accusers of Heraclides, although he was not
present. A sharp contest therefore ensued be-
tween the Alexandrians and the Constantinopoli-
tans, and a riot arose whereby many persons were
wounded, and some were killed. Theophilus,
seeing what was done, fled to Alexandria with-
out ceremony ; and the other bishops, except
the few who supported John, followed his ex-
ample, and returned to their respective sees.
After these transactions, Theophilus was de-
graded in every one's estimation : . but the
odium attached to him was exceedingly in-
creased by the shameless way in which he con-
tinued to read Origen's works. And when he
was asked why he thus countenanced what he
had publicly condemned, he replied, ' Origen's
books are like a meadow enameled with flowers
of every kind. If, therefore, I chance to find a
beautiful one among them, I cull it : but what-
ever appears to me to be thorny, I step over, as
that which would prick.' But Theophilus gave
this answer without reflecting on the saying of
the wise Solomon,- that ' the words of the wise
are as goads ' ; and those who are pricked by
the precepts they contain, ought not to kick
against them. For these reasons then Theoph-
ilus was held in contempt by all men. Dios-
corus bishop of Hermopolis, one of those termed
'the Tall Monks,' died a short time after the
flight of Theophilus, and was honored with a
magnificent funeral, being interred in the church
at ' The Oak,' where the Synod was convened
on John's account. John meanwhile was sedu-
lously employed in preaching. He ordained
Serapion bishop of Heraclea in Thrace, on
whose account the odium against himself had
been raised. Not long after the following
events occurred.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Of Eudoxia's Silver Statue. On account of it
fohn is exiled a Second Time.

At this time a silver statue of the Empress
Eudoxia covered with a long robe was erected '


' See above, chap. 11. ' Eccl. xii. 11.

' From Prosper Aquitamus and M.Trcclllnus' Chronicrn, we learn
that this was done in 403 a.d., or rather the consulship of Theodo-
sins the younger and Rumoridius.


upon a column of porphyry supported by a lofty
base. And this stood neither near nor far from
the church named Sophia, but one-half the
breadth of the street separated them. At this
statue public games were accustomed to be per-
formed ; these John regarded as an insult offered
to the church, and having regained his ordinary
freedom and keenness of tongue, he employed
his tongue against those who tolerated them.
Now while it would have been proper to induce
the authorities by a supplicatory petition to dis-
continue the games, he did not do this, but em-
ploying abusive language he ridiculed those who
had enjoined such practices. The empress once
more applied his expressions to herself as indi-
cating marked contempt toward her own person :
she therefore endeavored to procure the convo-
cation of another council of bishops against him.
When John became aware of this, he delivered
in the church that celebrated oration commenc-
ing with these words : - ' Again Herodias raves ; j
again she is troubled ; she dances again ; and
again desires to receive John's head in a charger.'
This, of course, exasperated the empress still
more. Not long after the following bishops
arrived : Leontius bishop of Ancyra in Asia,
Ammonius of Laodicea in Pisidia, Briso of Phi-
lippi in Thrace, Acacius of Beroea in Syria, and
some others. John presented himself fearlessly
before them, and demanded an investigation of
the charges which were made against him. But
the anniversary of the birth of our Saviour having
recurred, the emperor would not attend church
as usual, but sent Chrysostom a message to the
effect that he should not y:)artake of the commun-
ion with him until he had cleared himself of the
crimes with which he stood impeached. Now
as John maintained a bold and ardent bearing,
and his accusers seemed to grow faint-hearted,
the bishops present, setting aside all other mat-
ters, said they would confine themselves to this
sole consideration, that he had on his own re-
sponsibility, after his deposition, again seated
himself in the episcopal chair, without being
authorized by an ecclesiastical council. As he
alleged that sixty-five bishops who had held
communion with him had reinstated him, the
partisans of Leontius objected, saying : ' A larger
number voted against you, John, in the Synod.'
But although John then contended that this was
a canon of the Arians, and not of the catholic
church, and therefore it was inoperative against
him — for it' had been framed in the council con-
vened against Athanasius at Antioch, for the sub-
version of the doctrine of consubstantiality '' —


' This discourse entitled ' /« decollationrm Prcrcursoris et
haptistir Joannis' is to be found in Mign^'s Patrologia Crtrcia,
Vol. LIV. p. 485. and in Savile's edition of Chrysostom's works,
Vol. VII. S45- Savile, however, places it among the spurious pieces,
and considers it unworthy of the genius of Chrysostom.

3 Cf. II. 8.


VI. 21.] FINAL BANISHMENT AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM. 151


the bishops would not Hsten to his defence, but
immediately condemned him, without consider-
ing that by using this canon they were sanction-
ing the deposition of Athanasius himself. This
sentence was pronounced a little before Easter ;
the emperor therefore sent to tell John that he
could not go to the church, because two Synods
had condemned him. Accordingly Chrysostom
was silenced, and went no more to the church ;
but those who were of his party celebrated
Easter in the public baths which are called Con-
stantianae, and thenceforth left the church. Among
them were many bishops and presbyters, with
others of the clerical order, who from that time
held their assemblies apart in various places,
and were from him denominated ' Johannites.'
For the space of two months, John refrained
from appearing in public ; after which a decree
of the emperor sent him into exile. Thus
he was led into exile by force, and on the very
day of his departure, some of the Johannites set
fire to the church, which by means of a strong
easterly wind, communicated with the senate-
house. This conflagration happened on the
20th of June, under the sixth consulate of
Honorius, which he bore in conjunction with
Aristaenetus.* The severities which Optatus, the
prefect of Constantinople, a pagan in religion,
and a hater of the Christians, inflicted on John's
friends, and how he put many of them to death
on account of this act of incendiarism, I ought,
I beheve, to pass by in silence.*


CHAPTER XIX.

Orditiation of Arsacius as John^s Successor.
Indisposition of Cyrimis Bishop of Chakedon.

After the lapse of a few days, Arsacius was
ordained bishop of Constantinople : he was a
brother of Nectarius who so ably administered
the see before John, although he was then very
aged, being upwards of eighty years old. While
he very mildly and peacefully administered the
episcopate, Cyrinus bishop of Chalcedon, upon
whose foot Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia
had inadvertently trodden, became so seriously
affected by the accident, that mortification en-
sued, and it became necessary to amputate his
foot. Nor was this amputation performed once
only, but was required to be often repeated :
for after the injured limb was cut off, the evil so
permeated his whole system, that the other foot
also having become affected by the disease had
to submit to the same operation.' I have

* 404 A.D.

•'• Some of these details presumably are given by Sozomen in
VIII. 23 and 24.

' Palladius makes mention of this case without, however, nam-
ing Cyrinus. CT. r//. S. Joayi. Chrysostom, chap. 17 (Vol. XIII.
p. 63 A. of Benedictine ed. of Chrysostom).


alluded to this circumstance, because many have
affirmed that what he suffered was a judgment
upon him for his calumnious aspersions of John,
whom he so often designated as arrogant and
inexorable,^ as I have already said.^ Further-
more as on the 30th of September, in the last-
mentioned consulate,* there was an extraordinary
fall of hail of immense size at Constantinople
and its suburbs, it also was declared to be an
expression of Divine indignation on account of
Chrysostom's unjust deposition : and the death
of the empress tended to give increased credi-
bility to these reports, for it took place four days
after the hail-storm. Others, however, asserted
that John had been deservedly deposed, because
of the violence he had exercised in Asia and
Lydia, in depriving the Novatians and Quarto-
decimans of many of their churches, when he
went to Ephesus and ordained Heraclides. But
whether John's deposition was just, as his
enemies declare, or Cyrinus suffered in chastise-
ment for his slanderous revilings ; whether the
hail fell, or the empress died on John's account,
or whether these things happened for other
reasons, or for these in connection with others,
God only knows, who is the discerner of secrets,
and the just judge of truth itself. I have simply
recorded the reports which were current at that
time.

CHAPTER XX.

Death of Arsacius, and Ordination of Atticus.

But Arsacius did not long survive his acces-
sion to the bishopric; for he died on the nth
of November under the following consulate,
which was Stilicho's second, and the first of An-
themius.' In consequence of the fact that the
bishopric became desirable and many aspired
to the vacant see, much time elapsed before the
election of a successor : but at length in the
following consulate, which was the sixth of
Arcadius, and the first of Probus," a devout man
named Atticus was promoted to the episcopate.
He was a native of Sebastia in Armenia, and
had followed an ascetic life from an early age :
moreover in addition to a moderate share of
learning, he possessed a large amount of natural
prudence. But I shall speak of him more par-
ticularly a little later.^

CHAPTER XXI.

John dies in Exile.

John taken into exile died in Comana on the
Euxine, on the i4th.of September, in the following


2 (ivdiaTor, lit. - ' kneeless.'
' Cf. chap. 15, above.
* 404 A.D.


' 40, A.D.
^ 406 A.D.
3 Cf. VII. 2.


152


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI. 21;


consulate, which was the seventh of Honoriiis, and
the second of Theodosius.' A man, as we have
before observed,^ who on account of zeal for
temperance was inclined rather to anger than
forbearance : and his personal sanctity of char-
acter led him to indulge in a latitude of speech
which to others was intolerable. Indeed, it is
most inexplicable to me, how with a zeal so
ardent for the practice of self-control and blame-
lessness of life, he should in his sermons appear
to teach a loose view of temperance. For
whereas by the Synod of bishops repentance
was accepted but once from those who had
sinned after baptism ; he did not scruple to
say, ' Approach, although you may have repented
a thousand times.' ^ For this doctrine, many
even of his friends censured him, but especially
Sisinnius bishop of the Novatian ; who wrote a
book condemnatory of the above quoted ex-
pression of Chrysostom's, and severely rebuked
him for it. But this occurred long before.*


CHAPTER XXII.

Of Sisinnius Bishop of the Novations. His
Readiness at Repartee.

It will not be out of place here, I conceive,
to give some account of Sisinnius. He was, as
I have often said,^ a remarkably eloquent man,
and well-instructed in philosophy. But he had
particularly cultivated logic, and was profoundly
skilled in the interpretation of the holy Scrip-
tures ; insomuch that the heretic Eunomius often
shrank from the acumen which his reasoning
displayed. As regards his diet he was not
simple ; for although he practised the strictest
moderation, yet his table was always sumptu-
ously furnished. He was also accustomed to
indulge himself by wearing white garments, and
bathing twice a day in the public baths. And
when some one asked him ' why he, a bishop,
bathed himself twice a day?' he replied, 'Be-
cause it is inconvenient to l)athe thrice.' Going
one day from courtesy to visit the bishop Arsa-
cius, he was asked by one of the friends of that
bishop, ' why he wore a garment so unsuitable
for a bishop ? and where it was written that an
ecclesiastic should be clothed in white ? ' * Do
you tell me first,' said he, ' where it is written
that a bishop should wear black ? ' When he
that made the inquiry knew not what to reply

» 407 A.D. » Cf. above, chap. 3.

» These words are not found in any of Chrysostom's extant homi-
lies. There is no reason, however, for thinking that they were not
uttered by him in a sermon now not in existence. Socrates' remarks
on Chrysostom's attitude made here are amont; the considerations
which have led some to think that he w^ a Novatian. Cf. Introd.
p X.

* For further particulars on Chrysostom's life and the circum-
stances of his death, see authorities mentioned in chap. 2, note 3.

' Cf. V. ID and 21.


to this counter-question : ' You cannot show,'
rejoined Sisinnius, ' that a priest should be
clothed in black. But Solomon is my author-
ity, whose exhortation is, " Let thy garments
be white." ^ And our Saviour in the Gospels
appears clothed in white raiment : ^ moreover
he showed Moses and Elias to the apostles,
clad in white garments.' His prompt reply to
these and other questions called forth the admi-
ration of those present. Again when Leontius
bishop of Ancyra in Galatia Minor, who had
taken away a church from the Novatians, was on
a visit to Constantinople, Sisinnius went to him,
and begged him to restore the church. But he
received him rudely, saying, * Ye Novatians ought
not to have churches ; for ye take away repent-
ance, and shut out Divine mercy.' As Leontius
gave utterance to these and many other such
revilings against the Novatians, Sisinnius replied :
* No one repents more heartily than I do.' And
when Leontius asked him ' Why do you repent ? '
'That I came to see you,' said he. On one
occasion John the bishop having a contest with
him, said, ' The city cannot have two bishops.' *
' Nor has it,' said Sisinnius. John being irritated
at this response, said, ' You see you pretend that
you alone are the bishop.' ' I do not say that,*
rejoined Sisinnius ; ' but that I am not bishop in
your estimation only, who am such to others.*
John being still more chafed at this reply, said,.
' I will stop your preaching ; for you are a heretic'
To which Sisinnius good-humoredly replied, * I
will give you a reward, if you will relieve me
from so arduous a duty.' John being softened
a little by this answer, said, ' I will not make you
cease to preach, if you find speaking so trouble-
some.' So facetious was Sisinnius, and so ready
at repartee : but it would be tedious to dwell
further on his witticisms. Wherefore by means
of a few specimens we have illustrated what sort
of a person he was, deeming these as sufficient.
I will merely add that he was celebrated for eru-
dition, and on account of it all the bishops who
succeeded him loved and honored him ; and not
only they but all the leading members of the
senate also esteemed and admired him. He is
the author of many works : but they are charac-
terized by too great an affectation of elegance
of diction, and a lavish intermingling of poetic
expressions. On which account he was more


! Eccl. ix. 8. ^ ,. , u- r

s Matt. xvii. 2; Mark ix. 3: Luke ix. 29. On the clothmg of
the clerRy, see Bingham, Christ. Antiq. VI. 4. 18.

* The canons forbade the existence of two authoritative bishops in
one city. Cf V. 5, note 3. It was supposed to be an apostolic
tradition that prescribed this practice, and the faithful always re-
sisted and condemned any attempts to consecrate a second bishop in
a city. Thus ' when Const.intius proposed that Liberiu and Felix
should sit as co-partners in the Roman see and govern the church
in common, the people with one accord rejected the proposal, crying
out " One CTod, one Christ, one bishop." The rule, however, did
not apply »o 'he case of coadjutors, where the bishop was too old or
infirm to discharge his episcopal duties.' See Bingham, Christ.
Antiq. II. 13.


VI. 23.]


DEATH OF ARCADIUS.


153


admired as a speaker than as a writer ; for there
was dignity in his countenance and voice, as well
as in his form and aspect, and every movement
of his person was graceful. On account of these
features he was loved by all the sects, and he
was in especial favor with Atticus the bishop.
But I rnust conclude this brief notice of Sisinnius.


CHAPTER XXIII.

Death of the Emperor Arcadius.

Not long after the death of John, the Em-
peror Arcadius died also. This prince was of a
mild and gentle disposition, and toward the close
of his life was esteemed to be greatly beloved
of God, from the following circumstance. There
was at Constantinople an immense mansion called
Carya ; for in the court of it there is a walnut
tree on which it is said Acacius suffered martyr-
dom by hanging ; on which account a chapel
was built near it, which the Emperor Arcadius
one day thought fit to visit, and after having
prayed there, left again. All who lived near this
chapel ran in a crowd to see the emperor ; and


some going out of the mansion referred to, en-
deavored to preoccupy the streets in order to
get a better view of their sovereign and his suite,
while others followed in his train, until all who
inhaoited it, including the women and children,
had wholly gone out of it. No sooner was this
vast pile emptied of its occupants, the buildings
of which completely environed the church, than
the entire building fell. On which there was a
great outcry, followed by shouts of admiration,
because it was believed the emperor's prayer
had rescued so great a number of persons from
destruction. This event occurred in that man-
ner. On the I St of May, Arcadius died, leaving
his son Theodosius only eight years old, under
the consulate of Bassus and Philip, in the second
year of the 297th Olympiad.' He had reigned
thirteen years with Theodosius his father, and
fourteen years after his death, and had then
attained the thirty-first year of his age. This
book includes the space of twelve years and six
months.^

1 408 A.D.

2 The Greek editions [of Stephens, Valesius, Hussey, Bright,
&c.] add the alternate form of chap, u at this place. For purposes
of convenience in comparing the two versions we have given the
variants with chapter ii.


END OF THE SIXTH BOOK.


BOOK VII.


CHAPTER I.

Anthemius the Praiorian Prefect administers the
Government of the East in Behalf of Young
Theodosius.

After the death of Arcadius on the first of
May, during the consulate of Bassiis and PhiHp,'
his brother Honorius still governed the Western
parts of the empire ; but the administration of
the East devolved on his son Theodosius the
Younger, then only eight years old. The man-
agement of public affairs was therefore intrusted
to Anthemius the Praetorian prefect, grandson
of that Philip who in the reign of Constantius
ejected Paul from the see of Constantinople, and
established Macedonius in his place. By his di-
rections Constantinople was surrounded with high
walls.^ He was esteemed and actually was the
most prudent man of his time, and seldom did
anything unadvisedly, but consulted with the
most juckcious of his friends respecting all prac-
tical matters, and especially with Troilus^ the
sophist, who while excelling in philosophical at-
tainments, was equal to Anthemius himself in
political wisdom. Wherefore almost all things
were done with the concurrence of Troi'lus.


CHAPTER n.

Character and Conduct of Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople.

When Theodosius the emperor was in the
eighth year of his age, Atticus was in the third
year of his presidency over the church at Con-
stantinople, a man as we have by anticipation
said' distinguished alike for his learning, piety,
and discretion, wherefore it came about that the
churches under his episcopate attained a very
flourishing condition. For he not only united
those of 'the household of faith,' ^ but also by


> 408 AD. Cf. VI. 23. Sec G\hhon'% Decline and Fall 0/ the
Roman Empire, chap. 32.

' This was done, according to Cedrenus, several years later by
another prefect. For this reason and because of the grammatical
consiriiction in the original, Valesius rightly conjectures that the
phrase is a gloss introduced from the margin, and should be ex-
punged from the text.

•* TroTlus was a sophist of distinction who taught at Constanti-
nople under Arcadius and Honorius at the beginning of the fifth
century A.D., a native of Side and author of a treatise entitled
Aoyot iroAiTiKoi. See Suidas s.v. TpuiAot.

1 Cf. VI. 20. ' Gal. vi. 10.


his prudence called forth the admiration of the
heretics, whom indeed he by no means desired
to harass ; but if he sometimes was obliged to im-
press them with the fear of himself, he soon after-
ward showed himself mild and clement toward
them. But indeed he did not neglect his studies ;
for he assiduously labored in perusing the writ-
ings of the ancients, and often spent whole nights
in the task ; and thus he could not be confused
by the reasonings of the philosophers, and the
fallacious subtleties of the sophists. Besides this
he was affable and entertaining in conversation,
and ever ready to sympathize with the afflicted :
and in a word, to sum up his excellences in the
apostle's saying, * He was made all things to all
men.'^ Formerly while a presbyter, he had
been accustomed, after composing his sermons,
to commit them to memory, and then recite
them in the church : but by diligent application
he acquired confidence and made his instruction
extemporaneous and eloquent. His discourses
however were not such as to be received with
much applause by his auditors, nor to deserve to
be committed to writing. Let these particulars
respecting his talents, erudition, and manners
suffice. We must now proceed to relate such
things as are worthy of record, that happened in
his time.

CHAPTER ni.

Of Theodosius and Agape tus Bishops of Synada.

A CERTAIN Theodosius was bishop of Synada
in Phrygia Pacata ; he violently persecuted the
heretics in that province — and there was a
great number of them — and especially those
of the Macedonian sect ; he drove them out
not only from the city, but also out of the
country. This course he pursued not from any
precedent in the orthodox church, nor from the
desire of propagating the true faith ; but being
enslaved by the love of filthy lucre, he was im-
pelled by the avaricious motive of amassing
money, by extorting it from the heretics. To
this end he made all sorts of attempts upon the
Macedonians, putting arms into the hands of
his clergy ; and employing innumerable strata-
gems against them ; nor did he refrain from de-

' I Cor. ix. 22.


VII. 5-]


SABBATIUS AND THE NOVATIANS.


155


livering them up to the secular tribunals.^ But
he especially annoyed their bishop whose name
was Agapetus : and finding the governors of
the province were not invested with sufficient au-
thority to punish heretics according to his wish,
he went to Constantinople and petitioned for
edicts of a more stringent nature from the Prae-
torian prefect. While Theodosius was absent
on this business, Agapetus who, as I have said,
presided over the Macedonian sect, came to a
wise and prudent conclusion. Communicating
with his clergy, he called all the people under
his guidance together, and persuaded them to
embrace the * homoousian ' faith. On their ac-
quiescing in this proposition, he proceeded
immediately to the church attended not merely
by his own adherents, but by the whole body of
the people. There having offered prayer, he
took possession of the episcopal chair in which
Theodosius was accustomed to seat himself;
and preaching thenceforth the doctrine of con-
substantiality, he reunited the people, and made
himself master of the churches in the diocese of
Synada. Soon after these transactions, Theo-
dosius returned to Synada, bringing with him
extended powers from the prefect, and know-
ing nothing of what had taken place, he pro-
ceeded to the church just as he was. Being
forthwith unanimously expelled, he again be-
took himself to Constantinople ; upon his ar-
rival at that place he complained to Atticus, the
bishop, of the treatment he had met with, and
the manner in which he had been deprived of
his bishopric. Atticus perceiving that this move-
ment had resulted advantageously to the church,
consoled Theodosius as well as he could ;
recommending him to embrace with a contented
mind a retired life, and thus sacrifice his own
private interests to the public good. He then
wrote to Agapetus authorizing him to retain the
episcopate, and bidding him be under no ap-
prehension of being molested in consequence
of Theodosius' grievance.

CHAPTER IV.

A Paralytic Jew healed by Aitictis in Baptism.

This was one important improvement in the
circumstances of the Church, which happened
during the administration of Atticus. Nor were
these times without the attestation of miracles
and healings. For a certain Jew being a para-
lytic had been confined to his bed for many
years ; arid as every sort of medical skill, and
the prayers of his Jewish brethren had been
resorted to but had availed nothing, he had

1 On the limits of the secular power over ecclesiastical dignita-
ries, and the cases in which the clergy were amenable to the civil
law as well as those in which they were not, sec Bingham, Christ.
Antiq. V. 2.


recourse at length to Christian baptism, trusting
in it as the only true remedy to be used.'
When Atticus the bishop was informed of his
wishes, he instructed him in the first principles
of Christian truth, and having preached to him
to hope in Christ, directed that he should be
brought in his bed to the font. The paralytic
Jew receiving baptism with a sincere faith, as
soon as he was taken out of the baptismal font
found himself perfectly cured of his disease,
and continued to enjoy sound health afterwards.
This miraculous power Christ vouchsafed to be
manifested even in our times \ and the fame of
it caused many heathens to believe and be bap-
tized. But the Jews although zealously ' seek-
ing after signs,' - not even the signs which
actually took place induced to embrace the
faith. Such blessings were thus conferred by
Christvupon men.

CHAPTER V.

The Presbyter Sabbatius, formerly a Jew, sepa-
rates from the Novatians.

Many, however, making no account of these
events yielded to their own depravity ; for not
only did the Jews continue in unbelief after
this miracle, but others also who love to follow
them were shown to hold views similar to theirs.
Among these was Sabbatius, of whom mention
has before been made ; ^ who not being content
with the dignity of presbyter to which he had
attained, but aiming at a bishopric from the
beginning, separated himself from the church
of the Novatians, making a pretext of observ-
ing the Jewish Passover.^ Holding therefore
schismatic assemblies apart from his own bishop
Sisinnius, in a place named Xerolophus, where
the forum of Arcadius now is, he ventured on
the performance of an act deserving the severest
punishments. Reading one day at one of these
meetings that passage in the Gospel where it is
said,^ ' Now it was the Feast of the Jews called
the Passover,' he added what was never written
nor heard of before : ' Cursed be he that cele-
brates the Passover out of the days of unleav-
ened bread.' When these words were reported
among the people, the more simple of the
Novatian laity, deceived by this artifice, flocked
to him. But his fraudulent fabrication was of
no avail to him ; for his forgery issued in most
disastrous consequences. For shortly afterwards
he kept this feast in anticipation of the Christian
Easter ; and many according to their custom


' On the supposed miraculous effects of baptism, see TertuUian,
de baptisnio, passim. ^ i Cor. i. 22.

1 V. 21.

- Cf. I. 8, note 2, and V. 22 and notes.

■' Not an exact quotation. Luke xxii. i, resembles it more than
any other of the parallels.


156


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 5.


flocked to him. While they were passing the
night in the accustomed vigils, a panic as if
caused by evil spirits fell upon them, as if Sisin-
nius their bishop were coming with a multitude
of persons to attack them. P>om the perturba-
tion that might be expected in such a case, and
their being shut up at night in a confined place,
they trod upon one another, insomuch that above
seventy of them were cnished to death. On this
account many deserted Sabbatius : some how-
ever, holding his ignorant prejudice, remained
with him. In what way Sabbatius, by a viola-
tion of his oath, afterwards managed to get
himself ordained a bishop, we shall relate here-
after.''

CHAPTER VI.

The Leaders of Arianism at this Time.

DoROTHEUS bishop of the Arians, who, as we
have said,' was translated by that sect from An-
tioch to Constantinople, having attained the age
of one hundred and nineteen years, died on the
6th of November, in the seventh consulate of
Honorius, and the second of Theodosius .\ugus-
tus.* After him Barbas presided over the Arian
sect, in whose time the Arian faction was favored
by possessing two very eloquent members, both
having the rank of presbyter, one of whom was
named Timothy, and the other George. Now
George excelled in Grecian literature ; Timothy,
on the other hand, was proficient in the sacred
Scriptures. George indeed constantly had the
writings of Aristotle and Plato in his hands :
Timothy found his inspiration in Origen ; he
also evinced in his public expositions of the holy
Scriptures no inconsiderable acquaintance with
the Hebrew language. Now Timothy hod for-
merly identified himself with the sect of the
Psathyrians ; ^ but George had been ordained by
Barbas. I have myself conversed with Timothy,
and was exceedingly struck by the readiness with
which he would answer the most difficult ques-
tions, and clear up the most obscure passages in
the Divine oracles ; he also invariably quoted
Origen as an unquestionable authority in confir-
mation of his own utterances. But it is aston-
ishing to me that these two men should continue
to uphold the heresy of the Arians ; the one be-
ing so conversant with Plato, and the other hav-
ing Origen so frequently on his lips. For Plato
does not say that the second and third cause, as
he usually terms them, had a beginning of ex-
istence : * and Origen everywhere acknowledges
the Son to be co-eternal* with the Father.

* Cf. chap. 12 below. ' 407 a.d.

» Cf. V. 3, 12 and 23. ' Cr. V. 23, note 2.

* The special views of Plato which are here alluded to are proba-
bly those kiund in the Timirus. Cf. Jowett, The Dialogues of
Plato translated into English, Vol. II. p. 451 et seg.

» Cf. VI. 13.


Nevertheless although they remained connected
with their own church, still they unconsciously
changed the Arian sect for the better, and
displaced many of the blasphemies of Arius
by their own teachings. But enough of these
persons. Sisinnius bishop of the Novatians dy-
ing under the same consulate, Chrysanthus was
ordained in his place, of whom we shall have to
speak by and by.

CHAPTER VII.

Cyril succeeds Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria.

Shortly afterwards Theophilus bishop of Al-
exandria having fallen into a lethargic state, died
on the 15th of October,' in the ninth consulate
of Honorius, and the fifth of Theodosius. A
great contest immediately arose about the ap-
pointment of a successor, some seeking to place
Timothy the archdeacon in the episcopal chair ;
and others desiring Cyril, who was a nephew
of Theophilus. A tumult having arisen on this
account among the people, Abundantius, the
commander of the troops in Egypt, took sides
with Timothy. [Yet the partisans of Cyril tri-
umphed.] - Whereupon on the third day after
the death of Theophilus, Cyril came into posses-
sion of the episcopate, with greater power than
Theophilus had ever exercised. For from that
time the bishopric of Alexandria went beyond
the limits of its sacerdotal functions, and as-
sumed the administration of secular matters.'
Cyril immediately therefore shut up the churches
of the Novatians at Alexandria, and took pos-
session of all their consecrated vessels and
ornaments ; and then stripped their bishop
Theopemptus of all that he had.


J


CHAPTER VIII.


Propagation of Christianity among the Persians
by Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia.

About this same time it happened that Chris-
tianity was disseminated in Persia, by reason of
the following causes. Frequent embassies were
sent to and fro between the sovereigns of Persia
and the Roman empire, for which there were
continual occasions. Necessity brought it about
at that time that the Roman emperor thought
proper to send Maruthas bishop of Mesopota-
mia, who has been before mentioned,' on a
mission to the king of the Persians. 'The king

> 412 A.D. This chapter is out of chronological sequence, as
appears from the fact that Alaric took Rome in 410 a.d. See chap.
10 below.

' The words included in brackets are not found in the Greek;
they were probably inserted into the English translation as necessary
to explain the context.

» Cf. chap. II. ' Cf. VI. 15.


VII. lo.]


PROGRESS OF CHRISTIANITY IN PERSIA.


^57


discovering great piety in the man treated him
with great honor, and gave heed to him as
one who was indeed beloved of God. This
excited the jealousy of the magi/ whose influ-
ence is considerable over the Persian monarch,
for they feared lest he should persuade the king
to embrace Christianity. For Maruthas had by
his prayers cured the king of a violent headache
to which he had been long subject, and which
the magi had been unable to relieve. The ma-
gicians therefore had recourse to this decep-
tion. As the Persians worship fire, and the king
was accustomed to pay his adorations in a certain
edifice to the fire which was kept perpetually
burning, they concealed a man underneath the
sacred hearth, ordering him to make this excla-
mation at the time of day when the king was
accustomed to perform his devotion ! ' The king
should be thrust out because he is guilty of im-
piety, in imagining a Christian priest to be loved
by the Deity.' When Isdigerdes — for that was
the king's name — heard these words, he deter-
mined to dismiss Maruthas, notwithstanding the
reverence with which he regarded him. But
Maruthas being truly a God-loving man, by the
earnestness of his prayers, detected the imposi-
tion of the magi. Going to the king therefore,
he addressed him thus : ' Be not deluded, O
king,' said he, 'but when you again enter that
edifice and hear the same voice, explore the
ground below, and you will discover the fraud.
For it is not the fire that speaks, but human
contrivance does this.' The king received the
suggestion of Maruthas and went as usual to the
little house where the ever-burning fire was. When
he again heard the same voice, he ordered the
hearth to be dug up ; whereupon the impostor,
who uttered the supposed words of the Deity,
was discovered. Becoming indignant at the
deception thus attempted the king commanded
that the tribe of the magi should be decimated.
When this was effected he permitted Maruthas
to erect churches wherever he wished ; and from
that time the Christian religion was diffused
among the Persians. Then Maruthas being
recalled went to Constantinople ; not long after-
wards however, he was again sent as ambassador
to the Persian court. Again the magi devised
contrivances so as by all possible means to pre-
vent the king from giving him audience. One
of their devices was to cause a most disgusting
smell where the king was accustomed to go, and
then accuse the Christians of being the authors
of it. The king however having already had
occasion to suspect the magi, very diligently
and closely scrutinized the matter ; and again
the authors of the nuisance were detected.

2 A caste of priests who exercised great influence in Persia men-
tioned both in the Old and the New Testament. Cf. Smith, Diet,
of the Bible, art. Magi.


Wherefore he punished several of them, and
held Maruthas in still higher honor. For the
Romans as a nation he had much regard, and
prized good feeling on their part very highly.
Nay, he almost embraced the Christian faith
himself, as Maruthas in conjunction with Abdas
bishop of Persia gave another experimental
proof of its power : for these two by giving
themselves to much fasting and prayer, had
cast out a demon with which the king's son
was possessed. But the death of Isdigerdes'
prevented his making an open profession of
Christianity. The kingdom then devolved on
Vararanes his son, in whose time the treaty
between the Romans and Persians was broken
as we shall have occasion to narrate a little later.*


CHAPTER IX.

The Bishops of Antioch and Rome.

During this period upon the death of Fla-
vian ^ Porphyry received the episcopate of
Antioch, and after him Alexander' was set
over that church. But at Rome, Damasus
having held that bishopric eighteen years Siri-
cius succeeded him ; ^ and Siricius having pre-
sided there fifteen years, Anastasius held sway
over the church for three years ; after Anasta-
sius Innocent [was promoted to the same see].
He was the first persecutor of the Novatians at
Rome, and many of their churches he took
away.

CHAPTER X. /

Rome taken and sacked by Alaric.

About this same time ^ it happened that Rome
was taken by the barbarians ; for a certain Ala-
ric, a barbarian who had been an ally of the
Romans, and had served as an ally with ihe em-
peror Theodosius in the war against the usurper
Eugenius, having on that account been hon-
ored with Roman dignities, was unable to bear
his good fortune. He did not choose to assume
imperial authority, but retiring from Constan-
tinople went into the Western parts, and arriv-
ing at Illyricum immediately laid waste the
whole country. As he marched, however, the
Thessalians opposed him at the mouths of
the river Peneus, whence there is a pass over
Mount Pindus to Nicopolis in Epirus ; and com-
ing to an engagement, the Thessalians killed
about three thousand of his men. After this


' 420 A.D. * Chap. 18 below.

1 404 AD. » 414 A.D. 3 385 A.D.

' On Alaric's career, see Zosimus, V. 5, 6; 28-51 and V. 1-13.
Cf. also parallel accounts in Sozomen, IX. 4, 6-9: and Philostorgius,
XII. 2, 3; and Gibbon's Decline and Fall, chap. 31.


158


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[VII. lo.


the barbarians that were with him destroying
everything in their way, at last took Rome itself,
which they pillaged, burning the greatest num-
ber of the magnificent structures and other ad-
mirable works of art it contained. The money
and valuable articles they plundered and di-
vided among themselves. Many of the prin-
cipal senators they put to death on a variety of
pretexts. Moreover, Alaric in mockery of the
imperial dignity, proclaimed one Attalus^ em-
peror, whom he ordered to be attended with all
the insignia of sovereignty on one day, and to be
exhibited in the habit of a slave on the next.
After these achievements he made a precipitate
retreat, a report having reached him that the
emperor Theodosius had sent an army to fight
him. Nor was this report a fictitious one ; for
the imperial forces were actually on their way ;
but Alaric, not waiting for the materialization of
the rumor, decamped and escaped. It is said
that as he was advancing towards Rome, a pious
monk exhorted him not to delight in the per-
petuation of such atrocities, and no longer to
rejoice in slaughter and blood. To whom Ala-
ric replied, ' I am not going on in this course of
my own will ; but there is a something that irre-
sistibly impels me daily, saying, ' Proceed to
Rome, and desolate that city.' Such was the
career of this person.


CHAPTER XI.

The Bishops of Rome.

After Innocent, Zosimus governed the Roman
church for two years : and after him Boniface '
presided over it for three years. He was suc-
ceeded by Celestinus. And this Celestinus took
away the churches from the Novatians at Rome
also, and obliged Rusticula their bishop to hold
his meetings secretly in private houses. Until
this time the Novatians had flourished exceed-
ingly in Rome, possessing many churches there,
which were attended by large congregations.
But envy attacked them also, as soon as the
Roman episcopate, like that of Alexandria,
extended itself beyond the limits of ecclesiasti-
cal jurisdiction, and degenerated into its present
state of secular domination. For thenceforth
the bishops would not suffer even those who
agreed with them in matters of faith to enjoy
the privilege of assembling in peace, but stripped
them of all they possessed, praising them .merely
for these agreements in faith. The bishops of
Constantinople kept themselves free from this
[sort of conduct] ; inasmuch as in addition to
tolerating them and permitting them lo hold

' This incident is also given by Procopius of Csesarea in Hist.
Vandal. I. p. 8. i 418 a.d.


their assemblies within the city, as I have already
stated,- they treated them with every mark of
Christian regard.


CHAPTER XII.

Of Chrysanthus Bishop of the Novatians at
Coiistd ntinople.

After the death of Sisinnius. Chrysanthus
was constrained to take upon him the episcopal
office. He was the son of Marcian the prede-
cessor of Sisinnius, and having had a military
appointment in the palace at an early age, he
was subsequently under Theodosius the Great
made governor^ of Italy, and after that lord-
lieutenant^ of the British Isles, in both which
capacities he elicited for himself the highest
admiration. Returning to Constantinople at an
advanced age, earnestly desiring to be consti-
tuted prefect of that city, he was made bishop
of the Novatians against his will. For as Sisin-
nius, when at the point of death, had referred to
him as a most suitable person to occupy the see,
the people regarding this declaration as law,
sought to have him ordained forthwith. Now
as Chrysanthus attempted to avoid having this
dignity forced upon him, Sabbatius imagining
that a seasonable opportunity was now afforded
him of making himself master of the churches,
and making no account of the oath by which
he had bound himself,'' procured his own ordi-
nation at the hands of a few insignificant
bishops.'' Among these was Hermogenes, who
had been e.xcommunicated with curses by [Sab-
batius] himself on account of his blasphemous
writings. But this perjured procedure of Sab-
batius was of no avail to him : for the people
disgusted with his obstreperousness, used every
effort to discover the retreat of Chrysanthus ;
and having found him secluded in Bithynia,
they brought him back by force, and invested
him with the bishopric. He was a man of un-
surpassed modesty and prudence ; and thus he
established and enlarged the churches of the
Novatians at Constantinople. Moreover he was
the first to distribute gold among the poor out
of his own private property. Futhermore he
would receive nothing from the churches but
two loaves of the consecrated bread* every


» Cf. V. 10.

' viroTt<cos= consularis, consul honorarius ; the title was, dur-
ing the period of the republic, given to ex-consuls, but later it be-
came a common custom, especially under the emperors, for the
governors of the imperial provinces to be called consuls, and the
title consularis became the established designation of those-intrusted
with the administration of imperial provinces. Sec Smith, Diet, of
Greek and Rom. Antiq.

' Btxaptot [oiitKapiot] transliterated from the Lat. vicarius, of
which the Eng. ' lieutenant ' is an exact equivalent.

3 Cf. V. 21. « Cf. Bingham, Christ. Antiq. II. 16.

' The loaves which were offered by the faithful as a sacrifice
were called ' loaves of benediction,' and were used partly for the
Eucharist and partly as food by the bishop and clergy.


VII. 13.]


DISTURBANCES AT ALEXANDRIA.


159


Lord's day. So anxious was he to promote the
advantage of his own church, that he drew
Ablabius, the most eminent orator of that time,
from the school of Troilus, and ordained him a
presbyter ; whose sermons are in circulation,
being remarkably elegant and full of point. But
Ablabius was afterwards promoted to the bish-
opric of the church of the Novatians at Nicaea,
where he also taught rhetoric ^t the same time.


CHAPTER XIII.

Conflict betuieen the Christiatis and Jews at Al-
exa?idria : and breach betiueen the Bishop
Cyril and the Prefect Orestes. , ,

V

About this same time it happened that the
Jewish inhabitants were driven out of Alexandria
by Cyril the bishop on the following account.
The Alexandrian public is more delighted -with
tumult than any other people : and if at any
time it should find a pretext, breaks forth into
the most intolerable excesses ; for it never
ceases from its turbulence without bloodshed.
It happened on the present occasion that a dis-
turbance arose among the populace, not from a
cause of any serious importance, but out of an
evil that has become very popular in almost all
cities, viz. a fondness for dancing exhibitions.^
In consequence of the Jews being disengaged
from business on the Sabbath, and spending
their time, not in hearing the Law, but in theat-
rical amusements, dancers usually collect great
crowds on that day, and disorder is almost in-
variably produced. And although this was in
some degree controlled by the governor of
Alexandria, nevertheless the Jews continued
opposing these measures. And although they
are always hostile toward the Christians they
were roused to still greater opposition against
them on account of the dancers. When there-
fore Orestes the prefect was publishing an edict
— for so they are accustomed to call public
notices — in the theatre for the regulation of
the shows, some of the bishop Cyril's party were
present to learn the nature of the orders about to
be issued. There was among them a certain
Hierax, a teacher of the rudimental branches of
literature, and one who was a very enthusiastic
listener of the bishop Cyril's sermons, and made
himself conspicuous by his forwardness in ap-
plauding. When the Jews observ^ed this person in
the theatre, they immediately cried out that he
had come there for no other purpose than to excite
sedition among the people. Now Orestes had
long regarded with jealousy the growing power of

1 As to how the ancient Church looked upon theatrical shows,
see Bingham, Christ. Antiq. XVI. 11. 15, and passages there
referred to.


the bishops, because they encroached on the juris-
diction of the authorities aj^pointed by the em-
peror, especially as Cyril wished to set spies over
his proceedings ; he therefore ordered Hierax
to be seized, and publicly subjected him to the
torture in the theatre. Cyril, on being informed
of this, sent for the principal Jews, and threat-
ened them with the utmost severities unless they
desisted from their molestation of the Christians.
The Jewish populace on hearing these menaces,
instead of suppressing their violence, only be-
came more furious, and were led to form con-
spiracies for the destruction of the Christians ;
one of these was of so desperate a character as
to cause their entire expulsion from Alexandria ;
this I shall now describe. Having agreed that
each one of them should wear a ring on his
finger made of the bark of a palm branch, for
the sake of mutual recognition, they determined
to make a nightly attack on the Christians. They
therefore sent persons into the streets to raise
an outcry that the church named after Alexander
was on fire. Thus many Christians on hearing
this ran out, some from one direction and some
from another, in great anxiety to save their
church. The Jews immediately .fell upon and
slew them ; readily distinguishing each other by
their rings. At daybreak the authors of this
atrocity could not be concealed : and Cyril,
accompanied by an immense crowd of people,
going to their synagogues — for so they call their
house of prayer — took them away from them,
and drove the Jews out of the city, permitting
the multitude to plunder their goods. Thus the
Jews who had inhabited the city from the time
of Alexander the Macedonian were expelled from
it, stripped of all they possessed, and dispersed
some in one direction and some in another. One
of them, a physician- named Adamantius, fled
to Atticus bishop of Constantinople, and profess-
ing Christianity, some time afterwards returned
to Alexandria and fixed his residence there. But
Orestes the governor of Alexandria was filled
with great indignation at the^e transactions, and
was excessively grieved that a city of such mag-
nitude should have been suddenly bereft of so
large a portion of its population ; he therefore
at once communicated the whole affair to the
emperor. Cyril also wrote to him, describing
the outrageous conduct of the Jews : and in the
meanwhile sent persons to Orestes who should
mediate concerning a reconciliation : for this
the people had urged him to do. And when
Orestes refused to listen to friendly advances,
Cyril extended toward him the book of gospels,'
believing that respect for religion would induce

2 iarpuccii' Aoyiui' tTO<t>i<TTTi<;, also called by other writers of the
period iarpoo-oc^iCTT^?; see Sophocles, Greek Lex. 0/ the Rom.
and Byza/it. Periods.

^ As a mode of abjuration, see VI. 11, note 5. In this case the
sacred volume takes the place of the child.


i6o


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 13.


him to lay aside his resentment. When, however,
even this had no pacific effect on the prefect,
but he persisted in implacable hostility against
the bishop, the following event afterwards oc-
curred.

CHAPTER XIV.

The Monks of Nitria come down and raise a
Sedition against the Prefect of Alexandria.

Some of the monks inhabiting the mountains of
Nitria, of a very fiery disposition, whom Theophi-
lus some time before had unjustly armed against
Dioscorus and his brethren, being again trans-
ported with an ardent zeal, resolved to fight in
behalf of Cyril. About five hundred of them
therefore quitting their monasteries, came into
the city ; and meeting the prefect in his chariot,
they called him a pagan idolater, and applied to
him many other abusive epithets. He supposing
this to be a snare laid for him by Cyril, exclaimed
that he was a Christian, and had been baptized
by Atticus the bishop at Constantinople. As
they gave but little heed to his protestations, and
a certain one of them named Ammonius threw
a stone at Orestes which struck him on the head,
and covered him with the blood that flowed from
the wound, all the guards with a few exceptions
fled, plunging into the crowd, some in one direc-
tion and some in another, fearing to be stoned
to death. Meanwhile the populace of Alexan-
dria ran to the rescue of the governor, and put
the rest of the monks to flight ; but having
secured Ammonius they delivered him up to the
prefect. He immediately put him publicly to
the torture, which was inflicted with such severity
that he died under the effects of it : and not long
after he gave an account to the emperors of what
had taken place. Cyril also on the other hand
forwarded his statement of the matter to the
emperor : and causing the body of Ammonius
to be deposited in a certain church, he gave him
the new appellation of Thaumasius,^ ordering
him to be enrolled among the martyrs, and eu-
logizing his magnanimity in church as that of
one who had fallen in a conflict in defence of
piety. But the more sober-minded, although
Christians, did not accept Cyril's prejudiced es-
timate of him ; for they well knew that he had
suffered the punishment due to his rashness, and
that he had not lost his life under the torture
because he would not deny Christ. And Cyril
himself being conscious of this, suffered the recol-
lection of the circumstance to be gradually ob-
literated by silence. But the animosity between
Cyril and Orestes did not by any means subside
at this point, but was kindled ^ afresh by an oc-
currence similar to the preceding.

1 %iru>t.o.<noi, ' wonderful,' ' admirable.'

* The original here has oweo-^tcre, ' quenched,' ' extinguished,'


CHAPTER XV.

Of Hypatia the Female Philosopher.

There was a woman at Alexandria named
Hypatia,^ daughter of the philosopher Theon,
who made such attainments in literature and
science, as to far surpass all the philosophers of
her own time. Having succeeded to the school
of Plato and Plotinus, she explained the princi-
ples of philosophy to her auditors, many of whom
came from a distance to receive her instructions.
On account of the self-possession and ease of
manner, which she had acquired in consequence
of the cultivation of her mind, she not unfre-
quently appeared in public in presence of the
magistrates. Neither did she feel abashed in
coming to an assembly of men. For all men
on account of her extraordinary dignity and vir-
tue admired her the more. Yet even she fell a
victim to the political jealousy which at that
time prevailed. For as she had frequent inter-
views with Orestes, it was calumniously reported
among the Christian populace, that it was she
who prevented Orestes from being reconciled to
the bishop. Some of them therefore, hurried
away by a fierce and bigoted zeal, whose ring-
leader was a reader named Peter, waylaid her
returning home, and dragging her from her car-
riage, they took her to the church called Ccesa-
reum, where they completely stripped her, and
then murdered her with tiles.^ After tearing her
body in pieces, they took her mangled limbs to
a place called Cinaron, and there burnt them.
This affair brought not the least opprobrium, not
only upon Cyril,^ but also upon the whole Alex-
andrian church. And surely nothing can be
farther from the spirit of Christianity than the
allowance of massacres, fights, and transactions
of that sort. This happened in the month of
March during Lent, in the fourth year of Cyril's
episcopate, under the tenth consulate of Hono-
rius, and the sixth of Theodosius.*

but the context demands the very opposite meaning, unless indeed
the outrage on Hypatia was considered the last in the scries of occa-
sions of quarrel between Orestes and Cyril, aftex which the differ-
ence gradually died out.

1 The following incident has been popularized by Charles Kings-
ley in his well-known novel of Hypatia, which has, however, the
accessory aim of antagonizing the over-estimation of early Chris-
tianity by Dr. Pusey and his followers. The original sources for
the history of Hypatia, besides the present chapter, arc the letters
of her pupil Synesius, and Philostorgius, VIII. 9. Cf. also Wems-
dorf, df Hypatia, philosopha Alex. diss. 4, Viieb. 1748.

' offTpdnon, lit. ' oystershells,' but the word was also applied to
brick tiles used on the roofs of houses.

^ The responsibility of Cyril in this affair has been variously
estimated by different historians. ' Walch, Gibbon, and Milman
incline to hold him guilty. J. C. Robertson ascribes him indirect
responsibility, asserting that the perpetrators of the crime 'were
mostly offipers of his church, and had unquestionably drawn encour-
agement from his earlier proceedings." Hist, of the Christ. Ch.
Vol. I. p. 401. W. Bright says, ' Cyril was no party to this hideous
deed, but it was the work of men whose passions he had originally
called out. Had there been no onslaught on the synagogues, there
would doubtless have been no murder of Hypatia." Hist. 0/ the
Church/ront yix to 4SI, pp. 274, 275. See also Schaff, Hist. 0/
the Christ. Ch. Vol. III. p. 943.

« 41S A.D.


VII. i8.] MACHINATIONS OF JEWS AGAINST CHRISTIANS.


i6l


CHAPTER XVI.

The Jews commit Another Outrage upon the
Christians and are punished.

Soon afterwards the Jews renewed their ma-
levolent and impious practices against the Chris-
tians, and drew down upon themselves deserved
punishment. At a place named Inmestar, situ-
ated between Chalcis and Antioch in Syria, the
Jews were amusing themselves in their usual
way with a variety of sports. In this way they
indulged in many absurdities, and at length im-
pelled by drunkenness they were guilty of scoff-
ing at Christians and even Christ himself; and
in derision of the cross and those who put their
trust in the Crucified One, they seized a Chris-
tian boy, and having bound him to a cross,
began to laugh and sneer at him. But in a
little while becoming so transported with fury,
they scourged the child until he died under
their hands. This conduct occasioned a sharp
conflict between them and the Christians ; and
as soon as the emperors were informed of the
circumstance, they issued orders to the governor
of the province to find out and punish the de-
linquents. And thus the Jewish inhabitants of
this place paid the penalty for the wickedness
they had committed in their impious sport.

CHAPTER XVII.

Miracle performed by Paul Bishop of the Nova-
tians at the Baptism of a Jewish Impostor.

About this time Chrysanthus bishop of the
Novatians, after presiding over the churches of
his own sect seven years, died on the 26th of
August, under the consulate of Monaxius and
Plintha.' He was succeeded in the bishopric
"by Paul, who had formerly been a teacher of the
Latin language : but afterwards, setting aside the
Latin language, had devoted himself to an as-
cetic course of life ; and having founded a mon-
astery of religious men, he adopted a mode of
living not very different from that pursued by
the monks in the desert. In fact I myself found
him just such a person as Evagrius^ says the
monks dwelling in the deserts ought to be ;
imitating them in continued fastings, silence,
abstinence from animal food, and for the most
part abstaining also from the use of oil and
wine. He was, moreover, solicitous about the
wants of the poor to as great an extent as any
other man ; he untiringly visited those who
were in prison, and in behalf of many criminals
interceded with the judges, who readily attended

' 419 A.D.

' On Evagrius, see IV. 23. On the passage in his works alluded,
see Evagrius, Ecclesiastical History, IV. 35, 36.


to him on account of his eminent piety. But why
should I lengthen my account of him ? For I am
about to mention a deed done by him which is
well worthy of being recorded in writing. A
certain Jewish impostor, pretending to be a
convert to Christianity, was in the habit of being
baptized often^ and by that artifice he amassed
a good deal of money. After having deceived
many of the Christian sects by this fraud — for
he received baptism from the Arians and Mace-
donians — as there remained no others to prac-
tise his hypocrisy upon, he at length came to
Paul bishop of the Novatians, and declaring
that he earnestly desired baptism, requested that
he might obtain it at his hand. Paul com-
mended the determination of the Jew, but told
him he could not perform that rite for him, until
he had been instructed in the fundamental prin-
ciples of the faith, and given himself to fasting
and prayer for many days.^ The Jew compelled
to fast against his will became the more impor-
tunate in his request for baptism ; now as Paul
did not wish to discourage him by longer delays,
since he was so urgent, consented to grant his
request, and made all the necessary preparations
for the baptism. Having purchased a white
vestment for him, he ordered the font to be
filled with water, and then led the Jew to it in
order to baptize him. But a certain invisible
power of God caused the water suddenly to dis-
appear. The bishop, of course, and those pres-
ent, had not the least suspicion of the real
cause, but imagined that the water had escaped
by the channels underneath, by means of which
they are accustomed to empty the font ; these
passages were therefore very carefully closed,
and the font filled again. Again, however, as
the Jew was taken there a second time, the
water vanished as before. Then Paul addressing
the Jew, said, ' Either you are an evil-doer,
wretched man, or an ignorant person who has
already been baptized.' The people having
crowded together to witness this miracle, one
am.ong them recognized the Jew, and iden-
tified him as having been baptized by Atticus,
the bishop, a little while before. Such was the
portent wrought by the hands of Paul bishop of
the Novatians.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Reneival of Hostilities between the Romans and
Persians after the Death of Isdigerdes King of
the Persians.

Isdigerdes king of the Persians, who had in
no way molested the Christians in his domin-


' The repetition of baptism, except in cases in which there was
doubt as to the validity of a first baptism, was considered a sacrilege.
See Smith and Cheetham, Diet, of Christ. Antiq. art. Iteration
Baptism. « Cf. I. 8.


l62


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. i8.


ions, having died,' his son Vararanes by name
succeeded him in the kingdom. This prince
yielding to the influence of the magi, persecuted
the Christians there with rigor, by inflicting on
them a variety of Persian punishments and tor-
tures. They were therefore on account of the
oppression obhged to desert their country and
seek refuge among the Romans, entreating them
not to suffer them to be completely extirpated.
Atticus the bishop received these suppliants with
great benignity, and did his utmost to help them
in whatsoever way it was possible : accordingly he
made the emperor Theodosius acquainted with
the facts. It happened at the same time that
another grievance of the Romans against Per-
sians came to light. The Persians, that is to
say, would not send back the laborers in the
gold mines who had been hired from among the
Romans ; and they also plundered the Roman
merchants. The bad feeling which these
things produced was greatly increased by the
flight of the Persian Christians into the Roman
territories. For the Persian king immediately
sent an embassy to demand the fugitives. But
the Romans were by no means disposed to de-
liver them up ; not only as desirous of defend-
ing their suppliants, but also because they were
ready to do anything for the sake of the Chris-
tian religion. For which reason they chose
rather to renew the war with the Persians, than
to suffer the Christians to be miserably destroyed.
The league was accordingly broken, and a fierce
war followed.^ Of which war I deem it not un-
seasonable to give some brief account. The
Roman emperor first sent a body of troops under
the command of the general Ardaburius ; ^ who
making an irruption through Armenia into Persia,
ravaged one of its provinces called Azazene.
Narsaeus the Persian general marched against
him with the Persian army ; but on coming to
an engagement he was defeated, and obliged to
retreat, .\fterwards he judged it advantageous
to make an unexpected irruption through Meso-
potamia into the Roman territories there un-
guarded, thinking by this means to be revenged
on the enemy. But this design of Narsaeus did
not escape the observation of the Roman gen-
eral. Having therefore plundered Azazene, he
then himself also hastily marched into Mesopo-
tamia. Wherefore Narsaeus, although furnished
with a large army, was prevented from invading
the Roman provinces; but arriving at Nisibis —
a city in the possession of the Persians situated
on the frontiers of both empires — he sent to
Ardaburius desiring that they might make mutual
arrangements about carrying on the war, and

> Having reigned between 399 and 420 a.d. Cf. Clinton, Fasti
Romani, year 420.

' There had been peace between the Persian and the Roman
powers since 381. Cf. Pagi, A tit. 420, note 14.

' Mentioned in Theophanes' Chronographia, p. 74.


appoint a time and place for an engagement.
But he said to the messengers, * Tell Narsaeus
that the Roman emperors will not fight when it
pleases him.' The emperor perceiving that the
Persian was mustering his whole force, made
additional levies to his army, and put his whole
trust in God for the victory : and that the king
was not without immediate benefit from this
pious confidence the following circumstance
proves. As the Constantinopolitans were in
great consternation, and apprehensive respecting
the issue of the war, angels from God appeared
to some persons in Bithynia who were travelling
to Constantinople on their own affairs, and bade
them tell the people not to be alarmed, but pray
to God and be assured that the Romans would be
conquerors. For they said that they themselves
were appointed by God to defend them. When
this message was circulated it not only com-
forted the residents of the city, but rendered
the soldiers more courageous. The seat of war
being transferred, as we have said, from Armenia
to Mesopotamia, the Romans shut up the Per-
sians in the city of Nisibis, which they besieged ;
and having constructed wooden towers which
they advanced by means of machines to the
walls, they slew great numbers of those who de-
fended them, as well as of those who ran to their
assistance. When Vararanes the Persian mon-
arch learned that his province of Azazene on the
one hand had been desolated, and that on the
other his army was closely besieged in the city
of Nisibis, he resolved to march in person with
all his forces against the Romans : but dreading
the Roman valor, he implored the aid of the
Saracens, who were then governed by a warlike
chief named Alamundarus. This prince accord-
ingly brought with him a large reinforcement of
Saracen auxiliaries, exhorted the king of the Per-
sians to fear nothing, for that he would soon
reduce the Romans under his power, and deliver
Antioch in Syria into his hands. But the event
did not reafize these promises ; for God infused
into the minds of the Saracens a terrible panic ;
and imagining that the Roman army was falling
upon them, and finding no other way of escape,
they precipitated themselves, armed as they were,
into the river Euphrates, wherein nearly one
hundred thousand of them were drowned. Such
was the nature of the panic.

The Romans besieging Nisibis, understand-
ing that the king of Persia was bringing with
him a great number of elephants, became
alarmed in their turn, burnt all the machines
they had used in carrying on the siege, and
retired into their own country. What engage-
ments afterwards took place, and how Areo-
bindus another Roman general killed the bravest
of the Persians in single combat, and by what
means Ardaburius destroyed seven Persian com-


VII. 20.]


WAR WITH THE PERSIANS.


163


manders in an ambuscade, and in what manner
Vitian another Roman general vanquished the
remnant of the Saracen forces, I beheve I ought
to pass by, lest I should digress too far from my
subject.

CHAPTER XIX.

Of Palladius the Courier.

How the Emperor Theodosius received in-
telligence of what was done in an incredibly
short space of time, and how he was quickly
informed of events taking place far away, I
shall attempt to explain. For he had the good
fortune to possess among his subjects a man
endowed with extraordinary energy both of body
and mind, named Palladius ; who rode so vigor-
ously that he would reach the frontiers of the
Roman and Persian dominions in three days,^
and again return to Constantinople in as many
more. The same individual traversed other
parts of the world on missions from the emperor
with equal celerity : so that an eloquent man
once said not unaptly, ' This man by his speed
proves the vast expanse of the Roman Empire
to be little.' The king of the Persians himself
was astonished at the expeditious feats which
were related to him of this courier : but we
must be content with the above details concern-
ing him.


CHAPTER XX.


:./


A Second Overthrorv of the Persians by the
Romans.

Now the emperor of the Romans dwelling in
Constantinople being fully aware that God had
plainly given him the victory was so benevolent
that although those under him had been suc-
cessful in war nevertheless he desired to make
peace ; and to that end he dispatched Helion,
a man in whom he placed the greatest confi-
dence, with a commission to enter into a pacific
treaty with the Persians. Helion having arrived
in Mesopotamia, at the place where the Romans
for their own security had formed a trench,
sent before him as his deputy Maximin an elo-
quent man who was the associate of Ardaburius
the commander-in-chief of the army, to make
preUminary arrangements concerning the terms
of peace. Maximin on coming into the pres-
ence of the Persian king, said he had been sent
to him on this matter, not by the Roman em-
peror, but by his generals ; for he said this


war was not even known to the emperor, and
if known would be considered insignificant by
him. And as the sovereign of Persia had gladly
decided to receive the embassy, — for his troops
were suffering from want of provisions, — there
came to him that corps among them which is
distinguished by the name of * the Immortals.' "■
This is a body of brave mdn numbering about
ten thousand — and counselled the king not to
listen to any overtures for peace, until they
should have made an attack upon the Romans,
who, they said, were now become extremely
incautious. The king approving their advice,
ordered the ambassador to be imprisoned and
a guard set over him, and permitted the Im-
mortals to put their design upon the Romans
into execution. They therefore, on arriving at
the place appointed, divided themselves into
two bands, with a view to surround some por-
tion of the Roman army. The Romans observ-
ing but one body of Persians approaching them,
prepared themselves to receive it, not having
seen the other division, in consequence of their
suddenly rushing forth to battle. But just as
the engagement was about to commence, Divine
Providence so ordered it, that another division
of the Roman army under Procopius a general
emerged from behind a certain hill and per-
ceiving their comrades in danger, attacked the
Persians in the rear. Thus were they, who but
a little before had surrounded the Romans,
themselves encompassed. Having utterly de-
stroyed these in a short time, the Romans
turned upon those who broke forth from their
ambuscade and in like manner slew every one
of them with darts. In this way those who by
the Persians were termed ' the Immortals ' were
all of them shown to be mortal, Christ having
executed this vengeance upon the Persians be-
cause they had shed the blood of so many of
his pious worshippers. The king of the Persians
on being informed of the disaster, pretended to
be ignorant of what had taken place, and
ordered the embassy to be admitted, he thus
addressing the ambassador : * I agree to the
peace, not as yielding to the Romans, but to
gratify you, whom I have found to be the most
prudent of all the Romans.' Thus was that
war concluded which had been undertaken on
account of the suftering Christians in Persia,
under the consulate of the two Augusti,- being
the thirteenth of Honorius, and the tenth of
Theodosius, in the fourth year of the 300th
Olympiad : and with it terminated the persecu-
tion which had been excited in Persia against
the Christians.


^ Much, of course, depends, in estimating the rate of speed here re-
corded, on the exact distance between Constantinople and the rather
indefinite limits of the Persian empire. But even if the minimum of
500 miles be taken as a basis, the speed seems almost incredible.


' A Persian body-guard called 'S.6a.vaToi, 'Immortals,' existed
during the period of the invasion of Greece by the Persians (cf.
Herodotus, VIT. 31). The organization and discipline of the later
body must have been, of course, very different.

- 422 A.D.


164


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 21.


CHAPTER XXI.

Kind Treatment of the Persian Captives by Aca-
cius Bishop of Amida.

A NOBLE action of Acacius bishop of Amida,
at that time greatly enhanced his reputation
among all men. As the Roman soldiery would
on no consideration restore to the Persian king
the captives whom they had taken, these cap-
tives, about seven thousand in number, were
being destroyed by famine in devastating Aza-
zene, and this greatly distressed the king of the
Persians. Then Acacius thought such a matter
was by no means to be trifled with ; having
therefore assembled his clergy, he thus ad-
dressed them : ' Our God, my brethren, needs
neither dishes nor cups ; for he neither eats,
nor drinks, nor is in want of anything. Since
then, by the liberality of its faithful members,
the church possesses many vessels both of gold
and silver, it behooves us to sell them, that by
the money thus raised we may be able to re-
deem the prisoners, and also supply them with
food.' Having said these things and many
others similar to these, he ordered the vessels
to be melted down, and from the proceeds paid
the soldiers a ransom for their captives, whom
he supported for some time ; and then furnish-
ing them with what was needful for their jour-
ney, sent them back to their sovereign. This
benevolence on the part of the excellent Aca-
cius, astonished the king of the Persians, as if
the Romans were accustomed to conquer their
enemies as well by their beneficence in peace as
their prowess in war. They say also that the
Persian king wished that Acacius should come
into his presence, that he might have the pleas-
ure of beholding such a man ; a wish which by
the emperor Theodosius' order was soon grati-
fied. So signal a victory having through Divine
favor been achieved by the Romans, many who
were illustrious for their eloquence, wrote pan-
egyrics in honor of the emperor, and recited
them in public. The empress herself also com-
posed a poem in heroic verse : for she had ex-
cellent literary taste ; being the daughter of
Leontius the Athenian sophist, she had been in-
structed in every kind of learning by her father ;
Atticus the bishop had baptized her a little
while previous to her marriage with the em-
peror, and had then given her the Christian
name of Eudocia,^ instead of her pagan one of
Athenais.^ Many, as I have said, produced eu-


logiums on this occasion. Some, indeed, were
stimulated by the desire of being noticed by
the emperor ; while others were anxious to dis-
play their talents to the masses, being unwilling
that the attainments they had made by dint of
great exertion should lie buried in obscurity.


I EuSoKta, * Benevolence.'

» The Chronicon Paichale gives a different account of Eudocia.
1( says that her father's name was Heraclitus. When he died her
brothers Gcsius and Valerian refused to give her her share of the
inheritance. She came to Constantinople to plead for her rights
through Pulchcria, the sister of Theodosius, and impressed the
latter so favorably that Pulcheria persuaded Theodosius to make
her his wife (cf. Chronic. Patch, year 420). Her brothers on


CHAPTER XXII.

Virtues of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger.

But although I am neither eager for the
notice of the emperor, nor wish to make an
exhibition of my oratorical powers, yet have I
felt it my duty to record plainly the singular
virtues with which the emperor is endowed : for
I am persuaded that silence concerning them, as
they are so excellent, would be injustice to those
who should come after us. In the first place
then, this prince though born and nurtured to
empire, was neither stultified nor effeminated
by the circumstances of his birth and educa-
tion. He evinced so much prudence, that he
appeared to those who conversed with him to
have acquired wisdom from experience. Such
was his fortitude in undergoing hardships, that
he would courageously endure both heat and
cold ; fasting very frequently, especially on
Wednesdays and Fridays ; ^ and this he did
from an earnest endeavor to observe with accu-
racy all the prescribed forms of the Christian
religion. He rendered his palace little different
from a monastery : for he, together with his
sisters, rose early in the morning, and recited
responsive hymns in praise of the Deity. By
this training he learnt the holy Scriptures by
heart ; and he would often discourse with the
bishops on scriptural subjects, as if he had
been an ordained priest of long standing. He
was a more indefatigable collector of the sacred
books and of the expositions which had been
written on them, than even Ptolemy Philadel-
phus^ had formerly been. In clemency and
humanity he far surpassed all others. For the
emperor Julian although he professed to be a

hearing of her elevation to the throne fled to Greece, but she sent
for them and per>uaded Theodosius to appoint them to high offices,
on the ground that she was indebted to them for her good fortune
(cf. Chronic. Pasch. year 421). Besides her ode commemorating
the victory of the imperial forces over the Persians, several other
works of hers are mentioned, viz. paraphrases of the Pentateuch,
Joshua, and Judges into Greek hexameters, a version of the prophe-
cies of Zachariah and Daniel, and a poem in three books on St.
Cyprian and St. Justina; to these Zonar.-is adds that she completed
the Centones Honterici o{ Patricius. Her later years were clouded
by a misunderstanding between her husband and herself, which is
variously given by the contemporaneous historians and altogether
passed over by Socrates. Cf. Evagrius, H. E. I. 20, 22, and Zona-
ras, Ann. XIll.

■ On the observance of these two days of the week as fast days
in the early Church, see Bingham, Christ. Antiq. XXI. 3.

2 'PiAaAtA.()oi; = ' lover of his brothers,' but applied to him by
the rhetorical figure of antiphrasis because he killed his brothers.
This Ptolemy PhiLidelphus reii^ned in Egypt from 285 to 247 B.C.
and is famous for having the Old Testament translated from Hebrew
into Greek, according to the common tradition, by seventy learned
men, whence the translation has been known as the Septuagint.


VII. 23.]


THEODOSIUS THE YOUNGER.


165


philosopher, could not moderate his rage against
the Antiochians who derided him, but inflicted
upon Theodore the most agonizing tortures.''
Theodosius on the contrary, bidding farewell to
Aristotle's syllogisms, exercised philosophy in
deeds, by getting the mastery over anger, grief,
and pleasure. Never has he revenged himself
on any one by whom he has been injured ; nor
has any one ever even seen him irritated. And
when some of his most intimate friends once
asked him, why he never inflicted capital pun-
ishment upon offenders, his answer was, ' Would
that it were even possible to restore to life those
that have died.' To another making a similar
inquiry he replied, ' It is neither a great nor a
difficult thing for a mortal to be put to death :
but it is God only that can resuscitate by re-
pentance a person that has once died.' So
habitually indeed did he practice mercy, that if
any one were guilty and sentence of death was
passed upon him, and he was conducted toward
the place of execution, he was never suffered to
reach the gates of the city before a pardon was
issued, commanding his immediate return. Hav-
ing once exhibited a show of hunting wild beasts
in the Amphitheatre at Constantinople, the peo-
ple cried out, ' Let one of the boldest bestiarii ■*
encounter the enraged animal.' But he said to
them, * Do ye not know that we are wont to view
these spectacles with feelings of humanity ? ' By
this expression he instructed the people to be
satisfied in future with shows of a less cruel de-
scription. His piety was such that he had a
reverential regard for all who were consecrated
to the service of God ; and honored in an es-
pecial manner those whom he ascertained to be
eminent for their sanctity of life. It is said that
the bishop of Chebron * having died at Constan-
tinople, the emperor expressed a wish to have
his cassock of sackcloth of hair ; which, although
it was excessively filthy, he wore as a cloak, hop-
ing that thus he should become a partaker in
some degree of the sanctity of the deceased.
In a certain year, during which the weather had
been very tempestuous, he was obliged by the
eagerness of the people to exhibit the usual
sports in the Hippodrome ; and when the circus
was filled with spectators, the violence of the
storm increased, and there was a heavy fall of
snow. Then the emperor made it very evident
how his mind was affected towards God ; for he
caused the herald to make a proclamation to the
people to this effect : ' It is far better and fitter
to desist from the show, and unite in common


3 Cf. III. 19.

* Persons who fought with wild beasts in the games of the circus.
They were of two classes: (i) professionals, those who fought for
pay, and (2) criminals, allowed to use arms in defending themselves
against the wild beasts to which they had been condemned. It is
one of the first class that is here meant.

" An altogether unknown and doubtful diocese.


prayer to God, that we may be preserved unhurt
from the impending storm.' Scarcely had the
herald executed his commission, when all the
people, with the greatest joy, began with one ac-
cord to offer supplication and sing praises to
God, so that the whole city became one vast
congregation ; and the emperor himself in un-
official garments, went into the midst of the mul-
titude and commenced the hymns. Nor was he
disappointed in his expectation, for the atmos-
phere began to resume its wonted serenity : and
Divine benevolence bestowed on all an abundant
harvest, instead of an expected deficiency of
corn. If at any time war was raised, like David
he had recourse to God, knowing that he is the
arbiter of battles, and by prayer brought them
to a prosperous issue. At this point therefore,
I shall relate, how a little after the war against
the Persians, by placing his confidence in God
he vanquished the usurper John, after Honorius
had died on the 15th of August, in the consulate
of Asclepiodotus and Marian.^ For I judge what
then occurred worthy of mention, inasmuch as
there happened to the emperor's generals who
were dispatched against the tyrant, something
analogous to what took place when the Israelites
crossed the Red Sea under the guidance of
Moses. These things however, I shall set forth
very briefly, leaving to others the numerous de-
tails which would require a special treatise.


CHAPTER XXIII.

After the Death of the E7nperor Honorius John
usurps the Sovereignty at Rome. He is de-
stroyed through the Prayers of Theodosius the
Younger.

When the Emperor Honorius died Theodosius
— now sole ruler — having received the news
concealed the truth as long as possible, mislead-
ing the people sometimes with one report, and
then with another. But he privately dispatched
a military force to Salonae, a city of Dalmatia,
that in the event of any revolutionary movement
in the West there might be resources at hand to
check it ; and after making these provisional
arrangements, he at length openly announced
his uncle's death. In the meantime John, the
superintendent of the emperor's secretaries,' not
content with the dignity to which he had already
attained, seized upon the sovereign authority ;
and sent an embassy to the emperor Theodosius,
requesting that he might be recognized as his
colleague in the empire. But that prince first
caused the ambassadors to be arrested, then sent
off Ardaburius, the commander-in-chief of the
army, who had greatly distinguished himself in


" 423 A.D.


* So also Zosimus, V. 40.


i66


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[VII. 23.


the Persian war.- He, on arriving at Salonoe, set
sail from thence for Aquileia. And he was fortu-
nate as was thought, but fortune was adverse to
him as it afterwards appeared. For a contrary
wind having arisen, he was driven into the usurp-
er's hand. The latter having seized him became
more sanguine in his hope that the emperor
would be induced by the urgency of the case to
elect and proclaim him emperor, in order to pre-
serve the life of his general-in-chief. And the
emperor was in fact greatly distressed when he
heard of it, as was also the army which had been
sent against the usurper, lest Ardaburius should
be subjected to evil treatment by the usurper.
Aspar the son of Ardaburius, having learnt that
his fcither was in the usurper's power, and aware
at the same time that the party of the rebels was
strengthened by the accession of immense num-
bers of barbarians, knew not what course to pur-
sue. Then again at this crisis the prayer of the
pious emperor prevailed. For an angel of God,
under the appearance of a shepherd, undertook
the guidance of Aspar and the troops which
were with him, and led him through the lake
near Ravenna — for in that city the usurper was
then residing — and there detained the military
chief. Now, no one had ever been known to
have forded that lake before ; but God then
rendered that passable, which had hitherto been
impassable. Having therefore crossed the lake,
as if going over dry ground, they found the gates
of the city open, and overpowered the usurper.
This event afforded that most devout emperor
an opportunity of giving a fresh demonstration
of his piety towards God. For the news of the
usurper's being destroyed, having arrived while
he was engaged at the exhibition of the sports
of the Hippodrome, he immediately said to the
people : ' Come now, if you please, let us leave
these diversions, and proceed to the church to
offer thanksgivings to God, whose hand has
overthrown the usurper.' Thus did he address
them ; and the spectacles were immediately
forsaken and neglected, the people all passing
out of the circus singing praises together with
him, as with one heart and one voice. And
arriving at the church, the whole city again be-
came one congregation ; and once in the church
they passed the remainder of the day in these
devotional exercises.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Valftitinian a Son of Cons fan ti us and Placidia,
Aunt of Theodosius, is proclaimed Etnpcror.

.\ftf,r the usurper's death, the emperor Theo-
dosius became very anxious as to whom he

' See above, chap. i8.


should proclaim emperor of the West. He had
a cousin then very young named Valentinian ;
the son of his aunt Placidia, daughter of Theo-
dosius the Great, and sister of the two Augusti
Arcadius and Honorius and of that Constantius
who had been proclaimed emperor by Honori-
us,^ and had died after a short reign with him.
This cousin he created Caesar, and sent into the
Western parts, committing the administration of
affairs to his mother Placidia. He himself also
hastened towards Italy, that he might in person
both proclaim his cousin emperor, and also being
present among them, endeavor to influence the
natives and residents by his counsels not to sub-
mit to usurpers readily. But when he reached
Thessalonica he was prevented from proceed-
ing further by sickness ; he therefore sent for-
ward the imperial crown to his cousin by Helion
the patrician, and he himself returned to Con-
stantinople. But concerning these matters I
deem the narrative here given sufficient.

CHAPTER XXV.

Christian Benevolence of Atticus Bishop of Con-
stantinople. He 7-egisters y^ohn's Name in the
Diptychs. His Fore-knowledge of his Own
Death.

MEAmvHiLE Atticus the bishop caused the
affairs of the church to flourish in an ex-
traordinary manner ; administering all things
with prudence, and inciting the people to
virtue by his instruction. Perceiving that the
church was on the point of being divided inas-
much as the Johannites^ assembled themselves
apart, he ordered that mention of John should
be made in the prayers, as was customary to be
done of the other deceased- bishops ; by which
means he trusted that many would be induced
to return to the Church. And he was so liberal
that he not only provided for the poor of his
own parishes, but transmitted contributions to
supply the wants and promote the comfort of
the indigent in the neighboring cities also.
On one occasion as he sent to Calliopius a pres-
byter of the church at Nicaea, three hundred
pieces^ of gold he also dispatched the following
letter.

' Atticus to Calliopius — salutations in the
Lord.

' I have been informed that there are in your
city ten thousand necessitous persons whose
condition demands the compassion of the pious.

' Cf. I. 39, and II. I.

' The adherents of Chrysostom. See VI. 3.

' He effected this re.storation by having the name John enrolled
in the diptychs or registers of those whose names should be included
in the prayers of th": liturgy.

•> xpu<rii'ou?, with o-Tarijpas probably to be supplied; if so the
value of these gold pieces was about $5.00, or £,\ as. (jd.


VII. 25-]


ATTICUS BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


167


And I say ten thousand, designating their mul-
titude rather than using the number precisely.
As therefore I have received a sum of money
from him, who with a bountiful hand is wont to
supply faithful stewards ; and since it happens
that some are pressed by want, that those who
have may be proved, who yet do not minister to
the needy — take, my friend, these three hun-
dred pieces of gold, and dispose of them as
you may think fit. It will be your care, I doubt
not, to distribute to such as are ashamed to beg,
and not to those who through life have sought
to feed themselves at others' expense. In be-
stowing these alms make no distinction on relig-
ious grounds ; but feed the hungry whether
they agree with us in sentiment, or not.'

Thus did Atticus consider even the poor who
were at a distance from him. He labored also
to aboUsh the superstitions of certain persons.
For on being informed that those who had sep-
arated themselves from the Novatians, on ac-
count of the Jewish Passover, had transported
the body of Sabbatius* from the island of Rhodes
— for in that island he had died in exile — and
having buried it, were accustomed to pray at his
grave, he caused the body to be disinterred at
night, and deposited in a private sepulchre ; and
those who had formerly paid their adorations at
that place, on finding his tomb had been opened,
ceased honoring that tomb thenceforth. More-
over he manifested a great deal of taste in the
application of names to places. To a port in
the mouth of the Euxine sea, anciently called
Pharmaceus,^ he gave the appellation of Thera-
peia ; *^ because he would not have a place where
religious assemblies were held, dishonored by an
inauspicious name. Another place, a suburb of
Constantinople, he termed Argyropolis,^ for this
reason. Chrysopolis * is an ancient port situated
at the head of the Bosphorus, and is mentioned
by several of the early writers, especially Strabo,
Nicolaus Damascenus, and the illustrious Xeno-
phon in the sixth book of his Anabasis of Cyrus ; ^
and again in the first of his Helkfu'ca '" he says
concerning it, ' that Alcibiades having walled it
round, established a toll in it ; for all who sailed
out of Pontus were accustomed to pay tithes
there.' Atticus seeing the former place to be
directly opposite to Chrysopolis, and very de-

* See above, chaps. 5 and 12.

" tfrapfiaxea = ' poisoner.'

•J ffepaireia?: the word occurs in three senses, viz. (i) healing,
(2) service, (3) worship. Probably, and as the sentence following
seems to indicate, the last of these was the one meant to be empha-
sized; this is also borne out by the plural number used. If the first
sense were the one for which the word was chosen, it must have
been because of its being in complete contrast to the previous name.
The place retains the name thus given it to this day and constitutes
one of the suburbs of Constantinople.

■ Silver City. » Golden City.

' Cf. Xenophon, Anab. VI. 6. 38.

'" Cf. Xenophon, Hellenica, I. i. 22. The event mentioned
took place in 411 B.C.


lightfully situated, declared that it was most
fitting it should be called Argyropolis ; and as
soon as this was said it firmly established the
name. Some persons having said to him that
the Novatians ought not to be permitted to hold
their assemblies within the cities : ' Do you not
know,' he replied, ' that they were fellow-sufferers
with us in the persecution under Constantius and
Valens?" Besides,' said he, ' they are witnesses
to our creed : for although they separated from
the church a long while ago, they have never
introduced any innovations concerning the faith.'
Being once at Nicsea on account of the ordina-
tion of a bishop, and seeing there Asclepiades
bishop of the Novatians, then very aged, he
asked him, ' How many years have you been a
bishop?' When he was answered fifty years:
' You are a happy man,' said he, ' to have had
charge of so " good a work " '^ for such a length
of time.' To the same Asclepiades he observed :
' I commend Novatus ; but can by no means
approve of the Novatians.' And when Ascle-
piades, surprised at this strange remark, said,
* What is the meaning of your remark, bishop ? '
Atticus gave him this reason for the distinction.
' I approve of Novatus for refusing to commune
with those who had sacrificed, for I myself
would have done the same : but I cannot praise
the Novatians, inasmuch as they exclude laymen
from communion for very trivial offenses.'
Asclepiades answered, ' There are many other
" sins unto death," ^'^ as the Scriptures term
them, besides sacrificing to idols ; on account
of which even you excommunicate ecclesiastics
only, but we laymen also, reserving to God
alone the power of pardoning them.' " Atticus
had moreover a presentiment of his own death ;
for at his departure from Nicaea, he said to
Calliopius a presbyter of that place : ' Hasten
to Constantinople before autumn if you wish to
see me again alive ; for if you delay beyond
that time, you will not find me sun-iving.' Nor
did he err in this prediction ; for he died on
the loth of October, in the 21st year of his
episcopate, under the eleventh consulate of
Theodosius, and the first of Valentinian Caesar.'^
The Emperor Theodosius indeed, being then
on his way from Thessalonica, did not reach
Constantinople in time for his funeral, for Atti-
cus had been consigned to the grave one day
before the emperor's arrival. Not long after-
wards, on the 23d of the same month, October,
the young Valentinian was proclaimed Augustus.'"


>' Cf. IV. 1-6. '2 I Tim. iii. I. >3 I John v. 17.

'♦ The Catholic Church was more severe in its discipline regarding
the clergy than the laity, but it does not appear that excommunica-
tion was in any case absolute and reinstatement impossible. See
on this point the liberal views of Chrysostom, VI. 21. Cf. also
Bennett, Christ. Archifology, p. 383.

'5 425 A.D.

'" This was Valentinian III. See chap. 24 above for his rela-
tionship to the reigning Theodosius.


1 68


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VI L 26.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Sisinnius is chosen to succeed Atticus.

After the decease of Atticus, there arose a
strong contest about the election of a successor,
some proposing one person, and some another.
One party, they say, was urgent in favor of a
presbyter named PhiUp ; another wished to pro-
mote Proclus who was also a presbyter ; but the
general desire of the people was that the
bishopric should be conferred on Sisinnius.
This person was also a presbyter but held no
ecclesiastical office within the city, having been
appointed to the sacred ministry in a church at
Elaea, a village in the suburbs of Constantinople.
This village is situated across the harbor from
the city, and in it from an ancient custom the
whole population annually assembled for the
celebration of our Saviour's ascension. All of
the laity were warmly attached to the man
because he was famous for his piety, and espe-
cially because he was diligent in the care of the
poor even ' beyond his power.' ' The earnest-
ness of the laity thus prevailed, and Sisinnius
was ordained on the twenty-eighth day of Feb-
ruary, under the following consulate, which was
the twelfth of Theodosius, and the second of
Valentinian." The presbyter Philip was so cha-
grined at the preference of another to himself,
that he even introduced the subject into his
Christian History^ making some very censori-
ous remarks, both about the person ordained
and those who had ordained him, and much
more severely on the laity. But he said such
things as I cannot by any means commit to
writing. Since I do not approve of his unad-
vised action in committing them to writing, I
do not deem it unseasonable, however, to give
some notice here of him and of his works.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Voluminous Productions of Philip, a Presbyter
of Side.

Philip was a native of Side ; Side is a city
of Pamphylia. From this place also Troilus the
sophist came, to whom Philip boasted himself to
be nearly related. He was a deacon and thus
admitted to the privilege of familiar intercourse
with John Chrysostom, the bishop. He labored
assiduously in literature, and besides making
very considerable literary attainments, formed
an extensive collection of books in every branch
of knowledge. Affecting the Asiatic style,' he


* 426 A.D.


' 2 Cor. viii. 3

' Sec Introd.

Philip's attack on .. _..., ...^ .__.. .„. „ .., j,..,„„,y,

because Philip and Sisinnius both being of the same rank in the
clergy, the latter was made archbishop of Constantinople.

1 This was a heavy, redundant, and turgid style deprecated by


p. 12. Photius, .5;i5//(7/A. chap. 35, mentions
1 Sisinnius and assigns the reason for it as jealousy.


became the author of many treatises, attempt-
ing among others a refutation of the Emperor
Julian's treatises against the Christians, and
compiled a Christian History, which he divided
into thirty-si.t books ; each of these books
occupied several volumes, so that they amounted
altogether to nearly one thousand, and the mere
argument^ of each volume equalled in magni-
tude the volume itself. This composition he
has entitled not an Ecclesiastical, but a Chris-
tian History, and has grouped together in it
abundance of very heterogeneous materials,
wishing to show that he is not ignorant of phil-
osophical and scientific learning : for it contains
a medley of geometrical theorems, astronomical
speculations, arithmetical calculations, and musi-
cal principles, with geographical delineations of
islands, mountains, forests, and various other
matters of little moment. By forcing such irrel-
evant details into connection with his subject,
he has rendered his work a very loose produc-
tion, useless alike, in my opinion, to the igno-
rant and the learned ; for the illiterate are
incapable of appreciating the loftiness of his
diction, and such as are really competent to
form a just estimate, condemn his wearisome
tautology. But let every one exercise his own
judgment concerning these books according to
his taste. All I have to add is, that he has con-
founded the chronological order of the transac-
tions he describes : for after having related what
took place in the reign of the Emperor Theo-
dosius, he immediately goes back to the times
of the bishop Athanasius ; and this sort of thing
he does frequently. But enough has been said
of Philip : we must now mention what hap-
pened under the episcopate of Sisinnius.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Proclus ordained Bishop of Cyzicus by Sisinnius,
but rejected by the People.

The bishop of Cyzicus having died, Sisinnius
ordained Proclus to the bishopric of that city.
But while he was preparing to depart thither,
the inhabitants anticipated him, by electing an
ascetic named Dalmatius. This they did in dis-
regard of a law which forbade their ordinatioit
of a bishop without the sanction of the bishop
of Constantinople ; ' but they pretended that

rhetoricians of the better class from the time of Cicero onwards. Cf.
Cicero, Brut. XIII. 51; Quinctilian, Inslit. Orat. XII. 10, and
Jerome, ad Rustic. (125. 6).

2 un-dflffTi? = lit. 'subject' or 'substance'; the contents, or as
later, called the arijument, or summary of contents.

' The Council in its 6th Canon declared that no one should be
ordained bishoo without the consent of his metropolitan: but that
the bishop of Const.-intinople w.-\s the metropolitan of the Cyzicenes
does not appear unless the decree of the (Canon 3d) Council of Con-
stantinople making the latter a patriarchate is to be understood as
rendering the see of Cyzicus subordinate to that of Constantinople,
as an individual church is to the metropolitan. Cf. Bingham,
Chritt. Anliq. II. 16. 12.


VII. 30.] NESTORIUS MADE BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


169


this was a special privilege granted to Atticus
personally. Proclus therefore continued desti-
tute of the presidency over his own church, but
acquired celebrity for his discourses in the
churches of Constantinople. We shall however
speak of him more particularly in an appropriate
place. Sisinnius having survived his appoint-
ment to the bishopric by barely two entire years,
was removed by death on the 24th of Decem-
ber, in the consulate of Hierius and Ardaburius.^
For his temperance, integrity of Hfe, and be-
nignity to the poor, he was deservedly eminent ;
he was moreover singularly affable and guileless
in disposition, and this rendered him rather
averse to business, so that by men of active
habits he was accounted indolent.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Nes tonus of A)itioch promoted to the See of Con-
stantinople, His Persecution of the Heretics.

After the death of Sisinnius, on account of
the spirit of ambitious rivalry displayed by the
ecclesiastics of Constantinople, the emperors
resolved that none of that church should fill the
vacant bishopric, notwithstanding the fact that
many eagerly desired to have Philip ordained,
and no less a number were in favor of the elec-
tion of Proclus. They therefore sent for a
stranger ^ from Antioch, whose name was Nes-
torius,^ a native of Germanicia,^ distinguished
for his excellent voice and fluency of speech ;
qualifications which they judged important for
the instruction of the people. After three months
had elapsed therefore, Nestorius was brought
from Antioch, being greatly lauded by some for
his temperance : but what sort of a disposition
he was of in other respects, those who possessed
any discernment were able to perceive from his
first sermon. Being ordained on the loth of
April, under the consulate of Felix and Taurus,''
he immediately uttered those famous words,
before all the people, in addressing the emperor,
* Give me, my prince, the earth purged of here-
tics, and I will give you heaven as a recompense.


' ^l-J A.D.

1 eTrrjAufia, perhaps in a contemptuous sense = ' an imported
fellow.'

'^ Founder of Nestorianism (Nestorian church and heresy). For
details on Nestorianism, see Assemani, Bibliotheca Oriental, tom.
IV., said to be the most exhaustive work on the subject, ancient
and modern alike, being a volume of 950 pp. and occupied with
Nestorianism alone. ' It collects information from all quarters,
especially from the Oriental writers, concerning the history, ritual,
organization, schools, and missions.' (Stokes, in Smith and Wace.)
The peculiar characteristic of the Nestorian Christology will appear
in the sequel of Socrates' account. Other accessible sources of in-
formation on Nestorianism and Nestorius will be found in the
standard ecclesiastical histories. Cf. Neander, Hist. 0/ the Christ.
Church, Vol. II. p. 446-524; SchafT, Hist, of the Christ. Church,
Vol. III. p. 714-734; Kurtz, Church Hist. Vol. I. p. 334; also
Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Rom. Empire, chap. 47.

* A city in Cilicia, on the western border of Syria.

< 428 A.D,


Assist me in destroying heretics, and I will as-
sist you in vanquishing the Persians.''' Now
although these utterances were extremely grati-
fying to some of the multitude, who cherished
a senseless antipathy to the very name of heretic ;
yet those, as I have said, who were skillful in
predicating a man's character from his expres-
sions, did not fail to detect his levity of mind,
and violent and vainglorious temperament, inas-
much as he had burst forth into such vehemence
without being able to contain himself for even
the shortest space of time ; and to use the pro-
verbial phrase, ' before he had tasted the water
of the city,' showed himself a furious persecutor.
Accordingly on the fifth day after his ordination,
having determined to demolish a chapel in which
the Arians were accustomed to perform their
devotions privately, he drove these people to
desperation ; for when they saw the work of
destruction going forward in their chapel, they
threw fire into it, and the fire spreading on all
sides reduced many of the adjacent buildings
also to ashes. A tumult accordingly arose on
account of this throughout the city, and the
Arians burning to revenge themselves, made
preparations for that purpose : but God the
Guardian of the city suffered not the mischief
to gather to a climax. From that time, how-
ever, they branded Nestorius as an 'incendiary,'
and it was not only the heretics who did this,
but those also of his own faith. For he could
not rest, but seeking every means of harassing
those who embraced not his own sentiments, he
continually disturbed the public tranquillity. He
annoyed the Novatians also, being incited to
jealousy because Paul their bishop was every-
where respected for his piety ; but the emperor
by his admonitions checked his fury. With
what calamities he visited the Quartodecimans
throughout Asia, Lydia, and Caria, and what
multitudes perished in a popular tumult of which
he was the cause at Miletus and Sardis, I think
proper to pass by in silence. What punishment
he suffered for all these enormities, and for that
unbridled license of speech in which he indulged
himself, I shall mention somewhat later. ^


CHAPTER XXX.

The Burgiindians embrace Christianity under
Theodosius the Younger.

I MUST now relate an event well worthy of

0 ' What the bishops and especially the prelates of the greater
churches said in their first sermon to the people was very carefully
observed among the early Christians. For from that sermon a con-
jecture was made as to the faith, doctrine, and temper of every
bishop. Hence the people were wont to take particular notice, and
remember their sayings. A remark of this nature occurs above,
Bk. II. chap. 43, concerning the first sermon of Eudoxius, bishop of
Constantinople. And Theodoret and Epiphanius declare the same
concerning the first sermon of Melitius to the people." — Valesius.

^ Below, chap. 36.


IJO


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 30.


being recorded, which happened about this
time. There is a barbarous nation dwelling
beyond the Rhine, denominated Burgundians ;
they lead a peaceful life ; for being almost all
artisans, they support themselves by the exer-
cise of their trades. The Huns, by making con-
tinual irruptions on this people, devastated their
country, and often destroyed great numbers of
them. In this perplexity, therefore, the Bur-
gundians resolved to have recourse not to any
human being, but to commit themselves to the
protection of some god : and having seriously
considered that the God of the Romans might-
ily defended those that feared him, they all with
common consent embraced the faith of Christ.
Going therefore to one of the cities of Gaul,
they requested the bishop to grant them Chris-
tian baptism : who ordering them to fast seven
days, and having meanwhile instructed them in
the elementary principles of the faith, on the
eighth day baptized and dismissed them. Ac-
cordingly becoming confident thenceforth, they
marched against their invaders ; nor were they
disappointed in their hope. For the king of
the Huns, Uptar ' by name, having died in the
night from the effects of a surfeit, the Burgun-
dians attacked that people then without a com-
mander-in-chief; and although they were few
in numbers and their opponents very many,
they obtained a complete victory ; for the Bur-
gundians were altogether but three thousand
men, and destroyed no less than ten thousand
of the enemy. From that period this nation
became zealously attached to the Christian re-
ligion. About the same time Barbas bishop of
the Arians died, on the 24th of June, under the
thirteenth consulate of Theodosius,^ and the
third of Valentinian, and Sabbatius was consti-
tuted his successor. Enough has been said of
these matters.


CHAPTER XXXI.

Nestorius harasses the Maccdoniaiis.

Nestorius indeed acted contrary to the usage
of the Church, and caused himself to be hated
in other ways also,' as is evident from what hap-
pened during his episcopate. For Anthony
bishop of Germa, a city of the Hellespont, ac-
tuated by the example of Nestorius in his intol-
erance of heretics, began to persecute the Mac-
edonians, under the pretext of carrying out the


^ Octar, mentioned as an uncle (father's brother) of Attila by
Jomandes, Historia Getarum , chap. 35.

' 430 A.D.

' By a slight change in the Greek text, Valesius renders this
phrase 'but caused others also to imitate him,' alleging that the
conduct of Anthony of Germa was in imitation of Nestorius ; but the
emendation seems unnecessary. Socrates means that Nestorius
made himself odious in other ways, perhaps through othex persons
such as Anthony, &c.


intentions of the patriarch. The Macedonians
for some time endured his annoyance ; but
when Anthony proceeded to farther extremities,
unable any longer to bear his harsh treatment,
they were led to a sad desperation, and suborn-
ing two men, who put right in a secondary
place and profit first, they assassinated their
tormenter. When the Macedonians had per-
petrated this crime, Nestorius took occasion
from it to increase his violence of conduct
against them, and prevailed on the emperor to
take away their churches. They were there-
fore deprived of not only those which they pos-
sessed at Constantinople, before the old walls
of the imperial city, but of those also which
they had at Cyzicus, and many others that be-
longed to them in the rural districts of the
Hellespont. Many of them therefore at that
time came over to the Catholic church, and
professed the * homoousian ' faith. But as the
proverb says, ' drunkards never want wine, nor
the contentious strife ' : and so it fell out with
regard to Nestorius, who after having exerted
himself \.q expel others from the church, was
himself ejected on the following account.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Of the Presbyter Afiastasius, by whom the Faith
of Nestorius was perverted.

Nestorius had an associate whom he had
brought from Antioch, a presbyter named Anas-
tasius ; for this man he had the highest esteem,
and consulted him in the management of his
most important affairs. This Anastasius preach-
ing one day in the church said, 'Let no one call
Mary Thcotocos : ' for Mary was but a woman ; ^
and it is impossible that God should be bom of
a woman.' These words created a great sensa-
tion, and troubled many both of the clergy and
laity ; they having been heretofore taught to
acknowledge Christ as God, and by no means
to separate his humanity from his divinity on
account of the economy of incarnation, heeding
the voice of the apostle when he said, * Yea,
though we have known Christ after the flesh ; yet
now henceforth know we him no more.' ^ And
again, * Wherefore, leaving the word of the begin-
ning of Christ, let us go on unto perfection.' *
While great offense was taken in the church, as
we have said, at what was thus propounded,
Nestorius, eager to establish Anastasius' propo-
sition— for he did not wish to have the man
who was esteemed by himself found guilty
of blasphemy — delivered several public dis-

> ©foTditoc, i.e. ' Mother of God.' Sec 'HanAcT, Htit.of Christ.
Church, Vol. II. p. 449.

» ai'0puiTro(, ' human beine-'

' 2 Cor. V. 16. ' Heb. vi. i.


VII. 33-]


ORIGIN OF NESTORIANISM.


171


courses on the subject, in which he assumed a
controversial attitude, and totally rejected the
epithet Theotocos. Wherefore the controversy
on the subject being taken in one spirit by some
and in another by others, the discussion which
ensued divided the church, and resembled the
struggle of combatants in the dark, all parties
uttering the most confused and contradictory
assertions. Nestorius thus acquired the reputa-
tion among the masses of asserting the blas-
phemous dogma that the Lord is a mere man,
and attempting to foist on the Church the
dogmas of Paul of Samosata and Photinus ; and
so great a clamor was raised by the contention
that it was deemed requisite to convene a gen-
eral council to take cognizance of the matter in
dispute. Having myself perused the writings
of Nestorius, I have found him an unlearned
man and shall candidly express the conviction
of my own mind concerning him : and as in
entire freedom from personal antipathies, I have
already alluded to his faults, I shall in like man-
ner be unbiassed by the criminations of his
adversaries, to derogate from his merits. I can-
not then concede that he was either a follower
of Paul of Samosata or of Photinus, or that he
denied the Divinity of Christ : but he seemed
scared at the term Theotocos, as though it were
some terrible phantom.^ The fact is, the cause-
less alarm he manifested on this subject just cjq-
posed his extreme ignorance : for being a man of
natural fluency as a speaker, he was considered
well educated, but in reality he was disgracefully
illiterate. In fact he contemned the drudgery
of an accurate examination of the ancient ex-
positors : and, puffed up with his readiness of
expression, he did not give his attention to the
ancients, but thought himself the greatest of all.
Now he was evidently unacquainted with the
fact that in the First Catholic epistle of John it
was written in the ancient copies,^ ' Every spirit
that separates Jesus, is not of God.' The muti-
lation of this passage ' is attributable to those
who desired to separate the Divine nature from
the human economy : or to use the very lan-
guage of the early interpreters, some persons
have corrupted this epistle, aiming at ' separat-
ing the manhood of Christ from his Deity.' But
the humanity is united to the Divinity in the
Saviour, so as to constitute not two persons but
one only. Hence it was that the ancients, em-
boldened by this testimony, scrupled not to stvle
Mary Theotocos. For thus Eusebius Pamphilus

o iiopyLoXyKiov, ' hobgoblin,' ' bugbear.*

" I John iv. 2, 3. The findings of modern textii.il criticism are
at variance with Socrates' opinion that the original in the Kpistle of
John was Anei (separates). Westcott and Hort admit Ai'ti into
their margin, but evidently in order to have it translated as the
Revised Version has it (also in the margin) ' annidleth,' taking
away all the force of the passage as used here.

' Of what nature was this mutilation? Some authorities omitted
it altogether (see Tischendorf, No-rum. Ti-st. ed. Octav. Maj., on
the passage) ; others changed Auei into H') o/noAoyp.


in his third book of the Life of Constantine *
writes in these terms :

' And in fact " God with us " submitted to be
born for our sake ; and the place of his nativity
is by the Hebrews called Bethlehem. Where-
fore the devout empress Helena adorned the
place of accouchement of the Ciod-bearing virgin
with the most splendid monuments, decorating
that sacred spot with the richest ornaments.'

Origen also in the first volume of his Commen-
taries on the apostle's epistle to the Romans,'-*
gives an ample exposition of the sense in which
the term Theotocos is used. It is therefore ob-
vious that Nestorius had very little acquaintance
with the treatises of the ancients, and for that
reason, as I observed, objected to the word only :
for that he does not assert Christ to be a mere
man, as Photinus did or Paul of Samosata, his
own published homilies fully demonstrate. In
these discourses he nowhere destroys the proper
personality ^^ of the Word of God ; but on the
contrary invariably maintains that he has an es-
sential and distinct personality and existence.
Nor does he ever deny his subsistence as Pho-
tinus and the Samosatan did, and as the Mani-
chaeans and followers of Montanus have also
dared to do. Such in fact I find Nestorius, both
from having myself read his own works, and from
the assurances of his admirers. But this idle
contention of his has produced no slight ferment
in the religious world.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Desecration of the Altar of the Great Church
by Runaway Slaves.

While matters were in this state it happened
that an outrage was perpetrated in the church.
For the domestics of a man of quality who were
foreigners, having experienced harsh treatment
from their master, fled from him to the church ;
and thus they ran up to the very altar with their
swords drawn. ^ Nor could they be prevailed
upon by any entreaties to withdraw ; so that
they impeded the performance of the sacred
services ; but inasmuch as they obstinately main-
tained their position for several days, brandishing
their weapons in defiance of any one who dared
to approach them — and in fact killed one of the
ecclesiastics, and wounded another — they were
finally compelled to slay themselves. A person
who was present at this desecration of the sanc-
tuary, remarked that such a profanation was an
ominous presage, and in support of his view of
the matter, quoted the two following iambics of
an ancient poet : —


' Cf. Euseb. Life of Const. III. 43.
° Cf. Origen, Com. in Rom. I. i. 5.
'" i'-nnmciaiv; see I. chap. 5, note 2.
1 Cf. Bingham, Christ. Atttiq. VIII. 11.


172


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 33.


" For such prognostics happen at a time
When temples are defiled by impious crime."

Nor was he who made the prediction disap-
pointed in these inauspicious forebodings : for
they signified as it seems a division among the
people, and the deposition of the author of it.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Synod at Ephesus against Nestorius. His
Deposition.

Not long time elapsed before a mandate from
the emperor directed the bishops in all places
to assemble at Ephesus.^ Immediately after the
festival of Easter therefore Nestorius, escorted
by a great crowd of his adherents, repaired to
Ephesus, and found many of the bishops already
there. Cyril bishop of Alexandria making some
delay, did not arrive till near Pentecost. Five
days after Pentecost, Juvenal bishop of Jerusa-
lem arrived. While John of Antioch was still
absent, those who were now congregated entered
into the consideration of the question ; and
Cyril of Alexandria began a sharp skirmish of
words, with the design of terrifying Nestorius,
for he had a strong dislike for him. When many
had declared that Christ was God, Nestorius
said : ' I cannot term him God who was two
and three months old. I am therefore clear of
your blood, and shall in future come no more
among you.' Having uttered these words he
left the assembly, and afterwards held meetings
with the other bishops who entertained senti-
ments similar to his own. Accordingly those
present were divided into two factions. That
section which supported Cyril, having consti-
tuted themselves a council, summoned Nesto-
rius : but he refused to meet them, and put
them off until the arrival of John of Antioch.
The partisans of Cyril therefore proceeded to
the examination of the public discourses of Nes-
torius which he had preached on the subject in
dispute ; and after deciding from a repeated
I perusal of them that they contained distinct
1 blasphemy against the Son of God, they deposed
him. This being done, the partisans of Nes-
/ torius constituted themselves another council
apart, and therein deposed Cyril himself, and
together with him Memnon bishop of f^ihesus.
Not long after these events, John bishop of
Antioch made his appearance ; and being in-
formed of what had taken place, he pronounced
unqualified censure on Cyril as the author of all
this confusion, in having so precipitately pro-
ceeded to the deposition of Nestorius. Upon

> This was the third of the Ecumenical or General Synods; it
was convened in ^yi and dealt with the Nestorian controversy. Cf.
Hefele, Hiit. of the Councils 0/ the Ch. Vol. III. p. i ; also Eva-
grius, H. E. I. 2, 3, 4.


this Cyril combined with Juvenal to revenge
themselves on John, and they deposed him also.
When affairs reached this confused condition,
Nestorius saw that the contention which had
been raised was thus tending to the destruction
of communion, in bitter regret he called Mary
Theotocos, and cried out : ' Let Mary be called
Theotocos, if you will, and let all disputing cease.'
But although he made this recantation, no notice
was taken of it ; for his deposition was not re-
voked, and he was banished to the Oasis, where
he still remains.- Such was the conclusion of this
Synod. These things were done on the 28th of
June, under the consulate of Bassus and Anti-
ochus.^ John when he had returned to his
bishopric, having convened several bishops, de-
posed Cyril, who had also returned to his see :
but soon afterwards, having set aside their en-
mity and accepting each other as friends, they
mutually reinstated each other in their episcopal
chairs. But after the deposition of Nestorius a
mighty agitation prevailed through the churches
of Constantinople. For the people was divided
on account of what we have already called his
unfortunate utterances ; and the clergy unani-
mously anathematized him. For such is the
sentence which we Christians are accustomed
to pronounce on those who have advanced any
blasphemous doctrines, when we set up their
impiety that it may be publicly exposed, as it
were, on a pillar, to universal execration.


CHAPTER XXXV.

Maximian elected to the Episcopate of Constan-
tinople, though Some wished Proclus to take
that Place.

After this there was another debate concern-
ing the election of a bishop of Constantinople.
Many were in favor of Philip, of whom we have
already made mention ; but a still greater num-
ber advocated the claims of Proclus. And the
candidacy of Proclus would have succeeded,
had not some of the most influential persons in-
terfered, on the ground of its being forbidden by


• After his deposition Nestorius was banished to the Oasis, as
above stated. This Oasis was ' a miserable place exposed to the
wild nomad tribes; all around were shiftins; sands, forming a path-
less solitude. He . . . employed himself in writing a defense of
the opinions for which he had lost all. The Blemmyes at length
inv.-xded the Oasis, and took Nestorius, among others, captive;
then, by what he calls a most unexpected act of compassion, released
him, and bade him hurry away. He thought it best to proceed to
Panopolis in the Thebaid, and voluntarily reported himself to the
governor, who, unmoved by his pathetic entreaty that the imperial
authorities would not be less merciful than the barbarians, ordered
some soldiers to convey him to Elephantine. The journey under
such circumstances exhausted the old man; a fall severely hurt his
hand and side; and before he could reach Elephantine, a mandate
came for his return to Panopolis. Two more compulsory changes
of abode were added to sufferings which remind us perforce of the
last days of S. John Chrysostom;' and then the unhappy Nestorius
was no more. The exact year of his death cannot be ascertained.' —
W. Bright, Hist, of the Church from a.d. 313 to 4S'i P- 37'. 37'-

2 431 A.D.


VII. 37]


VALIDITY OF EPISCOPAL TRANSFERENCES.


^n


the ecclesiastical canon that a person nominated
to one bishopric should be translated to that of
another city.' The people believing this asser-
tion, were thereby restrained ; and about four
months after the deposition of Nestorius, a man
named Maximian was promoted to the bishopric,
who had lived an ascetic life, and was also ranked
as a presbyter. He had acquired a high reputa-
tion for sanctity, on account of having at his own
expense constructed sepulchral depositaries for
the reception of the pious after their decease,
but was ' rude in speech ' ^ and inclined to live a
quiet life.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

The Author's Opinion of the Validity of Trans-
lations from One See to Another.

But since some parties by appealing to a pro-
hibition in the ecclesiastical canon, prevented the
election of Proclus, because of his previous ap-
pointment to the see of Cyzicus, I wish to make
a few remarks on this subject. Those who then
presumed to interpose such a cause of exclusion
do not appear to me to have stated the truth ; but
they were either influenced by prejudice against
Proclus, or at least have been themselves com-
pletely ignorant both of the canons, and of the
frequent and often advantageous precedents that
had been established in the churches. Eusebius
Pamphilus relates in the sixth book of his Eccle-
siastical History} that Alexander bishop of a
certain city in Cappadocia, coming to Jerusalem
for devotional purposes, was detained by the in-
habitants of that city, and constituted bishop, as
the successor of Narcissus ; and that he con-
tinued to preside over the churches there during
the remainder of his life. So indifferent a thing
was it amongst our ancestors, to transfer a bishop
from one city to another as often as it was deemed
expedient. But if it is necessary to place beyond
a doubt the falsehood of the statement of those
who prevented the ordination of Proclus, I shall
annex to this treatise the canon bearing on the
subject. It runs thus : ^

' If any one after having been ordained a bishop
should not proceed to the church unto which he
has been appointed, from no fault on his part,

1 The canon referred to is probably the fifteenth of Nicaea, as
follows: ' On account of the numerous troubles and divisions which
have taken place, it has been thought good that ... no bishop,
priest, or deacon should remove from one city to another. If any
one should venture, even after this ordinance of the holy and great
Synod, to act contrary to this present rule, and should follow the
old custom, the translation shall be null, and he shall return to the
church to which he had been ordained bishop or priest.' Cf. also
Apostol. Can. 14 and 15, and the twenty-first of the Council of An-
tioch given by Hefele, Hist. 0/ the Ch. Councils, Vol. II. p. 72.

' 2 Cor. XI. 6.

1 Cf. Euseb. H. E.W.ji.

^ The canon here quoted is the eighteenth of the Council of
Antioch (see Hefele, //ist. 0/ the Ch. Councils, Vol. II. p. 71);
whereas the canon of that council bearing on that subject is the
twenty-first, as noted in chap. 35, note i.


but either because the people are unwilling to
receive him, or for some other reason arising
from necessity, let him be partaker of the honor
and functions of the rank with which he has
been invested, provided he intermeddles not
with the affairs of the church wherein he may
minister. It is his duty however to submit to
whatever the Synod of the province may see fit
to determine, after it shall have taken cognizance
of the matter.'

Such is the language of the canon. That
many bishops have been transferred from one
city to another to meet the exigences of peculiar
cases, I shall now prove by giving the names of
those bishops who have been so translated."
Perigenes was ordained bishop of Patrae : but
inasmuch as the inhabitants of that city refused
to admit him, the bishop of Rome directed that
he should be assigned to the metropolitan see of
Corinth, which had become vacant by the de-
cease of its former bishop ; here he presided
during the rest of his days. Gregory was first
made bishop of Sasima, one of the cities of Cap-
padocia, but was afterwards transferred to Na-
zianzus. Melitius after having presided over the
church at Sebastia, subsequently governed that
of Antioch. Alexander bishop of Antioch trans-
ferred Dositheus bishop of Seleucia, to Tarsus
in Cilicia. Reverentius was removed from Area
in Phoenicia, and afterwards to Tyre. John was
transferred from Gordum a city of Lydia, to Pro-
connesus, and presided over the church there.
Palladius was transferred from HelenopoHs to
Aspuna ; and Alexander from the same city to
Adriani. Theophilus was removed from Apamea
in Asia, to Eudoxiopohs anciently called Salam-
bria. Polycarp was transferred from Sexanta-
prista a city of Mysia, to Nicopolis in Thrace.
Hierophilus from Trapezopolis in Phrygia to
Plotinopohs in Thrace. Optimus from Agdamia
in Phrygia to Antioch in Pisidia ; and Silvanus
from Philippopolis in Thrace to Troas. This
enumeration of bishops who have passed from
one see to another is sufiicient for the present ;
concerning Silvanus who was removed from Phil-
ippopolis in Thrace to Troas I deem it desirable
here to give a concise account.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Miracle performed by Silvanus Bishop of Troas
formerly of Philippopolis.

Silvanus was formerly a rhetorician, and had
been brought up in the school of Troilus the
sophist ; but aiming at perfection in his Chris-


= In what way these canons against the translation of bishops
were understood and observed by the early church is discussed by
Bingham, Christ. Antiq. VI. 4. 6.


174


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[vn. 37.


tian course, he entered on the ascetic mode of
life, and set aside the rhetorician's pallium. Atti-
cus bishop of Constantinople having taken notice
of him afterwards ordained him bishop of Phil-
ippopolis.' Thus he resided three years in
Thrace ; but being unable to endure the cold of
that region — for his constitution was delicate
and sickly — he begged Atticus to appoint some
one else in his place, alleging that it was for no
other reason but the cold that he resigned resi-
dence in Thrace. This having been done, Sil-
vanus resided at Constantinople, where he prac-
ticed so great austerities that, despising the
luxurious refinements of the age, he often ap-
peared in the crowded streets of that populous
city shod with sandals made of hay. Some time
having elapsed, the bishop of Troas died ; on
which account the inhabitants of that city came
to Atticus concerning the appointment of a suc-
cessor. While he was deliberating whom he
should ordain for them, Silvanus happened to
pay him a visit, which at once relieved him from
further anxiety ; for addressing Silvanus, he said :
' You have now no longer any excuse for avoid-
ing the pastoral administration of a church ; for
Troas is not a cold place : so that God has con-
sidered your infirmity of body, and provided
you a suitable residence. Go thither then, my
brother, without delay.' Silvanus therefore re-
moved to that city.

Here a miracle was performed "by his instru-
mentality, which I shall now relate. An immense
ship for carrying burdens, such as they term
* float,' ^ intended for the conveyance of enor-
mous pillars, had been recently constructed on
the shore at Troas. This vessel it was neces-
sary to launch. But although many strong ropes
\ were attached to it, and the power of a vast
number of persons was applied, the vessel was
in no way moved. When these attempts had
been repeated several days successively with the
like result, the people began to think that a
devil detained the ship ; they therefore went to
the bishop Silvanus, and entreated him to go
and offer a prayer in that place. For thus only
they thought it could be launched. He replied
with his characteristic lowliness of mind that he
was but a sinner, and that the work pertained to
some one who was just and not to himself.
Being at length prevailed on by their continued
entreaties, he approached the shore, where after
having prayed, he touched one of the ropes, and
exhorting the rest to vigorous exertion, the ship

• Another indication that the patriarchal functions of the bishop
of Constantinople were at this time exercised and recognized. The
Council of Chalcedon somewhat later (in 451 a.d.) formally ordered
in its twenty-eighth canon that the metropolitans of the Thracian,
Pontic, and Asian dioceses should be ordained by the bishop of
Constantinople, their election being first secured by the clergy and
laity of the dioceses, and referred to the patriarch afterwards.

' irXdTijv', a sort of raft; the word is incorrectly spelled ttAot^
according to Sophocles (Greek Lexic, &c.), and should be irAcunj.


was by the first pull instantly set in motion, and
ran swiftly into the sea. This miracle wrought
by the hands of Silvanus, stirred up the whole
population of the province to piety. But the
uncommon worth of Silvanus was manifested in
various other ways. Perceiving that the eccle-
siastics made a merchandise of the contentions
of those engaged in law-suits, he would never
nominate any one of the clergy as judge : but
causing the documents of the litigants to be de-
livered to himself, he summoned to hjm some
pious layman in whose integrity he had confi-
dence ; and committing to him the adjudication
of the case, he soon equitably settled all the dif-
ferences of the litigants ; and by this procedure
Silvanus acquired for himself great reputation
from all classes of persons.

We have indeed digressed pretty much from
the course of our history in giving this account
of Silvanus ; but yet it will not, we imagine, be
unprofitable. Let us now however return to
the place from which we departed. Maximian,
having been ordained on the 25th of October,
under the consulate of Bassus and Antiochus,'
the affairs of the church were reduced to a
better ordered and more tranquil condition.


CHAPTER XXXVIIL

Many of the Jews in Crete embrace the Chris-
tian Faith.

About this period a great number of Jews
who dwelt in Crete were converted to Christi-
anity, through the following disastrous circum-
stance. A certain Jewish impostor pretended
that he was Moses, and had been' sent from
heaven to lead out the Jews inhabiting that
island, and conduct them through the sea : for
he said that he was the same person who for-
merly preserved the Israelites by leading them
through the JRed Sea. During a whole year
therefore he perambulated the several cities of
the island, and persuaded the Jews to believe
such assurances. He moreover bid them re-
nounce their money and other property, pledg-
ing himself to guide them through a dry sea
into the land of promise. Deluded by such ex-
pectations, they neglected business of every
kind, despising what they possessed, and per-
mitting any one who chose to take it. When
the day appointed by this deceiver for their de-
parture had arrived, he himself took the lead,
and all followed with their wives and children.
He led them therefore until they reached a
promontory that overhung the sea, from which
he ordered them to fling themselves headlong


4J1 A.D.

Nothing further is beard of this strange affair.


VII. 41] THE PSEUDO-MOSES. MAXIMIAN AND PROCLUS.


175


into it. Those who came first to the precipice
did so, and were immediately destroyed, some
of them being dashed in pieces against the
rocks, and some drowned in the waters : and
more would have- perished, had not the Provi-
dence of God led some fishermen and mer-
chants who were Christians to be present.
These persons drew out and saved some that
were almost drowned, who then in their perilous
situation became sensible of the madness of
their conduct. The rest they hindered from
casting themselves down, by telling them of the
destruction of those who had taken the first
leap. When at length the Jews perceived how
fearfully they had been duped, they blamed
first of all their own indiscreet credulity, and
then sought to lay hold of the pseudo-Moses in
order to put him to death. But they were un-
able to seize him, for he suddenly disappeared :
which induced a general belief that it was some
malignant fiend,^ who had assumed a human
form for the destruction of their nation in that
place. In consequence of this experience
many of the Jews in Crete at that time aban-
doning Judaism attached themselves to the
Christian faith.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Preservation of the Church of the Novatians
from Fire.

A LITTLE while after this, Paul bishop of the
Novatians acquired the reputation of a man
truly beloved of God in a greater measure than
he had before. For a terrible conflagration
having broken out at Constantinople, such as
had never happened before, — for the fire
destroyed the greater part of the city, — as the
largest of the public granaries, the Achillean
bath,^ and everything else in the way of the fire
were being consumed, it at length approached
the church of the Novatians situated near Pelar-
gus. When the bishop Paul saw the church
endangered, he ran upon the altar, where he
commended to God the preservation of the
church and all it contained ; nor did he cease
to pray not only for it, but also for the city.
And God heard him, as the event clearly proved :
for although the fire entered this oratory through
all its doors and windows, it did no damage.
And while many adjacent edifices fell a prey to
the devouring element, the church itself was
seen unscathed in the midst of the whole con-
flagration triumphing over its raging flames.
This went on for two days and two nights, when

2 aAoio-Twp. iEschylus and Sophocles apply this word to the
Fu ries.

\ Rebuilt and rededicated, according to the Chronicon of Mar-
cellinus, under the consuls Maximus and Paterius, i.e. 443 a.d. and
ten years after the fire.


the fire was extinguished, after it had burnt
down a great part of the city : but the church
remained entire, and what is more marvelous
still, there was not the slightest trace even of
smoke to be observed either on its timbers or
its walls. This occurred on the 1 7th of August,
in the fourteenth consulate of Theodosius, which
he bore together with Maximus.^ Since that
time the Novatians annually celebrate the pres-
ervation of their church, on the i 7th of August,
by special thanksgivings to God. And almost
all men, Christians and most of the pagans
from that time forth continue to regard that
place with veneration as a peculiarly consecrated
spot, because of the miracle which was wrought
for its safeguard. So much concerning these
affairs,

CHAPTER XL.

Proclus succeeds Maximian Bishop of Con-
stantinople.

Maximm-N, having peacefully governed the
church during two years and five months, died
on the 1 2th of April, in the consulate of Areo-
bindus and Aspar.^ This happened to be on
the fifth day of the week of fasts which imme-
diately precedes Easter. The day of the week
was Thursday. Then the Emperor Theodosius
wishing to prevent the disturbances in the
church which usually attend the election of a
bishop, made a wise provision for this affair ;
for in order that there might be no dispute
again about the choice of a bishop and tumult
thus arise, without delaying, before the body of
Maximian was interred, he directed the bishops
who were then in the city to place Proclus in
the episcopal chair. For he had received
already letters from Cselestinus bishop of Rome
approving of this election, which he had for-
warded to Cyril of Alexandria, John of Antioch,
and Rufus of Thessalonica ; in which he assured
them that there was no impediment to the trans-
lation to another see, of a person who had been
nominated and really was the bishop of some
one church. Proclus, being thus invested with
the bishopric, performed the funeral obsequies
of Maximian : but it is now time briefly to give
some account of him also.


CHAPTER XLI.

Excellent Qualities of Proclus.

Proclus was a reader at a very early age, and
assiduously frequenting the schools, became de-
voted to the study of rhetoric. On attaining


» 433 A.D.


1 434 A.D.


176


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


[VII. 41.


manhood he was in the habit of constant inter-
course with Atticus the bishop, having been con-
stituted his secretary. When he had made great
progress, his patron promoted him to the rank
of deacon ; subsequently being elevated to the
presbyterate, as we have before stated, he was
ordained by Sisinnius to be bishop of Cyzicus.'
But all these things were done long before. At
this time he was allotted the episcopal chair of
Constantinople. He was a man of moral excel-
lence equal to any other ; for having been trained
by Atticus, he was a zealous imitator of all that
bishop's virtues. Patience, however, he exercised
to a greater degree than his master, who occa-
sionally practiced severities upon the heretics ;
for Proclus was gentle towards everybody, being
convinced that kindness is far more effective than
violence in advancing the cause of truth. Re-
solving therefore to vexatiously interfere with no
heresy whatever, he restored in his own person
to the church that mild and benign dignity of
character, which had so often before been un-
happily violated. In this respect he followed the
example of the Emperor Theodosius ; for as the
latter had determined never to exercise his im-
perial authority against criminals, so had Proclus
likewise purposed not to disquiet those who en-
tertained other sentiments on divine subjects than
those which he cherished himself.


CHAPTER XLII.

Panegyric of the Emperor Theodosius the
Younger}

For these reasons the emperor had the highest
esteem for Proclus. For in fact he himself was
a pattern to all true clergymen, and never ap-
proved of those who attempted to persecute
others. Nay I may venture to affirm, that in
meekness he surpassed all those who have ever
faithfully borne the sacerdotal office. And what
is recorded of Moses in the book of Numbers,''
* Now the man Moses was very meek, above all
the men which were upon the face of the earth '
— may most justly be applied at this day ; for
the Emperor Theodosius is ' meek above all the
men which are upon the face of the earth.' It
is because of this meekness that God subdued
his enemies without martial conflicts, as the cap-
ture of the usurper John,^ and the subsequent
discomfiture of the barbarians clearly demon-
strate. For the God of the universe has afforded
this most devout emperor in our times super-
natural aid of a similar kind to what was vouch-
safed to the righteous heretofore. I write not

^ See above, chap. 38. This was about the year 437 a.o.

* See chap. 23, above.
' Num. xii. 3.

* See above, chap. 23.


these things from adulation, but truthfully narrate
facts such as everybody can attest.


CHAPTER XLIII.

Calamities of the Barbarians who had been the
Usurper John's Allies.

After the death of the usurper, the barbarians
whom he had called to his assistance against the
Romans, made preparations for ravaging the Ro-
man provinces. The emperor being informed of
this, immediately, as his custom was, committed
the management of the matter to God ; and
continuing in earnest prayer, he speedily ob-
tained what he sought ; for it is worth while to
give attention to disasters which befell the barba-
rians.^ For their chief, whose name was Rougas,
was struck dead with a thunderbolt. Then a
plague followed which destroyed most of the
men who were under him : and as if this was
not sufficient, fire came down from heaven, and
consumed many of the survivors^ This filled
the barbarians with the utmost terror ; not so
much because they had dared to take up arms
against a nation of such valor as the Romans
possessed, as that they perceived them to be
assisted by a mighty God. On this occasion,
Proclus the bishop preached a sermon in the
church in which he applied a prophecy out of
Ezekiel to the deliverance effected by God in
the late emergency, and was in consequence
much admired. This is the language of the
prophecy : ^

' And thou, son of man, prophesy against Gog
the prince of Rhos, Mosoch, and Thobel. For
I will judge him with death, and with blood, and
with overflowing rain, and with hail-stones. I
will also rain fire and brimstone upon him, and
upon all his bands, and upon many nations that
are with him. And I will be magnified, and
glorified, and I will be known in the eyes of
many nations : and they shall know that I am
the Lord.'

This application of the prophecy was received
with great applause, as I have said, and enhanced
the estimation in which Proclus was held. More-
over the providence of God rewarded the meek-
ness of the emperor in various other ways, one
of which was the following.

' Who these barbarians were it is iinr>ossible to find out pre-
cisely, and that not because no mention is made of barbarian inroads
on the imperial territories, but because so many are mentioned by
the chronographers and the historians of the Goths (Jomandes,
Prosper Aquitanus, Marcellinus, &c.) that it is impossible to Iden-
tify this wiih any of them to the exclusion of the rest. Rougas
also appears in these historians as Rouas (in Priscus), Roas (in
Jomandes), Rugilas (in Prosper Aquitanus), and is said to be
related to Attila; but nothing certain can be drawn from the
accounts.

' Ezek. xxxviii. 2, 33, 23. Ambrose has also used this prophecy,
applying it to the Goths, and exhorted Gratian to make war against
them. Cf. Ambrose, de Fide, 2. 16. The quotation here is from the
LXX.


VII. 46.] MARRIAGE OF VALENTINIAN III. PROCLUS. MARCIAN. 177


CHAPTER XLIV.

Marriage of the Emperor Valentinian with
Eudoxia the Daughter of Theodosius.

He had by the empress Eudocia, his wife, a
daughter named Eudoxia. Her his cousin Val-
entinian, appointed by him emperor of the West,
demanded for himself in marriage. When the
emperor Theodosius had given his assent to this
proposal, and they had consulted with each
other as to the place on the frontiers of both
empires, where it would be desirable that the
marriage should be celebrated, it was decided
that both parties should go to Thessalonica
(which is about half-way) for this purpose.
But Valentinian sent a message to the effect
that he would not give him the trouble of
coming, for that he himself would go to Con-
stantinople. Accordingly, having secured the
Western parts with a sufficient guard, he pro-
ceeded thither on account of his nuptials, which
were celebrated in the consulate of Isidore and
Sinator ; ^ after which he returned with his wife
into the West. This auspicious event took place
at that time.


CHAPTER XLV.

The Body of John Chrysostovi transfer-red to
Constantinople, and placed in the Church of
the Apostles by the Emperor at the Instigation
of Proclus.

Not long after this, Proclus the bishop brought
back to the Church those who had separated
themselves from it on account of Bishop John's
deposition, he having soothed the irrita-
tion by a prudent expedient. What this was
we must now recount. Having obtained the
emperor's permission, he removed the body of
John from Comana, where it was buried, to Con-
stantinople, in the thirty-fifth year after his dep-
osition. And when he had carried it in solemn
procession through the city, he deposited it with
much honor in the church termed The Apos-
tles. By this means the admirers of that prel-
ate were conciliated, and again associated in
communion with the [catholic] Church. This
happened on the 27th of January, in the six-
teenth consulate of the Emperor Theodosius.'
But it astonishes me that envy, which has been
vented against Origen since his death, has spared
John. For the former was excommunicated by
Theophilus about two hundred years after his
decease ; while the latter was restored to com-
munion by Proclus in the thirty-fifth year after
his death ! So different was Proclus from The-


' 436 A.D.


1 438 A.D.


ophilus. And men of observation and intelli-
gence cannot be deceived in reference to how
these things were done and are continually being
done.


CHAPTER XLVI.

Death of Paul Bishop of the Novations, and
Election of Marcian as his Successor.

A LiiTLE while after the removal of John's
body, Paul bishop of the Novatians died, on
the 2 1 St of July, under the same consulate:^
who at his own funeral united, in a certain sense,
all the different sects into one church. For
aP, parties attended his body to the tomb, chant-
ing psalms together, inasmuch as even during
his lifetime by his rectitude he was in universal
esteem by all. But as Paul just before his death
performed a memorable act, I deem it advan-
tageous to insert it in this history as it may be
interesting to the readers of this work to be
acquainted with it. And lest the brilliancy of
that important deed should be obscured by
dwelling on circumstantial details of minor con-
sequence, I shall not stay to expatiate on the
strictness with which he maintained his ascetic
discipline as to diet even throughout his illness,
without the least departure from the course he
had prescribed for himself, or the omission of
any of the ordinary exercises of devotion with
his accustomed fervor. But what was this deed ?
Conscious that his departure was at hand, he
sent for all the presbyters of the churches under
his care, and thus addressed them : ' Give your
attention while I am alive to the election of a
bishop to preside over you, lest the peace of
your churches should hereafter be disturbed.'
They having answered that this affair had better
not be left to them : ' For inasmuch,' said they,
* as some of us have one judgment about the
matter, and some another, we would by no
means nominate the same individual. We wish
therefore that you would yourself designate the
person you would desire to succeed you.' ' Give
me then,' said Paul, * this declaration of yours in
writing, that you will elect him whom I should
appoint.' When they had written this pledge,
and ratified it by their signatures, Paul, rising in
his bed and sitting up, wrote the name of Mar-
cian in the paper, without informing any of those
present what he had inserted. This person had
been promoted to the rank of presbyter, and
instructed in the ascetic discipline by him, but
was then gone abroad. Having folded this
document and put his own seal on it, he caused
the principal presbyters to seal it also ; after
which he delivered it into the hands of Marcus

* As above, 438 a.d.


178


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


a bishop of the Novatians in Scythia, who was
at that time staying at Constantinople, to whom
he thus spake, ' If it shall please God that I
should continue much longer in this life, restore
me this deposit, now entnisted to your safe
keeping. But should it seem fit to him to re-
move me, you will herein discover whom I have
chosen as my successor in the bishopric' Soon
after this he died ; and on the third day after
his death, the paper having been unfolded in
the presence of a great number of persons, Mar-
cian's name was found within it, when they all
cried out that he was worthy of the honor.
Messengers were therefore sent off without delay
to bring him to Constantinople. These, by a
pious fraud, finding him residing at Tiberiopolis
in Phrygia, brought him back with them ; where-
upon he was ordained and placed in the episco-
pal chair on the 21st of the same month. ^


CHAPTER XLVII.

The Empress Eudocia goes to Jerusalem ; sent
there by the Emperor Theodosius.

Moreover the Emperor Theodosius offered
up thanksgivings to God for the blessings which
had been conferred upon him ; at the same time
reverencing Christ with the most special honors.
He also sent his wife Eudocia to Jerusalem, ^
she having bound herself by a vow to go thither,
should she live to see the marriage of her daugh-
ter. The empress therefore, on her visit to the
sacred city, adorned its churches with the most
costly gifts ; and both then, and after her return,
decorated all the churches in the other cities of
the East with a variety of ornaments.

' This seems hardly probable when compared with the opening
sentence of the chapter, and so Valesius with Chrislophorson and
otiiers change it into August. The emendation suggested in the
Greek is not a difficult one; it simply adds between aw- and toO of
the word a-'o-rov (above translated ' the same'), the syllable yova-
making it thus, avyoucrTov ^1771-09^ ' month of August.' The emenda-
tion, or something equivalent to it, must be accepted, otherwise we
are compelled to place the death of Paul and the ordination of Mar-
cian together with the intervening events on the same day.

1 On this visit of the empress to Jerusalerp, see Evagrius, H. E.
I. 20-23. During this visit for some reason or other — variously
stated oy the authors of the period — an alienation occurred be-
tween the emperor and Eudocia. See above, chap. 21, note 2.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

Thalassius is ordained Bishop of Casarea in
Cappadocia.

About this same time, under the seventeenth
consulate of Theodosius,' Proclus the bishop un-
dertook the performance of an act, such as no
one among the ancients had done. Firmus bishop
of Caesarea in Cappadocia being dead, the in-
habitants of that place came to Constantinople
to consult Proclus about the appointment of a
bishop. While Proclus was considering whom
he should prefer to that see, it so happened that
all the senators came to the church to visit him
on the sabbath day ; among whom was Thalas-
sius also, a man who had administered the gov-
ernment of the nations and cities of Illyricum.
And as it was reported that the emperor was
about to entrust the government of the Eastern
parts to him, Proclus laid his hands on him, and
ordained him bishop of Caesarea, instead of
Praetorian Prefect.

In such a flourishing condition were the affairs
of the Church at this time. But we shall here
close our history, praying that the churches
everywhere, with the cities and nations, may live
in peace ; for as long as peace continues, those
who desire to write histories will find no materials
for their purpose. And we ourselves, O holy
man of God, Theodore, should have been una-
ble to accomplish in seven books the task we
undertook at your request, had the lovers of
seditions chosen to be quiet.

This last book contains an account of the
transactions of thirty- two years : and the whole
history which is comprised in seven books, com-
prehends a period of 140 years.^ It commences
from the first year of the 271st Olympiad, in
which Constantine was proclaimed emperor ;
and ends at the second year of the 305th Olym-
piad, in which the Emperor Theodosius bore his
seventeenth consulate.*

• 439 A.D.

2 Evidently a round number, as he begun with the year 305 (cf.
I. 1), and the exact number of years included in the history cannot
be more than 135. ' 439 a.d.


END OF THE HISTORY OF SOCRATES.


THE

ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


OF


SOZOMEN,


COMPRISING A


HISTORY OF THE CHURCH,

FROM A.D. 323 TO A.D. 425.


TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK.


Revised bv


CHESTER D. HARTRANFT,

HARTFORD THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY.


THE TABLE OF CONTENTS.


PAGH

Introduction 191

Prefatory remarks by Valesius concerning the life and writings of Sozomen 233

Memoir of Sozomen 235

Dedication to the Emperor Theodosius II 236

INDEX OF CHAPTERS.

TABLE OF THE NINE BOOKS OF THE ECCLESUSTICAL HISTORY BY SALAMINIUS HERMIAS SOZOMEN,

ARRANGED BY NICEPHORUS CALLISTUS.

BOOK I.

Address to the Emperor Theodosius the Younger, to whom also he dedicates his treatise; for he bestows a

moderate encomium upon him; and makes a prefatory division of his work.
Chap. I. — The preface of the book, in which he investigates the history of the Jewish nation; mention of
those who began such a work; how and from what sources he collected his history; how he was intent

upon the truth; and what other details the history will contain 239

Chap. II. — Of the bishops of the large towns in the reign of Constantine; and how from fear of Licinius,
Christianity was professed cautiously in the East as far as Libya, while in the West, through the favor of

Constantine, it was professed with freedom 241

Chap. III. — By the vision of the cross, and by the appearance of Christ, Constantine is led to embrace Chris-
tianity. He receives religious instruction from our brethren 241

Chap. IV. — Constantine commands the sign of the cross to be carried before him in battle; an extraordinary

narrative about the bearers of the sign of the cross 242

Chap. Y. — Refutation of the assertion that Constantine became a Christian in consequence of the murder of

his son Crispus 242

Chap. VI. — The father of Constantine allows the name of Christ to be extended; Constantine the Great

prepared it to penetrate everywhere 243

Chap. VII. — Concerning the dispute between Constantine and Licinius, his brother-in-law, about the Chris-
tians; and how Licinius was conquered by force and put to death 243

Chap. VIII. — List of the benefits which Constantine conferred, in the freedom of the Christians, and build-
ing of churches; and other deeds for the public welfare 244

Chap. IX. — Constantine enacts a law in favor of celibates and of the clergy 245

Chap. X. — Concerning the great confessors who survived 246

Chap. XI. — Account of St. Spyridon : his modesty and steadfastness 246

Chap. XII. — On the organization of the monks : its origin and founders 247

Chap. XIII. — About Antony the Great and St. Paul the Simple 248

Chap. XIV. — Account of St. Ammon and Eutychius of Olympus .... 250

Chap. XV. — The Arian heresy: its origin, its progress, and the contention which it occasioned among the

bishops 251

Chap. XVI. — Constantine, having heard of the strife of the bishops and the difference of opinion concerning
the Passover, is greatly troubled, and sends Hosius, a Spaniard, bishop of Cordova, to Alexandria, to

abolish the dissension among the bishops and to settle the dispute about the Passover 252

Chap. XVII. — Of the council convened at Nica;a on account of Arius 253

Chap. XVIII. — Two philosophers are converted to the faith by the simplicity of two old men with whom

they hold a disputation 253


1 82 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


PACB


Chap. XIX. — When the council was assembled, the emperor delivered a public address 254

Chap. XX. — After having given audience to both parties, the emperor condemned the followers of Arius and

banished them ; 255

Chap. XXI. — What the council determined about Arius; the condemnation of his followers; his writings

are to be burnt; certain of the high priests differ from the council; the settlement of the Passover. . . . 255

Chap. XXII. — Acesius, bishop of the Novatians, is summoned by the emperor to be present at the first

council 256

Chap. XXIII. — Canons appointed by the council. Paphnutius, a certain confessor, restrains the council

from forming a canon enjoining celibacy to all who were about to be honored with the priesthood 256

Chap. XXIV. — Concerning Melitius; the excellent directions made by the holy council in his complications 256

Chap. XXV. — The emperor prepared a public table for the synod, after inviting its members to Constanti-
nople, and honoring them with gifts. He exhorted all to be of one mind, and forwarded to Alexandria
and every other place the decrees of the holy synod 257

BOOK II.

Chap. I. — The discovery of the life-bringing cross and of the holy nails 258

Chap. II. — Concerning Helena, the mother of the emperor; she visited Jerusalem, built temples in that city,

and performed other godly works; her death 259

Chap. III.— Temples built by Constantine the Great; the city called by his name; its founding; the build-
ings within it; the temple of Michael, the arch-soldier in the Sosthenium, and the miracles which have

occurred there 259

Chap. IV. — What Constantine the Great effected about the oak in Mamre. He also built a temple 261

Chap. V. — Constantine destroyed the places dedicated to the idols, and persuaded the people to prefer

Christianity 261

Chap. VI. — The reason why, under Constantine, the name of Christ was spread throughout the whole world 262

Chap. VII. — How the Iberians received the faith of Christ 263

Chap. VIII. — How the Armenians and Persians embraced Christianity 264

Chap, IX. — Sapor, king of Persia, is excited against the Christians. Symeon, bishop of Persia, and Ustha-

zanes, a eunuch, suffer the agony of martyrdom 264

Chap. X. — Christians slain by Sapor in Persia 265

Chap. XI. — Pusices, superintendent of the artisans of Sapor 266

Chap. XII. — Tarbula, the sister of Symeon, and her martyrdom 266

Chap. XIII. — Martyrdom of St. Acepsimas and of his companions 267

Chap. XIV. — The martyrdom of Bishop Milles, and his conduct. Sixteen thousand distinguished men in

Persia suffer martyrdom under Sapor, besides obscure individuals 267

Chap. XV. — Constantine writes to Sapor to stay the persecution of the Christians 268

Chap. XVI. — Eusebius and Theognis, who, at the council of Nice, had assented to the writings of Arius,

restored to their own sees 268

Chap. XVII. — On the death of Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, at his suggestion Athanasius receives the

throne; and an account of his youth; how he was a self-taught priest, and beloved by Antony the Great 269
Chap. XVIII. — The Arians and Melitians confer celebrity on Athanasius. Concerning Eusebius, and his
request of Athanasius to admit Arius to communion. Concerning the term ' consubstantial.' Eusebius

Pamphilus and Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, create tumults above all the rest 270

Chap. XIX. — Synod of Antioch. Unjust deposition of Eustathius. Euphronius receives the throne. Con-
stantine the Great writes to the Synod and to Eusebius Pamphilus, who refuses the bishopric of Antioch. 270

Chap. XX. — Concerning Maximus, who succeeded Macarius in the see of Jerusalem 271

Chap. XXI. — The Melitians and the Arians agree in sentiment. Eusebius and Theognis endeavor to inflame

anew the disease of Arius 271

Chap. XXII. — The vain machinations of the Arians and Melitians against St. Athanasius 272

Chap. XXIII. — Calumny respecting St. Athanasius and the hand of Arsenius 273

Chap. XXIV. — Some Indian nations received Christianity at that time, through the instrumentality of two

captives, Frumentius and Edesius 274

Chap. XXV. — Council of Tyre. Illegal deposition of .St. Athanasius 275

Chap. XXVI. — Erection of a temple by Constantine the Great at Golgotha in Jerusalem. Its dedication . . . 276
Chap. XXVII. — Concerning the Presbyter by whom Constantine was persuaded to recall Arius and Euzoius
from exile; the tractate concerning his possibly pious faith; and how Arius was again received by the
Synod assembled at Jerusalem 277


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 183

PACK

Chap. XXVIII. — Letter from the Emperor Constantine to the Synod of Tyre; and exile of St. Athanasius

through the machination of the Arian faction 278

Chap. XXIX. — Alexander, bishop of Const^intinople. His refusal to receive Arius into communion. Arius

is burst asunder while seeking natural relief 279

Chap. XXX. — Account given by the great Athanasius of the death of Arius 279

Chap. XXXI. — Events which occurred in Alexandria after the death of Arius. Letter of Constantine the

Great to the church there 280

Chap. XXXII. — Constantine enacts a law against all heresies, and prohibits the people from holding church
in any place but the Catholic Church, and thus the greater number of heresies disappear. The Arians
who sided with Eusebius of Nicomedia artfully attempted to obliterate the term ' consubstantial ' 280

Chap. XXXIII. — Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra. His heresy and depositfon 281

Chap. XXXIV. — Death of Constantine the Great. He died after baptism, and was buried in the temple of

the holy Apostles 282


BOOK III.

Chap. I. — After the death of Constantine the Great the adherents of Eusebius and Theognis attack the

Nicene faith 283

Chap. II. — Return of Athanasius the Great from Rome; letter of Constantine Caesar, son of Constantine the
Great; renewed machinations of the Arians against Athanasius; Acacius of Berroea; war between Con-
stans and Constantine 283

Chap. HI. — Paul, bishop of Constantinople, and Macedonius, the pneumatomachian 284

Chap. IV. — A sedition was excited on the ordination of Paul 284

Chap. V. — The partial council of Antioch; it deposed Athanasius; it substituted Gregory; its two state-
ments of the faith; those who agreed with them 285

Chap. VI. — Eusebius, surnamed Emesenus; Gregory accepted Alexandria; Athanasius seeks refuge in Rome 286

Chap. VII. — High priests of Rome and of Constantinople; restoration of Paul after Eusebius; the slaugh-
ter of Hermogenes, a general of the army; Constantius came from Antioch and removed Paul, and was
wrathfuUy disposed toward the city; he allowed Macedonius to be in doubt, and returned to Antioch. . 286

Chap. VIII. — Arrival of the Eastern high priests at Rome; letter of Julius, bishop of Rome, concerning
them; by means of the letters of Julius, Paul and Athanasius receive their own sees; contents of the
letter from the arch-priests of the East to Julius 287

Chap. IX. — Ejection of Paul and Athanasius; Macedonius is invested with the government of the church of

Constantinople 288

Chap. X. — The bishop of Rome writes to the bishops of the East in favor of Athanasius, and they send
an embassy to Rome, who with the bishop of Rome are to investigate the charges against, the Eastern
bishops. This deputation is dismissed by Constans the Caesar 288

Chap. XI. — The long formulary and the enactments issued by the Synod of Sardica. Julius, bishop of
Rome, and Hosius, the Spanish bishop, deposed by the bishops of the East, because they held com-
munion with Athanasius and the rest 289

Chap. XII. — The bishops of the party of Julius and Hosius held another session and deposed the Eastern

high priests, and also made a formulary of faith 290

Chap. XIII. — After the Synod, the East and the West are separated; the West nobly adheres to the faith of

the Nicsean Council, while the East is disturbed by contention here and there over this dogma 290

Chap. XIV. — Of the holy men who flourished about this time in Egypt, namely, Antony, the two Macariuses,
Heraclius, Cronius, Paphnutius, Putubastus, Arsisius, Serapion, Piturion, Pachomius, Apollonius, Anuph,
Hilarion, and a register of many other saints 291

Chap. XV. — Didymus the blind, and Aetius the heretic 294

Chap. XVI. — Concerning St. Ephraim 295

Chap. XVII. — Transactions of that period, and progress of Christian doctrine through the joint efforts of

emperors and arch-priests 297

Chap. XVIII. — Concerning the doctrines held by the sons of Constantine. Distinction between the terms
' Homoousios ' and ' Homoiousios.' Whence it came that Constantius quickly abandoned the correct
faith 297

Chap. XIX. — Further particulars concerning the term ' consubstantial.' Council of Ariminum; the man-
ner, source, and reason of its convention 298


i84 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

PAGB

Chap. XX. — Athanasius again reinstated by the letter of Constantius, and receives his see. The arch-priests

of Antioch. Question put by Constantius to Athanasius. The praise of God in hymns 298

Chap. XXI. — Letter of Constantius to the Egyptians in behalf of Athanasius. Synod of Jerusalem 299

Chap. XXII. — Epistle written by the Synod of Jerusalem in favor of Athanasius 299

Chap. XXIII. — Valens and Ursacius, who belonged to the Arian faction, confess to the bishop of Rome that

they had made false charges against Athanasius 300

Chap. XXIV. — Letter of conciliation from Valens and Ursacius to the great Athanasius. Restoration of the

other Eastern bishops to their own sees. Ejection of Macedonius again, and accession of Paul to the see 300


BOOK IV.

Chap. I. — Death of Constans Caesar. Occurrences which took place in Rome 301

Chap. II. — Constantius again ejects Athanasius, and banishes those who represented the Homoousian doctrine.
Death of Paul, bishop of Constantinople. Macedonius : his second usurpation of the see, and his evil

deeds 301

Chap. III. — Martyrdom of the holy notaries 301

Chap. IV. — Campaign of Constantius in Sirmium, and details concerning Vetranio and Magnentius. Callus

receives the title of Caesar, and is sent to the East 302

Chap. V. — Cyril directs the sacerdotal office after Maximus; and the largest form of the cross, surpassing

the sun in splendor, again appears in the heavens, and is visible during several days 302

Chap. VI. — Photinus, bishop of Sirmium : his heresy and the council convened at Sirmium in opposition
thereto. The three formularies of faith. This agitator of empty ideas was refuted by Basil of Ancyra.

After his deposition, Photinus, although solicited, declined reconciliation 302

Chap. VII. — Death of the tyrants Magnentius and Silvanus the apostate. Sedition of the Jews in Palestine.

Callus Caesar is slain on suspicion of revolution 303

Chap. VIII. — Arrival of Constantius at Rome. A council held in Italy. Account of what happened to

Athanasius the Great through the machinations of the Arians 304

Chap. IX. — Council of Milan. Flight of Athanasius 305

Chap. X. — Divers machinations of the Arians against Athanasius, and his escape from various dangers
through divine interposition. Evil deeds perpetrated by George in Egypt after the expulsion of Athana-
sius 305

Chap. XI. — Liberius, bishop of Rome, and the cause of his being exiled by Constantius. Felix his successor 306
Chap. XII. — Aetius, the Syrian, and Eudoxius, the successor of Leontius in Antioch. Concerning the term

' consubstantial ' 307

Chap. XIII. — Innovations of Eudoxius censured in a letter written by George, bishop of Laodicea. Depu-
tation from the council of Ancyra to Constantius 308

Chap. XIV. — Letter of the Emperor Constantius against Eudoxius and his partisans 309

Chap. XV. — The Emperor Constantius repairs to Sirmium, recalls Liberius, and restores him to the church

of Rome; he also commands Felix to assist Liberius in the sacerdotal office 309

Chap. XVI. — The emperor purposed on account of the heresy of Aetius and the innovations in Antioch, to
convene a council at Nicomedia; but as an earthquake took place in that city, and many other affairs
intervened, the council was first convened at Nicaea, and afterwards at Ariminum and Seleucia. Account

of Arsacius the confessor 310

Chap. XVII. — Proceedings of the council of Ariminum 312

Chap. XVIII. — Letter from the council at Ariminum to the emperor Constantius 313

Chap. XIX. — Concerning the deputies of the council and the emperor's letter; agreement of the adherents
of Ursacius and Valens afterwards, with the letter put forth ; exile of the archbishops; concerning the

Synod at Nicaea, and the reason why the synod was held in Ariminum 314

Chap. XX. — Events which took place in the Eastern churches; Marathonius, Eleusius of Cyzicus, and Mace-
donius expel those who maintain the term ' consubstantial.' Concerning the churches of the Novatians;

how one church was transported; the Novatians enter into communion with the orthodox 315

Chap. XXI. — Proceedings of Macedonius in Mantinium. His removal from his see when he attempted to

remove the coffin of Constantine the Great. Julian was pronounced Caesar 316

Chap. XXII. — Council of Seleucia 316

Chap. XXIII. — Acacius and Aetius; and how the deputies of the two councils of Ariminum and of Seleucia

were led by the emperor to accept the same doctrines 318


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 185

TACE

Chap. XXIV. — Formulary of the council of Ariminum approved by the Acacians. List of the deposed

chief priests, and the causes of their condemnation 319

Chap. XXV. — Causes of the deposition of Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem. Mutual dissensions among the bishops.

Meletius is ordained by the Arians, and supplants Eustathius in the bishopric of Sebaste 321

Chap. XXVI. — Death of Macedonius, bishop of Constantinople. What Eudoxius said in his teaching. Eudox-
ius and Acacius strenuously sought the abolition of the formularies of faith set forth at Nica;a and at
Ariminum. Troubles which thence arose in the churches 322

Chap. XXVII. — Macedonius, after his rejection from his see, blasphemes against the Holy Spirit. Propaga-
tion of his heresy through the instrumentality of Marathonius and others 322

Chap. XXVIII. — The Arians, under the impression that the divine Meletius upheld their sentiments, trans-
late him from Sebaste to Antioch. On his bold confession of the orthodox doctrines, they were confounded;
and after they had deposed him, they placed Euzoius in the see. Meletius formed his own church;
but those who held to consubstantiality turned away from him because he had been ordained by Arians 323

Chap. XXIX. — The partisans of Acacius again do not remain quiet, but strive to abolish the term 'consub-

stantial,' and to confirm the heresy of Arius 323

Chap. XXX. — George, bishop of Antioch, and the chief priests of Jerusalem. Three chief priests succes-
sively succeed Cyril. Restoration of Cyril to the see of Jerusalem 324

BOOK V.

Chap. I. — Apostasy of Julian the traitor. Death of the Emperor Constantius 325

Chap. II. — The life, education, and training of Julian, and his accession to the empire 325

Chap. III. — Julian, on his settlement in the empire, began quietly to stir up opposition to Christianity, and to

introduce Paganism artfuUy 328

Chap. IV. — Julian inflicted evils upon the inhabitants of Caesarea. Bold fidelity of Maris, bishop of Chalcedon 328

Chap. V. — Julian restores liberty to the Christians, in order to excite further troubles in the church. The evil

treatment of Christians he devised 329

Chap. VI. — Athanasius, after having been seven years concealed in the house of a wise and beautiful virgin,

reappears at that time in public, and enters the church of Alexandria 330

Chap. VII. — Violent death and triumph of George, bishop of Alexandria, the result of certain occurrences in

the temple of Mithra. Letter of Julian on this aggravated circumstance 330

Chap. VIII. — Concerning Theodoritus, the keeper of the sacred vessels of Antioch. How Julian, the uncle

of the traitor, on account of these vessels, falls a prey to worms 331

Chap. IX. — Martyrdom of the saints Eusebius, Nestabus, and Zeno, in the city of Gaza '. . . . 332

Chap. X. — Concerning St. Hilarion and the virgins in Heliopolis who were destroyed by swine. Strange

martyrdom of Mark, bishop of Arethusa 333

Chap. XI. — Concerning Macedonius, Theodulus, Gratian, Busiris, Basil, and Eupsychius, who suffered martyr-
dom in those times 334

Chap. XII. — Concerning Lucifer and Eusebius, bishops of the West. Eusebius, with Athanasius the Great
and other bishops, collects a council at Alexandria, and confirms the Nicene faith by defining the consub-
stantiality of the Spirit with the Father and the Son. Their decree concerning substance and hypostasis 334

Chap. XIII. — Concerning Paulinus and Meletius, chief priests of Antioch. How Eusebius and Lucifer

antagonized one another. Eusebius and Hilarius defend the Nicene faith 335

Chap. XIV. — The partisans of Macedonius disputed with the Arians concerning Acacius 336

Chap. XV. — Athanasius is again banished; concerning Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, and Titus, bishop of

Bostra. Mention of the ancestors of the author 336

Chap. XVI. — Efforts of Julian to establish paganism and to abolish our usages. The epistle which he sent

to the pagan high priests 337

Chap. XVII. — In order that he might not be thought tyrannical, Julian proceeds artfully against the Chris-
tians. Abolition of the sign of the cross. He makes the soldiery sacrifice, although they were unwilling 339

Chap. XVIII. — He prohibited the Christians from the markets and from the judicial seats and from shar-
ing in Greek education. Resistance of Basil the Great, Gregory the theologian, and Apolinarius
to this decree; they rapidly translate the Scriptures into Greek modes of expression. Apolinarius and
Gregory Nazianzen do this more than Basil, the one in a rhetorical vein, the other in epic style and in
imitation of every poet 340

Chap. XIX. — Work written by Julian entitled ' Aversion to Beards.' Daphne in Antioch, a full descrip-
tion of it. Translation of the remains of Baby las, the holy martyr 340


i86 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


PAGE

Chap. XX. — In consequence of the translation, many of the Christians are ill-treated. Theodore the con-
fessor. Temple of Apollo at Daphne destroyed by fire falling from heaven 342

Chap. XXI. — Of the statue of Christ in Paneas which Julian overthrew and made valueless; he erected his
own statue; this was overthrown by a thunder-bolt and destroyed. Fountain of Emmaus in which Christ
washed His feet. Concerning the tree Persis which worshiped Christ in Egypt, and the wonders wrought
through it 342

Chap. XXII. — From aversion to the Christians, Julian granted permission to the Jews to rebuild the temple
at Jerusalem; in every endeavor to put their hands to the work, fire sprang upward and killed many;
about the sign of the cross which appeared on the clothing of those who had exerted themselves in this
work 343


BOOK VI.

Chap. I. — Expedition of Julian into Persia; he was worsted and broke off his life miserably. Letter written

by Libanius describing his death 345

Chap. II. — He perished under Divine wrath. Visions of the emperor's death seen by various individuals.
Reply of the carpenter's son; Julian tossed his blood aloft to Christ. Calamities which Julian entailed
upon the Romans 346

Chap. III. — The reign of Jovian : he introduced many laws, which he carried out in his government 347

Chap. IV. — Troubles again arise in the churches; Synod of Antioch, in which the Nicene faith is con-
firmed ; the points which this important Synod wrote about to Jovian 348

Chap. V. — Athanasius the Great is very highly esteemed by the emperor, and rules over the churches of

Egypt. Vision of Antony the Great 349

Chap. VI. — Death of Jovian; the life of Valentinian and his confidence in God; how he was advanced to

the throne, and selected his brother Valens to reign with him; the differences of both 349

Chap. VII. — Troubles again arise in the churches, and the Synod of Lampsacus is held. The Arians who
supported Eudoxius prevail and eject the orthodox from the churches; among the ejected is Meletius of
Antioch 350

Chap. VIII. — Revolt and extraordinary death of Procopius. Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, and Eunomius,

the heretic. Eunomius succeeds Eleusius 351

Chap. IX. — Sufferings of those who maintained the Nicene faith. Agelius, the ruler of the Novatians 351

Chap. X. — Concerning Valentinian the Younger, and Gratian. Persecution under Valens. The Homoou-

sians, being oppressed by the Arians and Macedonians, send an embassy to Rome 352

Chap. XI. — The confession of Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus, the deputies of the Macedonians, to

Liberius, bishop of Rome 352

Chap. XII. — Councils of Sicily and of Tyana. The Synod which was expected to be held in Cilicia is dis-
solved by Valens. The persecution at that time. Athanasius the Great flees again and is in conceal-
ment; by the letter of Valens he reappears and governs the churches in Egypt 353

Chap. XIII. — Demophilus, an Arian, became bishop of Constantinople after Eudoxius. The pious elect

Evagrius. Account of the persecution which ensued 354

Chap. XIV. — Account of the eighty pious delegates in Nicomedia, whom Valens burned with the vessel in

mid-sea 355

Chap. XV. — Disputes between Eusebius, bishop of Caesarea, and Basil the Great; hence the Arians took

courage and came to Caesarea and were repulsed 355

Chap. XVI. — Basil becomes bishop of Caesarea, after Eusebius; his boldness towards the emperor and the

prefect 355

Chap. XVII. — Friendship of Basil and of Gregory the theologian; being peers in wisdom they defend the

Nicene doctrines 356

Chap. XVIII. — The persecution which occurred at Antioch, on the Orontes. The place of prayer in

Edessa, called after the Apostle Thomas; the assembly there, and confession of the inhabitants of Edessa. 356

Chap. XIX. — Death of the great Athanasius; the elevation of Lucius, who was Arian-minded, to the see;
the numerous calamities he brought upon the churches in Egypt; Peter, who served after Athanasius,
passed over to Rome 357

Chap. XX. — Persecution of the Egyptian monks, and of the disciples of St. Antony. They were enclosed in

a certain island on account of their orthodoxy; the miracles which they wrought 357

Chap. XXI. — List of the places in which the Nicene doctrines were represented. Faith manifested by the

Scythians; Vetranio the leader of this race 3^8


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 187

PACB

Chap. XXII. — At that time the doctrine of the Holy Ghost was agitated, and it was decided that He is to be

considered consubstantial with the Father and the Son ^jg

Chap. XXIII. — Death of Liberius, bishop of Rome. He is succeeded by Damasus and Syricius. Orthodox
doctrines prevail everywhere throughout the West, except where Auxentius is the high priest; Synod
held at Rome by which Auxentius is deposed; the definition which it sent by letter 359

Chap. XXIV. — Concerning St. Ambrose and his elevation to the high-priesthood; how he persuaded the

people to practice piety. The Novatians of Phrygia and the Passover 361

Chap. XXV. — Concerning Apolinarius : father and son of that name. Vitalianus, the presbyter. On being

dislodged from one kind of heresy, they incline to others 361

Chap. XXVI. — Eunomius and his teacher Aetius, their affairs and doctrines. They were the first who

broached one immersion for the baptism 362

Chap. XXVII. — Account given by Gregory the theologian, of Apolinarius and Eunomius, in a letter to
Nectarius. Their heresy was extinguished by the philosophy of the monks who were then living; for
the heresy of these two held nearly the entire East 364

Chap. XXVIII. — Of the holy men who flourished at this period in Egypt: John, Or, Amon, Benus, Theonj^s,

Copres, Helles, Elias, Apelles, Isidore, Serapion, Dioscorus, and Eulogius 365

Chap. XXIX. — Concerning the monks of Thebais: Apollos, Dorotheus; concerning Piammon, John, Mark,

Macarius, ApoUodorus, Moses, Paul who was in Ferma, Pacho, Stephen, and Pior 365

Chap. XXX. — Monks of Scetis : Origen, Didymus, Cronion, Orsisius, Putubatus, Arsion, Serapion, Ammon,

Eusebius and Dioscorus, the brethren who are called long, and Evagrius the philosopher 368

Chap. XXXI. — Concerning the monks of Nitria, and the Monasteries called cells; about the one in Rhinocorura;

about Melas, Dionysius, and Solon 369

Chap. XXXII. — Monks of Palestine : Hesycas, Epiphanius who was afterwards in Cyprus, Ammonius,

and Silvanus • 369

Chap. XXXIII. — Monks of Syria and Persia: Battheus, Eusebius, Barges, Halas, Abbo, Lazarus, Abdaleus,

Zeno, Heliodorus, Eusebius of Carrae, Protogenes, and Aones 370

Chap. XXXIV. — Monks of Edessa: Julianus, Ephraim Syrus, Barus, and Eulogius; further, the monks of
Coele-Syria: Valentinus, Theodore, Merosas, Bassus, Bassonius; the holy men of Galatia and Cappadocia
and elsewhere ; why those saints until recently were long-lived 370

Chap. XXXV. — The wooden tripod, and the succession of the emperor through a knowledge of its letters.

Destruction of the philosophers; astronomy 37?

Chap. XXXVI. — Expedition against the Sarmatians; death of Valentinian in Rome; Valentinian the Younger
proclaimed. Persecution of the priests; oration of the philosopher Themistius on account of which
Valens was disposed to treat those who diff"ered from him more humanely 372

Chap. XXXVII. — Concerning the barbarians beyond the Danube who were driven out by the Huns, and
advanced to the Romans, and their conversion to Christianity; Ulphilas and Athanarichus; occurrences
between them; whence the Goths received Arianism 373

Chap. XXXVIII. — Concerning Mania, the phylarch of the Saracens. When the treaty with the Romans was
dissolved, Moses, their bishop, who had been ordained by the Christians, renewed it. Narrative concern-
ing the Ishmaelites and the Saracens, and their gods; and how they began to be Christianized through
Zocomus, their phylarch 374

Chap. XXXIX. — Peter, having returned from Rome, regains the churches of Egypt after Lucius had given

way. Expedition of Valens into the West against the Scythians 375

Chap. XL. — St. Isaac, the monk, predicts the death of Valens. Valens in his flight enters a chaff"-house,

is consumed, and so yields up his life 375

BOOK VII.

Chap. I. — WTien the Romans are pressed by the barbarians, Mavia sends assistance and some of the popu-
lace effect a victory. Gratian commands each to believe as he wishes 377

Chap. II. — Gratian elects Theodosius of Spain to reign with him. Arianism prevails throughout the Eastern
churches, except that of Jerusalem. Council of Antioch. The settlement of the presidency of the
churches ^^y

Chap. III. — Concerning St. Meletius and Paulinus, bishops of Antioch. Their oath respecting the episcopal

s^^ 378

Chap. IV. — Reign of Theodosius the Great; he was initiated into divine baptism by Ascholius, bishop of
Thessalonica. The letters he addressed to those who did not hold the definition of the council of
Nice 378


i88 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

PACB

Chap. V. — Gregory the theologian receives from Theodosius the government of the churches. Expulsion of

Demophilus and of all who deny that the Son is ' consubstantial ' with the Father 378

Chap, VI. — Concerning the Arians; and further the success of Eunomius. Boldness of St. Amphilochius

toward the emperor 379

Chap. VII. — Concerning the second holy general council, and the place and the cause of its convention.

Abdication of Gregory, the theologian , 380

Chap. VIII. — Election of Nectarius to the see of Constantinople; his birthplace and education 380

Chap. IX. — Decrees of the second general council. Maximus, the cynical philosopher 381

Chap. X. — Concerning Martyrius of Cilicia. Translation of the remains of St. Paul, the confessor, and of

Meletius, bishop of Antioch 382

Chap. XI. — Ordination of Flavian as bishop of Antioch, and subsequent occurrences on account of the oath 382
CliAP. XII. — Project of Theodosius to unify all the heresies. The propositions made by Agelius and Sisinius,
the Novatians. At another Synod the emperor received those only who represent consubstantiality; those

who held a different view he ejected from the churches 382

Chap. XIII. — Maximus the tyrant. Concerning the occurrences between the Empress Justina and St. Ambrose.
The Emperor Gratian was killed by guile. Valentinian and his mother fled to Theodosius in Thessa-

lonica 383

Chap. XIV. — Birth of Honorius. Theodosius leaves Arcadius at Constantinople, and proceeds to Italy. Suc-
cession of the Novatian and other patriarchs. Audacity of the Arians. Theodosius, after destroying the

tyrant, celebrates a magnificent triumph in Rome 384

Chap. XV. — Flavian and Evagrius, bishops of Antioch. The events at Alexandria upon the destruction of

the temple of Dionysus. The Serapeum and the other«idolatrous temples which were destroyed 385

Chap. XVI. — In what manner, and from what cause, the functions of the presbyter appointed to preside

over the imposition of penance were abolished. Dissertation on the mode of imposing penance 386

Chap. XVII. — Banishment of Eunomius by Theodosius the Great. Theophronius, his successor; of Euty-
chus and of Dorotheus, and their heresies; of those called Psathyrians. Division of the Arians into differ-
ent parties. Those in Constantinople were more united 387

Chap. XVIII. — Another heresy, that of the Sabbatians, is originated by the Novatians. Their Synod in

Sangarus. Account in greater detail of the Easter Festival 388

Chap. XIX. — A list worthy of study given by the historian of customs among different nations and churches 389
Chap. XX. — Extension of our doctrines and complete demolition of idolatrotis temples. Inundation of the

Nile 390

Chap. XXI. — Discovery of the honored head of the forerunner of our Lord, and the events about it 391

Ch.\p. XXII. — Death of Valentinian the Younger, emperor in Rome, through strangling. The tyrant

Eugenius. Prophecy of John, the monk of Thebais 392

Chap. XXIII. — Exaction of tribute in Antioch, and demolition of the statues of the emperor. Embassy

headed by Flavian, the chief priest 392

Chap. XXIV. — Victory of Theodosius the emperor over Eugenius 393

Chap. XXV. — Intrepid bearing of St. Ambrose in the presence of the Emperor Theodosius. Massacre at

Thessalonica. Narrative of the other righteous deeds of this saint 393

Chap. XXVI. — St. Donatus, bishop of Eurcea, and Theotimus, high priest of Scythia 394

Chap. XXVII. — St. Epiphanius, bishop of Cyprus, and a particular account of his acts 395

Chap. XXVIII. — Acacius, bishop of Beroea; Zeno and Ajax, men distinguished and renowned for virtue. . . 396
Chap. XXIX. — Discovery of the remains of the prophets Habakkuk and Micah. Death of Emperor Theo-
dosius lUe Great 397


BOOK VIIL

Chap. I. — Successors of Theodosius the Great. Rufinus, the praetorian prefect, is slain. The chief priests

of the principal cities. Differences among the heretics. Account of Sisinius, bishop of the Novatians. 398

Chap. II. — Education, training, conduct, and wisdom of the great John Chrysostom; his promotion to the

see; Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, becomes his confirmed opponent 399

Chap. III. — Rapid promotion of John to the bishopric, and more vehement grappling with its affairs. He
re-establishes discipline in the churches everywhere. By sending an embassy to Rome, he abolished the
hostility to Flavian 400

Chap. IV. — Enterprise of Galnas, the Gothic barbarian. Evils which he perpetrated 401


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 189

PAGR

Chap. V. — John swayed the people by his teachings. Concerning the woman, a follower of Macedonius, on

account of whom the bread was turned into a stone 402

Chap. VI. — Proceedings of John in Asia and Phrygia. Heraclides, bishop of Ephesus, and Gerontius,

bishop of Nicomedia 403

Chap. VII. — Concerning Eutropius, chief of the eunuchs, and the law enacted by him. On being turned

from the church, he was put to death. Murmurs against John 403

Chap. VIII. — Antiphonal hymns against the Arians introduced by John. The interests of the orthodox are

much augmented by the teachings of John, while the wealthy are more and more enraged 404

Chap. IX. — Serapion, the archdeacon, and St. Olympias. Some of the celebrated men insolently bear down

upon John, traducing him as impracticable and passionate 404

Chap. X. — Severian, bishop of Gabales, and Antiochus, bishop of Ptolemais. Dispute between Serapion and

Severian. Reconciliation between them effected by the empress 405

Chap. XI. — Question agitated in Egypt, as to whether God has a corporeal form. Theophilus, bishop of

Alexandria, and the books of Origen 405

Chap. XII. — About the four brothers, called ' the long,' who were ascetics, and of whom Theophilus was an

enemy; about Isidore and the events which came about through these four 406

Chap. XIII. — These four repair to John on account of his interest; for this reason Theophilus was enraged,

and prepares himself to fight against John 407

Chap. XIV. — Perversity of Theophilus. St. Epiphanius : his residence at Constantinople, and preparation to

excite the people against John 407

Chap. XV. — The son of the empress, and St. Epiphanius. Conference between the 'long brothers' and

Epiphanius, and his re-embarkation for Cyprus. Epiphanius and John 408

Chap. XVI. — The dispute between the empress and John. Arrival of Theophilus from Egypt. Cyrinus,

bishop of Chalcedon 409

Chap. XVII. — Council held by Theophilus and the accusers of John in Rufinianae. John is summoned to

attend, and not being present was deposed by them 409

Chap. XVIII. — Sedition of the people against Theophilus; and they traduced their rulers. John was

recalled and again came to the see 410

Chap. XIX. — Obstinacy of Theophilus. Enmity between the Egyptians and the citizens of Constantinople.

Flight of Theophilus. Nilammon the ascetic. The Synod concerning John 41 1

Chap. XX. — The statue of the empress; what happened there; the teaching of John; convocation of

another Synod against John; his deposition .- 412

Chap. XXI. — Calamities suffered by the people after the expulsion of John. The plots against him of assas-
sination 412

Chap. XXII. — Unlawful expulsion of John from his bishopric. The trouble which followed. Conflagration

of the church by fire from heaven. Exile of John to Cucusus , 413

Chap. XXIII. — Arsacius elected to succeed John. The evils wrought against the followers of John. St.

Nicarete 413

Chap. XXIV. — Eutropius the reader, and the blessed Olympias, and the presbyter Tigrius, are persecuted

on account of their attachment to John. The Patriarchs 414

Chap. XXV. — Since these ills existed in the church, secular affairs also fell into disorder. The affairs of

Stilicho, the general of Honorius 415

Chap. XXVI. — Two epistles from Innocent, the pope of Rome, of which one was addressed to John Chrysos-

tom, and the other to the clergy of Constantinople concerning John 415

Chap. XXVII. — The terrible events which resulted from the treatment of John. Death of the Empress

Eudoxia. Death of Arsacius. And further, concerning Atticus, the Patriarch, his birthplace and character 417
Chap, XXVIII. — Effort of Innocent, bishop of Rome, to recall John through a council; concerning those

who were sent by him to make trial of the matter. The death of John Chrysostom 417


BOOK IX.

Chap. I. — Death of Arcadius, and government of Theodosius the Younger. His sisters. Piety, virtue, and

virginity of the Princess Pulcheria; her divinely loved works; she educated the emperor befittingly . . 419

Chap. II. — Discovery of the relics of forty holy martyrs 420

Chap. III. ■ — The virtues of Pulcheria; her sisters 421

Chap. IV, — Truce with Persia. Honorius and Stilicho. Transactions in Rome and Dalmatia 421


IQO THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

PACE

Chap. V. — The different nations took up arms against the Romans, of whom some were, through the provi-
dence of God, defeated, and others brought to terms of amity 422

Chap. VI. — Alaric, the Goth. He assaulted Rome and straitened it by war 422

Chap. VII. — Innocent, the bishop of the presbytery of Rome; he sent an embassy to Alaric. Jovius, prefect

of Italy. Embassy dispatched to the emperor. Events concerning Alaric 423

Chap. VIII. — Rebellion of Attalus and his general, Heraclean; and how he eventually craved forgiveness at

the feet of Honorius 423

Chap. IX. — The disturbance which the Greeks and Christians had about Attalus. The courageous Saros.

Alaric, by a stratagem, obtains possession of Rome, and protected the sacretl asylum of the Apostle Peter 424

Chap. X. — A Roman lady who manifested a deed of modesty 424

Chap. XI. — The tyrants who, in the West, at that time rebelled against Honorius. They are wholly destroyed

on account of the emperor's love of God 425

Chap. XII. — Theodosiolus and Lagodius. The races of the Vandals and Suevi. Death of Alaric. Flight of

the tyrants Constantine and Constans 425

Chap. XIII. — Concerning Gerontius, Maximus, .and the troops of Honorius. Capture of Gerontius and his

wife ; their death 426

Chap. XIV. — Constantine. The army of Honorius and Edovicus, his general. Defeat of Edovicus by Ulphi-

las, the general of Constantine. Death of Edovicus 426

Chap. XV. — Constantine throws aside the emblems of imperial power, and is ordained as presbyter; his

subsequent death. Death of the other tyrants who had conspired against Honorius 426

Chap. XVI. — Honorius, the ruler, a lover of God. Death of Honorius. His successors, Valentinian and

Honoria, his daughter; the peace which was then world-wide 427

Chap. XVII. — Discovery of the relics of Zechariah the prophet, and of Stephen the proto-martyr 427


INTRODUCTION.


SALAMINIUS HERMIAS SOZOMEN.


PART I.— The Life.

The name is an unusual and difficult one. It seems desirable to give preference to the order
which Photius adopts, but to preserve the speUing in Nicephorus CaUistus, and in the captions
of the chief manuscripts, and therefore to call him Salaminius Hermias Sozomen. What the
term Salaminius indicates, cannot yet be accurately determined. There are no data to show any
official connection of Sozomen with Salamis opposite Athens, or Salamis (Constantia) in Cyprus ;
certainly there is no record of any naval service. In vi. 32, where he speaks of the greater lights of
monasticism in Palestine, Hilarion, Hesychas, and Epiphanius, he remarks, " At the same period
in the monasteries, Salamines, Phuscon, Malachion, Crispion, four brethren, were highly distin-
guished." In the tart controversy between Epiphanius and the empress, the latter had said, " You
have not power to revive the dead ; otherwise your archdeacon would not have died." Sozomen
explains, " She alluded to Crispion, the archdeacon, who had died a short time previously ; he
was brother to Phuscon and Salamanus, monks whom I had occasion to mention when detailing
the history of events under the reign of Valens " (viii. 15). The readings in the first citation
fluctuate between the forms Salamines and Salamanes. Since these monks were of the family of
Alaphion, intimate friends and neighbors of the grandfather of Sozomen (v. 15), it might be con-
jectured that Salamines stood in some relationship with Sozomen, such as sponsor or teacher, and
that the cognomen might have its origin from such a connection. It seems strange in such a
case that he would not have dwelt upon the bond, or at least have emphasized the life of this
particular brother by a special note ; but he simply avers, " Some good men belonging to this
family have flourished even in our own days ; and in my youth I saw some of them, but they were
then very aged." Nor in the other passages (vi. 32, viii. 15) is there any hint of intimacy. At
the same time, this seems as yet the most warranted explanation of the epithet. Hermias was quite
a common name even among Christians. It was originally connected with the household or local
worship of Hermes, as the giver of an unexpected gift, or it may be as the utterance of a parental
wish for the future success of the newcomer. Although it contained a heathen reminiscence, it
was probably conferred in this case because it was ancestral. The name Sozomen itself is docu-
mentarily a very unusual one ; and was probably bestowed upon the child by the father as a
devout recognition of deliverance for himself and his boy, and in contrast with the family surname.
A certain praefectus domestico,. to whom Isidore of Pelusium addresses a letter (i. 300), was also
so called ; he must have been a cotemporary. It would be a pleasant surprise could he be
identified with the historian ; and it would not be at all impossible, for Evagrius, the advocate and
historian, was so promoted {H. E. vi. 24). The biographical hints in Sozomen's surviving
work are of the smallest ; and outside tradition has preserved absolutely nothing. His ancestors
were apparently from early times inhabitants of the village of Bethelia, in the territory of Gaza,


192 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

and near to that important city. By race, they were probably of Philistine rather than Jewish
descent ; for they were pagans (Hellenists) up to the time of Hilarion, in the second quarter of
the fourth century, and our historian contrasts them with the Hebrews. The family was one of
distinction, belonging to a sort of village patncianate. That of Alaphion was of still greater dignity.
The village of Bethelia was populous with a mixture of Gentiles and Jews ; the former, however,
largely predominating. Its name appears to have been derived "from the Pantheon, erected on an
artificial acropolis, and so overlooking the whole community, whose universalistic religious zeal was
thus symbolized. The term Bethel was first given to the temple, and then was transferred to the
town as Bethelia ; and the use of such a form indicates that the prevailing dialect was a variation of
Syriac or .'\ramaic. It is also spelled Bethelea (vi. 32). Hilarion was bom in Thabatha, another
village near Gaza, to the south, on a wady of the same name. He became a student in Alexan-
dria, but adopted the monastic discipHne, through the example of Antony ; on returning to his
home, he found his parents dead. He distributed his share of the patrimony to his family and the
poor, and then withdrew to a desert by the sea, twenty stadia from his native village, and began
his career of monastic activity as the founder of that ethical system in Palestine. Before his
flight to other and distant seclusions, he came in contact with Alaphion, the head of a noble
family in Bethelia, seemingly on very friendly footing with Sozomen's grandfather. Alaphion was
possessed of a demon ; neither pagan formularies nor Jewish exorcists could relieve him ; Hilarion
had but to invoke the name of Christ, and the malignant agent was expelled.' The healed man
became at once a Christian ; the grandfather of Sozomen was won to the same profession by the
care of his friend. The father, too, adopted the new faith ; many other relatives joined the
ranks of the believers, in this intensely pagan community and region ; for Gaza, as the chief
city, displayed a decided hostility to the Gospel. The grandfather was a man of native intelli-
gence, and had moderate cultivation in general studies, and was not without some knowledge of
arithmetic. His earlier social and intellectual position made him at once prominent among the
converts, especially as an interpreter of the Scriptures. He won the affections of the Christians in
Ascalon and Gaza and their outlying regions. In the estimation of his grandson, he was a neces-
sary figure in the religious life of the Christian communities, and people carried doubtful points
of holy writ to him for solution ; yet it does not appear that he held any clerical function.
While the ancestor of Sozomen was conspicuous as the religious teacher of Southwestern
Palestine, the old Philistine region, Alaphion and his family were distinguished for works of a
practical quality : they founded churches and monasteries ; they were active in the relief of
strangers and the poor ; some adopted the new philosophy ; and out of their ranks came martyrs
and bishops. Sozomen says nothing of his father, excepting that he was originally a pagan, and
therefore born before Hilarion's mission. The edicts of Julian caused a sudden revival of the
old state religion, and led to many local persecutions, where the pagans were the stronger party :
Gaza and its dependencies were of this number, and some of the tragedies of that unhappy time
are recorded by our historian. The families of .Maphion and of Sozomen were compelled to flee,
to what place is not told us ; probably the southernmost monastic retreats : the exiles certainly
returned (v. 15), not unlikely after the accession of Jovian. We can only guess at the date of
Sozomen's birth, and somewhat in this wise. Hilarion's activity in Palestine was after the council
of Nice, and before the accession of Julian ; we may say about a.d. 345. The grandfather at his
conversion may have been about forty, since he had become a conspicuous local figure ; the
father, in all likelihood, was but a lad when this change came over the domestic worship. The
exile under Julian took place very nearly in 362, and the return in 364, when the patrician of
Bethelia was verging on sixty, and the lad had become a young man. We may place the date of
Sozomen's birth somewhere between 370 and 380. Hilarion passed away about 371 : Ephraim
Syrus, in 378 ; Gratian was emperor of the West ; Theodosius the Great was just about to succeed

* V. 15, and HitroH. de vita Hilarionis.


INTRODUCTION. 193


Valens in the East. Ambrose was the most imposing ecclesiastic of the Occident ; Gregory
Nazianzen and Epiphanius were the leaders of orthodoxy in the Orient.

There are but few details concerning his education. That it was directed by the monks is
sure ; in fact, the only form of Christian life known in that region was of the ascetic type ; the
very bishops and clerical functionaries were selected from the ranks of the practical philosophers.
There was a succession of pious men in the line of Alaphion, and with the elders of the second
generation, Sozomen, as a youth, was more or less acquainted. The names of some of them have
already been mentioned : ' all had been pupils of Hilarion. The fourth of the brothers, Melachion
by name, must have already passed away, and legends had speedily transfigured his memory.
The influence of Epiphanius throughout Palestine, and particularly in its southern slopes and
shepheloth, was dominant in shaping the quality of devotional thought and feeling : its force was
scarcely spent when Sozomen was a boy.

This accounts for the exaggerated value he puts upon the monastic discipline as the true
philosophy, and why he desires not to appear ungrateful to its cultivators, in the writing of his
history ; for he purposes to keep in mind that tremendous movement, and to commemorate its
eminent leaders under different reigns ; in fact, he decides to make it a feature of his treatment
of church life and history. There is no warrant, however, for stating that he himself became a
monk. With all his admiration for their spiritual superiority, he does not lay claim to any direct
fellowship, but rather denies his right or competency to invade their domain. We may be sure
that he received the ordinary education fmparted in the monastic schools of the time, approxi-
mating that of similar institutions near Alexandria. In a degree it was narrow, and growingly
hostile to pagan literature ; moreover, it was apt to be provincial, if patriotic in its tone. This
will account for his desire to elevate the importance of Palestine over against the supercilious
tendency which centralized all culture in Constantinople. The main body of his studies was con-
ducted in the Greek language, of which he is no slight master ; indeed, he became one of the best
imitative stylists of his time, according to so good a judge as Photius. His familiarity with the
Syriac and Aramaic names, the exactness of their transliteration, and his larger acquaintance with
the history of the Syrian church, point to a likely knowledge of at least a dialect of that widely
diffused speech ; indeed, he could hardly have escaped the patois, which seems to have pre-
dominated over the Greek in Bethelia. In iii. 16, he allows for the loss of force and original
grace in every translation, but states that in Ephraim's works, the Greek rendition made
in Ephraim's own day, suffered nothing by the change, and he institutes such a comparison
between the original and its version, that one is inclined to think he could read both. So his
effort to keep a balance in writing between the central and border lands of the empire, and
indeed outside of it, would indicate a broader linguistic sympathy. In vi. 34, he speaks famil-
iarly of Syrian monks, who had survived to his own period ; the wider range of his knowledge may
have been due also to the practice of his profession, or to Syrian cases brought to Constantinople,
each of which would involve a comprehension of the language ; nor less his use of the records
written by the Christians of Persia, Syria, and particularly Edessa, to preserve the story of the
Persian church and its many martyrs, whose material he used so copiously (ii. 9-14). It is
difficult to be sure of his proficiency in Latin ; on the one hand, as an advocate it would be
absolutely necessary for him to understand that language of jurisprudence ; for all edicts, laws,
rescripts, were written therein : the Theodosian code itself was so compiled in his own day. On
the other hand, where he quotes Latin documents, he invariably does it from translations into
Greek made by other hands ; thus in iii. 2, of Constantine's letter to the Alexandrians, he says,
" I have met with a copy translated from the Latin into the Greek ; I shall insert it precisely as
I find it." So in iv. 18, the letter of the Synod of Ariminum to Constantius ; and in viii. 26,
the two epistles of Innocent. Probably his second-hand report about Hilary of Pictavium, v. 13,

' V. 15; vi. 32; viii. 15.


194 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


leans the same way. But on the whole we must allow his profession, which necessitated a knowl-
edge of the law language, to outweigh the lack of original versions in his book.

It is difificult to judge from a solitary work what the degree of an author's general culture is.
Clemens .-Mexandrinus has multitudinous quotations ; it would be easy to conclude that he was a
scholar of universal reading, and a genuine polyhistor ; but their inaccuracy and frequent infelicity
make them rather appear as the excerpts from some florilegium or some rhetorical hand-book.
The classical allusions in Sozomen are not very many; and he might well have considered it
out of place to indulge in overmuch reference in such a record as he presents ; the quahty of
what appears would not compel a wide range of reading ; the dedication is most fertile in familiar
illustrations, poetical, historical, and mythological. In i. 6, because of his mentioning Aquilis,
he drags the Argonauts in by the ears, hardly from Pisander, but rather from Zosimus, who does
the same in mentioning the progress of Alaric' When he describes Constantine's tentative
search for a favorable site on which to rear his new capital, the mention of the plain of Ilium
moves the historian to relate a little tradition about the Trojan town (ii. 3). He mentions
Aristotle, in whose philosophy Aetius was versed (iii. 15) ; and to whose dialectic work
Theophronius composed an introduction (vii. 17). When he dwells on the imitative literature
produced by Apolinarius, he alludes indirectly to the Homeric poems, and mentions outright his
writing " comedies in imitation of Menander, tragedies resembling those of Euripides, and odes
on the model of Pindar" (v. 18). In narrating the history of Daphne under Julian (v. 19), he
gives the myth of Apollo and Daphne. Such hints and others are no proof or disproof of any
extensive reading, and yet the way in which he alludes to some is more after a cyclopaedic
fashion than any profound study of the authors themselves. In fact, his confession in the instance
of the Apollo and Daphne myth is naive, " I leave this subject to those who are more accurately
acquainted with mythology." This acknowledgment is not born of any puritanic hesitancy, — for
he had ventured into the sensual bog a little way already, — but is rather a genuine declaration of
his ignorance, and that in the capital where Anthemius and Synesius were authorities. Probably
we have a little light in the limitations and illiberality of his early training, by recaUing his attitude
toward the imitative writings of Apolinarius, which sprang up to countervail the Julian edict,
which the Christians interpreted as a prohibition to their enjoyment of the Hellenic culture.
While Socrates whole-souledly and forcibly advocates the humanizing effect of the ancient litera-
ture (iii. 16), Sozomen says, "Were it not for the extreme partiality with which the productions
of antiquity are regarded, I doubt not but that the writings of Apolinarius would be held in as
much estimation as those of the ancients," and he rather sides with the monks in their contempt
for classic studies (i. 12). He does not wholly commit himself; he is a bit hesitant, — a
characteristic of his make-up. This was an absorbing question in that and previous days, as it
has continued to agitate the church, more or less, until our own time. In his time the influence
of the monks and the clergy, who were pervaded with the ascetic spirit, was more and more
against the humanities ; the court fluctuated, while the training of the Valentinian and Theodosian
succession had been decidedly monastic, and its sympathies were mainly with the intolerant
tendency, the necessities of their position, and the splendid and overshadowing political abilities
of men like Libanius, Themistius, Anthemius, Troilus, could not be set aside. Some of them,
too, had proved themselves to be the saviours and uplifters of the state. The learning and
grace of Eudocia, the empress, the spirit of her early training as the daughter of an Athenian
philosopher, and her own poetic gifts, were persuasive agents in sustaining a classical survival
among the Christians at the court, before she fell under the blight of her husband's jealousy.
Cyms, the restorer of Constantinople, filled his verses with the same antique flavor. The clergy,
whose prehminary training had been in the schools of the sophists, or at the Universities, could
not wholly bury their sympathy, alti^ough they went through casuistic struggles such as that of

• Zos. V. 29.


INTRODUCTION. 195


Jerome. The Arians, too, were frequently of a larger culture, and on the Germanic side, of signal
military skill and political sagacity, whose services the state could not dispense with. The Uni-
versity which even the monastically drilled Theodosius the Younger organized in Constantinople,
while seeking to give a Christian tone to the higher education, previously controlled by Athens,
made very liberal provision for the languages, if not so much for philosophy. Sozomen, as we
see, inclined to a less generous view, antl thought Apolinarius had such a universal genius, that
his numerous originals might be dispensed with ; Homer, Menander, Euripides, l^indar, but for
an affectation, need not have been missed. This shows the thin quality of his reading, if not the
restricted quantity of it, and lays bare the impotence of his critical faculty. These limitations
were doubtless due in large measure to the shrunken ideals of his Palestinian education : it
savored of Epiphanius' temper and impress.

His education on the religious side was in the Nicene faith as professed by the Catholic
Church in the East, to which the monks remained, not always thoughtfully faithful, in all that
stormy period. As Sozomen says, the people were unable to follow the refinements of theo-
logical discussion, and took their cue from those whose lives seemed better than that of the
ordinary clergy. He had, however, no close drill in the arguments /r^ and r<9;;, judging from
his own declarations of inability to follow the various aspects of Arian discussion. After
citing the letter of Gregory Nazianzen to Nectarius, in which the distinctive features of the
heresy of Apolinarius are given, he supplements: "What I have said, may, I think, suffice to
show the nature of the sentiments maintained by Apolinarius and Eunomius. If any one desire
more detailed information, I can only refer him to the works on the subject, written either by
them or by others, concerning these men. I do not profess easily to understand or to expound
these matters" (cTrei ifxal ovre (TvvLevat to. TOiavra, ovre fJieTacf>pd^av euTrere?, vi. 27). And when
he enumerates the causes of rupture among the Eunomians, " I should be prolix were I to enter
into further particulars ; and indeed the subject would be by no means an easy one to me, since
I have no such dialectic skill" (cTrei fX-qBe €/A7retpws exw rtLv TOiovT(x)v Sta\€$e(i)v, vii. 17). It would
seem, then, that his logical training had not been of a very deep quality, and yet it must be
said that such definitions and arguments as he does state in the history of controversy are
orderly and lucid. Metaphysics also seems to have had no large place in his earlier studies ; but
he certainly did become familiar with its later theological terms and distinctions, and he draws a
clear line between the various contestants who warred for and against consubstantiality. His read-
ing also covered some philosophical speculations, as one gathers from a sentence in v. 6, " For it
is not true, as some assert, that as is the body, so is the soul." He probably also early learned to
distinguish between ontology and ethics, by the practical lines drawn between the clerical disputant
and the monastic philosopher. A sentence in his history of Meletius, bishop of Antioch (iv. 28),
emphasizes this difference as we seldom find it in early Christian literature : " In his first
discourse he confines himself to instructing the people in what we call ethics {tov'; Ka\ov/x€vov<i
tjOlkov:; \6yovi), and then openly declared the Son to be of the same substance as the Father."

His spirit was taught to enslave itself with legalistic fetters, and where he does rise above
them, it is with trembling misgivings ; he had a side for larger things, like Socrates, due probably
to his profession, but he was afraid to venture quite so far, and yet he is magnanimous as compared
with the better educated and clerical Theodoret.

To those early school years we must also attribute his statement, that he was a witness to the
fidelity of Zeno, bishop of Majuma, the seaport of Gaza. " It is said, and I myself am witness
of the truth of the assertion, that when he was bishop of the church in Majuma, he was never
absent at morning or evening hymns, or any other worship of God. unless attacked by some
malady; and yet he was at this period an old man, being nearly a hundred years of age"
(vii. 28). The patriarch's self-support and industry were in like manner the object of his youth-
ful admiration. The struggle of the bishop of Gaza to assert his jurisdiction over Majuma, the
seaport which had its own episcopate, and desired to retain its ecclesiastical autonomy, after it


196 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


had lost its civil independence, Sozomen speaks of as happening in his day, and was one of the
news of his youth ; and one catches in his statement an inner satisfaction with the decision of
the council which recognized the freedom of the Christian community by the sea (v. 3). In
connection with public worship, he had very likely heard in those earlier days the reading of
the Apocalypse of Peter. He says in vii. 19, "Thus the book entitled the Apocalypse of
Peter, which was considered altogether spurious by the ancients, is still read in some of the
churches of Palestine, on the day of preparation, when the people observe a fast in memory
•of the passion of the Saviour." And a favorite book he saw in the hands of the monks of his
native land, was the Apocalypse of Paul, "although unrecognized by the ancients" (vii. 19).
A familiarity with such books gives a key to his later attitude toward prophecy.

There is no evidence as to what persuaded him to study law, nor do we know when he was
enrolled as a student. The fact that he mentions the school of Berytus as the place where Bishop
Triphyllius had prosecuted jurisprudence for so long a while (i. 11) can hardly be taken as a sug-
gestion of Sozomen's own residence there. It would have been more likely for him to have attended
lectures at the University of Alexandria or Antioch, with which cities he shows a considerable
acquaintance. His studies were probably based on the Codex Gregorianus, with its supplement,
the Codex Hermogenianus ; for it was in his own day, and during the writing of his history,
that the Codex Theodosianus was begun, and one is sorry to miss his name from the list of its
compilers ; and it was not until a.d. 439, that it was proclaimed as the text-book of imperial law.
That he was admitted to the practice of that profession, we have direct evidence, as in the case
of Evagrius, {H. E. vi. 7) while as to Socrates, it is simply an uncertified tradition. Sozomen
speaks of his afflicted friend Aquilinus (ii. 3), "who is even at the present time residing with us,
and is an advocate in the same courts of justice as that to which we belong." From the tenor
of the legal notices in his history it is likely that he practiced in the episcopal courts as well ; for
these had assumed form, and the function of an advocate is regulated in several synodical canons.
He is more careful and systematic in stating the course of important legislation with regard to
religion and the Church, than any other historian. Thus under Constantine, i. 3, 5, 8, 9, 21, 23,
ii. 32; under Constantius, iii. 17, iv. 15; under Julian, v. 5, 15, 17; under Jovian, vi. 3;
Valens, vi. 12, 19; Gratian, vii. i ; Gratian and Theodosius, vii. 4; under Theodosius, vii. 9,
12, 16, 20, 25, viii. 4 ; Valentinian, ii. (Justina), vii. 13; Arcadius, viii. 7, 24. There is no
instance of his own practice such as Evagrius gives (//'. E. vi. 7).

We can only guess at the time of his settlement in Constantinople. One would judge from
his narrative, that he was not there during the riots excited by the deposition of Chrysostom,
A.D. 404. He may have arrived a little after the elevation of Atticus to the see, as successor to
Arsacius, who had followed John, somewhere about 406, a year before the death of the orator,
and two years before the decease of the Emperor Arcadius. Under the sage Anthemius, he was
finding his way in his profession. Under Pulcheria, one is inclined to suppose that he obtained
some recognition. The capital thereafter remained the center of his practice, and he appears
to be still in connection with the dikasteries while he is writing the second book of his history
(ii. 3). There are a few personal points in his life at the imperial city which he hints at. Thirty-
five stadia overland from the city, toward the Pontus, was Hesti?e ; owing to an appearance of
the Archangel Michael, a temple was built there, and, as a consequence, called Michaelium. It
became noted for its curative properties, both for physical and mental disorders. Sozomen him-
self had been afflicted, how, he does not tell us, — whether by reverses, or dangers, or disease,
or other sufTering, — but he resorted thither and testifies to the benefit he received (ii. 3). There
is another personal incident which he records in ix. 2. He was a spectator of the splendid
ceremonials connected with the discovery and transfer of the remains of the Forty Martyrs : he
saw the costly caskets, the festival, and the procession ; he heard the music of the commemorative
odes, and beheld the deposit of the relics by the body of St. Thyrsus. A number of other spec-
tators whom he knew were there, the greater part of whom were living at the writing of his record.


INTRODUCTION. 197

This celebration took place much later, under the episcopate of Proclus ; therefore after the year
434. A final personal hint is given in his statements of the overthrow of Uldis. Concerning the
remnant of the Sciri, who as a result of that campaign were scattered as slaves over Asia Minor,
he remarks, " I have seen many in Bithynia, near Mt. Olympus, living apart from one another,
and cultivating the hills and valleys of that region " (ix. 15). As to the nature of this tour, we
know nothing. He must have been active in many of the later ecclesiastical and secular matters
which he narrates, for the first endeavor of his history is to mention the affairs in which he was
concerned (/u.£/Avi7o-o/utat 8e -n-payfiariov ots TraptTvxov, i. i). We Can only deplore that he makes
no sign, in the unfolding story, possibly some might have been indicated had he completed his
ninth book.

The influential circles of the Eastern and Western capital were divided into parties on a
variety of themes. One such, on the lines of culture, we have already considered. A second
and very decisive one, was the question whether the foreigners, especially the Goths and the
Persians, should be admitted into the service of the state. The stronger body believed in the use
and incorporation of these new elements. What before was a variable matter, became a fixed
policy under Theodosius the Great, and in all directions. His weak sons were controlled by both
factions alternately. Anthemius, Pulcheria, and Theodosius II. adhered in the main to the
hberal view. Yet the presence of a cry, Rome for the Romans, could overthrow such a man as
Stilicho, and elevate such a weakling as Olympius. Sozomen, from his handling of the events,
allied himself with the illiberal cabal ; and while he sought room for a representation of foreign
Christianity in his book, nevertheless opposed the intrusion of at least the northern element into
the offices of the empire.

There was a third line of cleavage among the people and the court. A very strong and
persistent faction set itself against the admission of pagans and Arians into political position.
These two dying elements often combined to save themselves from extinction. The court itself
fluctuated, because the Germanic politicians were mostly Arian, and the best scholars of political
science were pagans. Exigencies compelled the recognition of masters like Anthemius and
Troilus. Sozomen threw in his lot with the narrower clique. He does not condescend to men-
tion the best statesman of his time, or the wisest political thinker. Socrates does, and with
admiration. The portrayal of Alaric is from the estimate of him as a leader in whom the hopes
of pagans and Arians revived. Gainas is traduced, because he was the rallying-point of expiring
Arianism in the East.

Sozomen, as we have seen, sided also with the majority in honoring the monastic life, which
was bitterly opposed by many politicians and ecclesiastics. Naturally, therefore, he regarded life
from a more pietistic standpoint, than did the court under the leadership either of Eudoxia or
Eudocia. He responded to the puritanism of Chrysostom and Pulcheria.

He is a defender of Chrysostom, and answers such criticisms as Socrates has made. We can
scarcely doubt that his heart was with the Johnites, although he may not have entered their
separatist communion.

We can gather from intimations in his history that Sozomen had traveled somewhat. He
shows a better knowledge of Palestine, than even Epiphanius ; he must have kept up his con-
nection with his native land to have been so well informed as to its traditions, places, and
customs. Naturally the greater part of this interest centers in Gaza and its neighborhood, as his
old home. In ii. i, 2, his story of the invention of the Cross and the holy buildings erected by
Helena, improves on the original, by local detail and color. In ii. 4, he enlarges upon the
Eusebian account of Constantine's purgation of Mamre or Terebinthus, as one familiar with the
spot and with its fair. In ii. 5, he gives a bit of history of Gaza and Majuma under Constan-
tine. In ii. 20, he narrates the election of Maximus as bishop of Jerusalem, from a source which
no one else has used. In iii. 14, his biographical notices of Hilarion, Hesychas, and others,
indicate an exact topographical knowledge. The Julian edict gives occasion to state the


198 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

dissensions between Gaza and its seaport (vii. 3). Quite graphic is the martyrology of Gaza and
its vicinity, given in v. 9. In discussing JuUan's outrage on the image of Christ at Paneas (v. 27),
and the miraculous well at Nicopolis, formerly Emmaus, we see signs of local acquaintanceship.
In V. 22, Julian is said to write to the patriarchs, and rulers, and people, asking for their prayers
for himself and his empire ; here is a distinct reference to the then existing patriarchate ; so all
the details of the attempted restoration betray a well-informed hand, as well as state the fact
of direct communication with the witnesses of the phenomena. The biographies in vi. 32 are
bound up with Southern Palestine, and particularly with Bethelia and Gerar. Similar lives in
vii. 28, of those more closely related to him, easily prove that he was near home. In viii. 13,
Scythopolis is selected by the fugitive Egyptian monks, because its many palms afforded them
their customary means of support, — a circumstance narrated by no one else. Nor are local hints
wanting in the story of the finding of Zachariah's body (ix. 17), with its legends. There is in
one sense a disproportionate mention of Palestine, and designedly, not only from patriotic
motives, but from a desire to vindicate its historic position in the development of Church history,
and to rebuke the prevailing tendency of churchmen and historians to press it into the back-
ground. It is a curious juxtaposition, that the councils of Chalcedon should so soon after have
vindicated the primacy of Jerusalem. There is also a better acquaintance with the facts and
purposes of Jewish history, the relation of Judaism to Christianity (i. i) ; the genesis of the
Saracens, and their association with the covenant people (vi. 38) ; the regulations of the paschal
season, especially in vii. 18; as well as a greater accuracy in the transliteration of names of
places.

It was no inconsiderable journey from Gaza to his school, and from his school to Constantino-
ple. The hints concerning Palestine, already mentioned, indicate personal observation. Beyond
these we have suggestions that may look to his having been in Arabia and Cyprus, as, when he
speaks (vii. 19) of knowing the custom in both places, to have a chorepiscopus at the head of
a local church. So, too, in Alexandria, he was struck with the strange position of the bishop
in not rising when the Gospels were read, something he had never known or heard of in other
communities, — words which point to familiarity with that city. One would be glad to think of his
having visited Tarsus, since he was acquainted with Cilix, a presbyter of that city, whom he con-
sulted about the origin of the Apocalypse of Paul (vii. 19). That he knew Bithynia from the sight
of it, we have already seen (ix. 5). He describes or alludes to architectural or topographic
features of Alexandria, Antioch, and possibly Edessa, in a way that scarcely leaves a doubt of his
having seen those cities ; we may suppose that his cHentelage would compel journeys to and fro.

His work abounds with allusions to structures and regions of Constantinople, to say nothing of
its vicinity. The general description of the building of the city by Constantine (ii. 3) already
gives some of its principal features. Of the churches, he mentions the first of those dedicated to
the Archangel St. Michael (ii. 3), at some remove from the city (Hestiae, Michaelium), and
to be distinguished from a later structure on the opposite shore, and one in the city, erected
to the same patron angel ; ^ — the church of the Apostles, which became the place of sepul-
ture for emperors and even bishops (ii. 34, iv. 21, viii. 10) ; — the church of Acacius the
martyr (iv. 21), to which Macedonius endeavored to remove the coffin of Constantine; — the
church of Sophia (iv. 26), begun by Constantine, and dedicated under Constantius, with which
was connected a baptistery (viii. 21); this great edifice was burned in the tumult which arose
after the second exile of Chrysostom was announced (viii. 22) ; — the house of prayer begun by
Chrysostom and completed by Sisinnius, containing the tomb of the martyred Notaries ; this
was outside the walls, in a spot previously devoted to the execution of criminals, and an object
of dread, because of frequenting ghosts (iv. 3); — the church of the Novatians, situated in
a part of the city called Pelargum ; this was taken down by them and transferred to a suburb

* Procopius de j^dificis, i. 3, 8.


INTRODUCTION. 199


named Sycae, hence the edifice was entitled Anastasia ; it was restored to its original spot under
Julian (iv. 20) ; — the little dwelling which was converted into a house of prayer for Gregory
Nazianzen, and so became a church, also called Anastasia (vii. 5) ; — the church reared by
Macedonius, which received the name of Paul, bishop of Constantinople, when Theodosius
removed the confessor's body to that building ; it is described as a spacious and distinguished
temple (vii. 10) ; when Theodosius the Great conveyed the head of John the Baptist to
Hebdomas, in the suburbs, where was the seventh milestone, he erected on that site a spacious
and magnificent temple, which became a center of imperial devotion and miraculous cures (vii.
21, 24, viii. 4, 14) ; — the church reared in honor of St. Stephen, the proto-martyr (viii. 24) ;
— the church dedicated to the memory of St. Mocus the Martyr, where Dioscorus was buried
(viii. 17).; — the place where the body of Thyrsus the Martyr reposed, and whither the relics of
the forty soldiers were transferred (ix. 2) ; this was a temple, according to Procopius.^ In
Chalcedon, he mentions the church of St. Euphemia, so glowingly described by Evagrius, and
that of SS. Peter and Paul in the Oak (Ruffinum).

While he speaks of the number of monks and nuns, in and about Constantinople (iv. 2, viii.
9), and alludes in a general way to their dwellings (iv. 20), he mentions no particular establish-
ment except that founded by Marathonius, which stood in Sozomen's time. He also refers to
the Xenodochia, the Nosocomia, the Cherotrophia, and the Ptochotrophia (iv. 20, 27, viii. 9),
but he does not specialize, not even concerning the group of institutions founded and endowed
by Pulcheria (ix. 8). There were residences for the bishops and clergy, but these are only
hinted at (vii. 14, viii. 14). The palaces and the forums are mentioned only in a general
way, but the splendid council chamber (/u-eyto-ros o'kos riys a-vyKXrjTov (3ovX.rj<:), which was burned
with the Sophia, is described as south of that edifice. He refers to the Hippodrome in the third
region, with a little description of its early form and place (vi. 39, viii. 21). Certain of the
eight public baths are mentioned, the commodious thermae called after Zeuxippus (iii. 9) is set
forth as a conspicuous and large structure, and the palace as adjoining it near the sea-side.
This was in the second region. He speaks correctly of baths bearing the names of Anastasia and
Carosa, daughters of Valens, standing in his own time (vi. 9). The baths of Constantius are
characterized as very spacious when he tells us how the followers of John resorted thither for the
pascnal feast (viii. 21).

We have some brief notices of a few friends outside the earlier circles in Bethelia and Gaza.
By the advice of some pious acquaintances, who were versed in the mysteries, he decided not to
publish the Nicene symbol (i. 20). Among those who experienced relief at the Michaelium,
was a fellow-advocate, Aquilinus ; the story of his cure is told us from Sozomen's own observation,
and from the statements made by his colleague (ii. 3). He was on good terms with Cilix, the
venerable presbyter of Tarsus (vii. 19). He had a friend or friends, who were cognizant of
affairs under Theophilus (viii. 12) ; and similarly with some who had been intimate with
Chrysostom (viii. 9). It is not unlikely that he knew Nicarete in her old age, a lady of
Bithynia remarkable for her sacrificial life, whose memory is preserved by him alone (viii. 23).
The facts which he brings to light concerning Pulcheria, and the submission of his work to the
younger Theodosius, shows that he was received graciously by both.

PART II. — SozoMEN AS Author.

When seized with a desire to write history, Sozomen says : " I at first felt strongly inclined to
trace the course of events from the very commencement, but on reflecting that similar records of
the past, up to their own time, had been compiled by those wisest of men, Clemens and Hege-
sippus, successors of the Apostles, by Africanus, the historian, and by Eusebius, surnamed
Pamphilus, a man intimately acquainted with Sacred Scriptures and the writings of the Greek

' de yEdificis, i. 4.


200


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


poets and historians, I merely drew up an epitome in two books, of all that is recorded to have
happened to the churches, from the ascension of Christ to the deposition of Licinius." This
work is unfortunately lost. It was not a simple chronicle, but an abbreviated account of these
events ; the abridgment was probably from the authors mentioned above. The habit of succinct
narration is quite in his later vein. He doubtless commingled secular with the sacred detail.
It may be suggestingly asked, whether his words in ix. i do not give a hint of another work :
" But I willingly for awhile pass over the many separate manifestations of divine favor, that were
granted to the sister of the emperor, as proofs that she was loved of God, lest anybody should
blame me, for having set out to do other things, and yet had turned to the use of encomiums."
This sudden arrest could not be owing to an intended resumption of such matters at a later
portion of the history ; for the method was already regarded as irrelevant, and the very reason for
citing no more in that vein ; is it not likely that he at least purposed an encomium of Pulcheria?

The attempt of Hieronymus, Wolf, Lambec, and Fenzel to ascribe Hermias' ^Laavpfios tQ)v I^w
(f>L\oa6cf)wv {IrHsio gentiliutn philosophorum) to Sozomen, because of identity of name, is now
held by none.' The work by which we know him, is the Ecclesiastical History in nine Books.
When did he write it ? In trying to determine the time of its production, let us look at the data
suggested in his work.

(i) In the dedication, the deUneation of the emperor's culture and character discloses a man
of fixity and repose ; these qualities could not be ascribed to the time of his imperial majority, in
his fifteenth year, nor to the time of his marriage (421) ; they are rather the features of settled
experience ; hence we would expect in general a period nearer the end of his reign, than one in
the beginning or middle ; certainly somewhere beyond his thirtieth year, and therefore beyond
A.D. 438.

(2) Sozomen says that poets and authors, even those of prefectural dignity, as well as other
subjects, celebrated the emperor. The usual literary incense was burned. Olympiodorus dedicated
his history to him. Socrates was magniloquent; and more particularly did Cyrus, the friend
of Eudocia, who attained the highest offices of the state from 439-441, write epigrams in praise
of his monarch.* This would make a date after 441.^

(3) In illustration of the practiced self-control of his sovereign, he narrates an incident of the
royal journey in the summer heat, through Bithynia, to the fallen city of Heraclea, in Pontus,*
with the view of restoring it. This journey took place in June of a.d. 443.* This incident is
introduced with npilj-qv, which would place the writing quite definitely as not very soon after
June 443.

(4) The reign of Theodosius is described as above all others bloodless and pure from slaughter.
This could only be moderately just, before the judicial murders connected with the jealous fits
of Theodosius, from 442 on, and the united movement of outlying nations upon the East and
West, as projected by the political sagacity of Attila.

(5) The professed terminus of his history is the seventeenth consulate of Theodosius : this
was the year 439 ; hence the whole work was written after that time.

(6) The prayer at the conclusion of the proemium may have in it a point of light ; he hopes
that through the favor of Christ, the imperium may be transmitted to Theodosius' sons and
grandsons. The only child born to Eudocia was a daughter, Eudoxia, who was married to
Valentinian III. It was because of the lack of succession, that Pulcheria married General
Marcianus. Eudocia withdrew from the court somewhere between 441-443, but that would not
have had to impede the succession, had Theodosius chosen to be divorced ; and this prayer
rather intimates the desirability of another marriage. This, therefore, must have been written


> Otto, Cor/. W//. Vol. ix. (Migne, P. G. vi.).
' See his epigrams in A nth. Gr.

' Giildenpinning thinks there may be a suggestion of the fatal
apple in Sozomen's praise of his sovereign's abstemiousness. I


would like to agree, but cannot. Die Kirchengtsch. des Thecdoret
von Kyrrhns, pp. 12, 13.

* Heraclea Pontica of the maps.

' Marcell. Am. Chron. s. d.; Chron. Pasch. 1. d.; Novell.
Theod. xxiii. 5, 21.


INTRODUCTION. 201


before the hope of sons was removed ; certainly, therefore, before the closing years of the
emperor's reign.

(7) In Book ix, Pulcheria's inclination to virginity is spoken of as expressed in the most
solemn way, and with the consecrated gift of a table to signalize it. There is no hint in the work
of the marriage with Marcian, suggested by Theodosius on his death-bed, and carried out after
his demise. This would indicate that the work was completed before 450.

(8) In ix. I, he affirms : "That new heresies have not prevailed in our times, we shall find to
be due especially to her, as we shall subsequently see." The heresies are those connected with
Nestorianism, 428-444, and possibly the return of the Johannists to full communion by the
triumphal restoration of Chrysostom's remains in 438 ; these were to fall within the limits of his
work. The Eutychean heresy in its first stage was hostile to Pulcheria's views, while its overthrow
was not effected until a year after the death of Theodosius. The close of the Nestorian contro-
versy through the compromise was in 444, and that date would suit well with the fact of master-
ing the heresy at the very time he was writing this account of Pulcheria.

(9) la ix. 2, he recounts the transfer of the forty martyrs, after a public festival had been
appropriately celebrated with fitting honor and pomp, with psalms, " at which I myself was
present ; and others who were present can also bear testimony that these things were done in
the way described, for almost all of them still survive. And the event occurred much later, when
Proclus governed the church of Constantinople." Proclus was elected 434, and continued in
office until his death in 447. This transfer must have taken place before 439, the proposed
terminus of the history, and very likely a little while after the accession of this long-tried candi-
date. The time of the writing was at some considerable remove from the event itself, because
of his appeal to the survivors as witnesses to the truth of his portrayal, and yet not so far, but that
the most of the participants and spectators could still be appealed to. This would correspond very
well with the date connected with 443, suggested by the incident in Bithynia, if we allow some
interval between the writing of the dedication and Book ix.

(10) In ix. 6, the overthrow of Uldis, 406, is narrated. The settlement of the conquered
Sciri as slaves and colonists is enlarged upon. Sozomen himself saw these imperial farmers at
their tilling in Bithynia. This may connect itself, possibly, as to the time of the year, and place,
with the emperor's progress to Heraclea Pontica. There is evidently an interval between the
capture of the Sciri, and their settled work as colonists, when Sozomen visited that region, and
between that visit and the writing of the fact. If it corresponded with the imperial progress,
it would of course be 443. Taking all these points together, it would seem that the work was
begun about the latter part of 443 ; and that the dedication was written first, because that states
the plan of the whole work, including the ninth book, whose . .xord does not meet the intention,
there expressed ; moreover, some of the events in Book ix. indicate a considerable interval
between the fact and the account of it. When he finished what he wrote, it is not so easy to
tell ; it would certainly take him a few years, and the end was reached before any considerable
outbreak of the Eutychean heresy ; therefore probably in 447, or 448, for the reason that
Pulcheria did not conquer that heresy until after her marriage with Marcian ; this date is supported
by the fact that the breaking of her vow was unknown to the writer of ix. i , 3 ; also because the
Emperor Theodosius was still alive. The work was the fruit and employment of old age ; the
style is certainly that of an elderly man, and not that of youth or early maturity.

What were the main objects he had in view in his history?

I. He desired to present the truth with regard to the facts and their results. In i. i, he
affirms : " I will readily transcribe fully from any work that may tend to the elucidation of
tmth." " Still, as it is requisite, in order to maintain historical accuracy, to pay the strictest
attention to the means of eliciting truth, I felt myself bound to examine all writings of this
class, according to my ability." This is his professed purpose ; however subjective or churchly
his view of truth may be, we must give him the credit for the intention. In i. i, he appeals


202 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

to his readers in this wise : " Let not an impertinent or malignant spirit be imputed to me, for
having dwelt upon the disputes of ecclesiastics among themselves, concerning the primacy
and pre-eminence of their own heresy. In the first place, as I have already said, a historian
ought to regard everything as secondary in importance to truth." And we shall see evidences
of his fairness.

2. His history is designed to be a demonstration of Christianity as from God. The vastness
of the change wrought by God in the introduction and success of Christianity and the insignificant
and mythical themes upon which literature had been wont to exercise itself, prompted him, with
his confessed inefficiency, to undertake this line of evidence, in the conviction that God would
help his believing incapacity. Hence his work is a record of immediate divine interventions, and
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit ; it abounds in visions, miracles, and prophecy. The celestial
agents visibly direct affairs ; the flow of vaticination does not cease ; the power to reverse the
expected order of events is not suspended. Thus, as to epiphanies of divine, angelic, or sainted
beings : In i. 3, is recounted the appearance of the cross unto Constantine ; and in the night
during sleep, the manifestation of Christ with a cross, and the instructions given to the emperor.
In ii. I, we have a series of divine interpositions to discover the true cross, and Sozomen remarks
in refutation of one explanation, " I do not think that human information is requisite, when God
thinks it best to make manifest the same." In ii. 3, the old name, Hestise, is changed to
MichaeHum, because of the reported appearance of the archangel there. The monks are favored
with such direct counselors ; Pachomius obeys an angel, who directs him to assemble young men
for instruction ; " he was frequently admitted to intercourse with the holy angels." Apollonius
)delded to direct divine advice, and withdrew from the desert to a populous region. The cross
reappeared in the days of Constantius (iv. 5) ; Julian's Hfe is filled with portents (v. i, 20, 22 ;
vi. 2). A curious bit of speculation occurs in vi. 2; in interpreting Julian's alleged use of
his blood, he says : " I know not whether the approach of death, as is wont to be the case, when
the soul is in the act of being separated from the body, and when it is enabled to behold diviner
spectacles than is allotted to men, that Julian might then have beheld Christ. Few allusions have
been made to this subject ; and yet I dare not reject this hypothesis as absolutely false, for God
often suffers still more improbable and astonishing events to take place, in order to prove that
the religion named after Christ is not sustained by human energy." Of Theodore's confession
(v. 20) he remarks : " It is said that he was afterwards asked whether he had been sensible
of any pain on the rack ; and that he replied he had not been entirely free from suffering,
but had his pain assuaged by the attentions of a young man who had stood by him, and had
wiped off the perspiration with the finest linen cloth, and supplied him with coolest water, by
which he eased the inflammation and refreshed his labors. I am convinced that no man, what-
ever magnanimity he may possess, is capable without the special assistance of divine Power,
of manifesting such entire indifference about the body." In vi. 29, Piammon sees an angel
standing near the holy table, and writing down in a book the names of the monks who were
present, while he erased the names of those who were absent. Mark had the elements of the
holy table administered to him by an angel (vii. 29). Malachion, while journeying with his
brothers, was made invisible, and then reappeared, and pursued his way with them (vi. 32). So
the portent at Hebdomas was a sign of divine favor to Theodosius the Great (vii. 24) ; the heavenly
hosts were the real overthrowers of Gainas (viii. 4) ; Basiliscus the martyr appears to Chrysostom
(viii. 28). Pulcheria's celestial directors helps her to find the forty martyrs (ix. 2). The appear-
ance of Zechariah to the serf pointed out the way to the discovery of the prophet's remains (ix. 1 7).
The demoniacal agencies are equally operant, some of which are alluded to in the above passages,
but readily yield to prayer and exorcism, if not immediately overthrown by God.

For a demonstration of the same tnith, miracles are wrought to effect physical cures, mental
troubles, threatened dangers, casting out of demons, silencing philosophers and wordy ecclesias-
tics, vindicating orthodoxy, reading the thoughts of hypocrites defeating enemies, sanctifying


INTRODUCTION. 203


the sacraments, raising the dead ; and they are the mighty agents for converting philosophers,
Jews, pagans, and heretics. They are wrought by the hands of the eminently excellent only ; the
gift is associated with a high measure of grace; for example the bishops Paphnutius (i. 10)
and Spyridion (i. 11) are so endowed ; Alexander of Constantinople (i. 14), Eusebius of Emesa
(iii. 6), Martin of Tours (iii. 14), Arsacius of Nicomedia (iv. 16), Donatus (vii. 26), Gregory of
Neocaesarea (vii. 26), Theotimus of Scythia (vii. 26), Epiphanius of Salamis (vii. 27). In like
manner, the monks Antony (i. 13), Amun (i. 14), Eutychianus (i. 14), Macarius the Egyptian,
Apollonius, Hilarion, Julian (iii. 14), John, Copres, Helles, Apelles, Eulogius (vi. 28) ; Apollos,
John of Diolchus, Benjamin and Pior (vi. 29). The united prayer of a congregation could effect
them (vii. 5). The statue of Christ at Paneas, the fountain at Emmaus, the tree at Hermopolis
(v. 21), were all miraculous centers. The spot where the Archangel Michael appeared (ii. 3),
the places where the head of John the Baptist reposed (vii. 21), the tombs of monks, martyrs
and bishops, — as of Hilarion (iii. 14), Martyrius and Marcianus (iv. 3), Epiphanius (vii. 27), —
were replete with restorative virtues. Sozomen had such a miracle wrought upon himself; he
believed thoroughly in an uninterrupted stream of charismata ; he deemed it necessary for the
maintenance of the faith. He was no more credulous than Socrates, or Theodoret, or Evagrius,
or Theodore. To criticise him for his belief in this respect is to forget the Christian conscious-
ness of the age. And the historic school which seeks to eliminate the volume of testimony, in
the assumption that miracles do not fall within the province of history, ignores the first law of
that science, which requires the reproduction of all facts, in time and place, whatever they may
be, that are afiiliated with the evolution of the human will ; that other older school which dis-
misses all ecclesiastical miracles on the a priori assumption that these energies ceased at a time
co-ordinate with the death of the Apostles, or at a point not far removed from their age, violates
the spirit of induction. These miracles must be tested by evidence, and the laws of super-
natural energy, and in no other way. To Sozomen and all his contemporaries the miracle
appeared essential both to the proof of the divine origin of Christianity, and to offset and with-
stand the influence of the theurgic arts of the philosophers, such as Julianus and many of the
Neoplatonists. As he remarks concerning the reply made by Alexander, bishop of Constan-
tinople, when he silenced the philosopher by the simple authority of Christ, " It is then right to
consider whether it is a greater miracle, that a man, and he a philosopher, should so easily be
silenced by a word, or that a stone wall should be cleft by the power of a word, which miracle
I have heard some attribute with pride to Julian, surnamed the Chaldean " (i. 18). The gift
of prophecy is also represented as sustained throughout this period, and with the same logical
aims in view. The monks are especially thus endowed : Antony (i. 13, vi. 5, 6), the two Macarii,
Pachomius (iii. 14), Arsacius (iv. 16), John (vi.. 28, vii. 22, vii. 28), Theon (vi. 28), Isaac
(vi. 40) ; so the bishops Athanasius (iv. 10), Chrysostom and Epiphanius, rather abusively
(viii. 15) ; so royal persons, such as the wife of Valens, passively (vi. 16), Pulcheria, directly and
passively (ix. 3). The perpetuation of this charism was deemed inherently necessary for the
sake of historical continuity, and to prove as well that the faith he loved had been established
by God ; equally was it requisite as a holy parallel whereby to gainsay the mantic spirit of
Paganism; as is best illustrated in the silencing of the oracle at Daphne (v. 19), and by his
reflections upon the philosopher's tripod devised for finding the successor of Valens (vi. 35). Nor
are Socrates, Theodoret, Evagrius, and others any more moderate than Sozomen in this respect.

3. Another aim of his history is to prove that Providence or the divine government is pro-
moting the Christian faith directly. The universal order must be interpreting itself distinctly
through the Church. The Father must be vindicating the good and punishing the wicked,
according to the orthodox category. Sozomen's history is as insistent in this regard as Eliphaz
and his philosophic confreres. One must be able to decide infallibly in each case as to cause
and effect ; it is a very realistic pragmatism, and is not the exclusive property of Sozomen ; it
is a characteristic of all these Church historians.


'204 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

There is properly enough a recognition of God in history ; the sovereign will and the human
will are jointly working out the world's order, but it is the attempt to trace the cause and effect
immediately and in each case, which is so repulsive and absurd. Some illustrations will show how
he brings out this view. In i. 7 the comment made on Constantine's overthrow of Licinius :
" From many facts it has often appeared to me that the teaching of the Christians is supported,
and its advancement secured, by the Providence of God, and not the least from what then
occurred ; for at the very moment that Licinius was about to persecute all the churches under
him, the war in Bithynia broke out, which ended in a war between him and Constantine, and in
which Constantine was so strengthened by Divine assistance, that he was victorious over his
enemies by land and by sea." More of detail comes out in the life of Athanasius. Thus in ii.
I 7, of his election he says : " Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, when about to depart this life, left
Athanasius as his succcessor, in accordance, I am convinced, with the Divine will, directing the
vote upon him." And again : " He fled to escape the honor, but he was discovered in his place
of concealment by the help of God, who had forecast by Divine manifestations to his blessed
predecessors, that the succession was to devolve upon him." His whole career is so viewed in
v. 6. There is a large discussion of this subject in vi. 35, where he argues against the plan^of
pagan philosophers to foretell the future of the empire : " The philosophers, on the other hand,
acted as if the deposition and restoration of emperors had depended solely on them ; for if
the imperial succession was to be considered dependent on the arrangement of the stars, what
was requisite but to await the accession of the future emperor, whoever he might be ? Or, if the
succession was regarded as dependent on the will of God, what right had man to meddle ? For
it is not the function of human foreknowledge or zeal to understand God's thought ; nor if it were
right, would it be well for men, even if they be the wisest of all, to think that they can plan better
than God." He persists in tracing a connection between God and every event in favor of
mechanical goodness or orthodoxy. He follows many opponents, whether heretical or pagan,
with the Divine wrath ; all these historians do this, — Philostorgius, as well as Evagrius. Sozomen
is not nearly so bitter or uncharitable as either of these. He is most atrabilious in the case of
Julian, under whom his own family had suffered. As a consequence of this arbitrary pious prag-
matism, the most deplorable incompetents are treated as the express favorites of heaven, while
the larger-minded pagan or Arian is loaded with contempt. Under this law, too, the evil sides of
the orthodox, and the excellences of the pagan, or Arians, are suppressed. The defeats of the
Nicene emperors are not mentioned ; the victories of the Anti-Nicene are passed by or belittled,
while their humiliations are evidence of the impending anger of heaven. In the survey of
Helena's life (ii. 2) he says : " It seems to me that so many holy actions demanded a recom-
pense, and indeed even in this life she was raised to the summit of magnificence." As to Con-
stantine, in ii. 34 he dares say : " He was more successful than any other sovereign in all his
undertakings ; for he formed no design, I am convinced, without God." When Bishop Felix of
Rome died, and Liberius became sole occupant of the see, he construes the fact thus : " This
event was no doubt ordained by God, that the seat of Peter might not be dishonored by the
occupancy of two bishops ; for such an arrangement is a sign of discord, and is foreign to
ecclesiastical law" (iv. 15). In all the features of Julian's life, God is visiting him with his unap-
peasable anger (vi. 35, v. 21, 22, vi. i, 2). The election of Nectarius, though it was in viola-
tion of ecclesiastical order and an accumulation of ignorant blunders, did not take place without
the interposition of Divine strength (vii. 8). Theodosius is portrayed as the prime delight of
heaven; thus his simple reliance upon God wins him a hopeless battle with Eugenius (vii. 24),
It is so with the whole Theodosian line (viii. i, ix. i). Pulcheria has Divine love manifested
to her in manifold ways, as does her brother, Theodosius the Younger (ix. i, 3, 16). Even
Alaric is driven by an inexplicable impulse to rebuke the luxury, debauchery, and injustice of the
Romans (ix. 6). In ix. i, he says of his own sovereign: "It appears to me that it was the
design of God to show by the events of this period, that piety alone suffices for the salvation of


INTRODUCTION. 205


princes ; and that without piety, armies, a powerful empire, and every other resource, are of no
avail. The Divine power, which is the guardian of the universe, foresaw that the emperor would
be distinguished by his piety, and determined that Pulcheria, his sister, should be the protector
of him and of the government." In ix. 16, he explains his secular details in the paragraph:
" This is not the proper place to enter into details concerning the deaths of the tyrants ; but I
considered it necessary to allude to the circumstance in order to show, that to insure the stability
of imperial power, it is sufficient for an emperor to serve God with reverence, which was the
course pursued by Honorius." While of his patron he says : " It seems as if God openly
manifested His favor towards the present emperor, not only by disposing of warhke affairs in an
unexpected way, but also by revealing the sacred bodies of many persons who were of old most
distinguished for piety." The whole history is full of this sort of philosophy of its personages.
Similarly all natural calamities and the irruption of barbarians are ethically explained, which is cor-
rect enough as a general principle ; but these phenomena are punitive or vindicatory of particular
deeds. Constantius' course toward Athanasius was heralded by an invasion of the Franks, and by
an earthquake in the East (iii. 6). Of Julian he says: "It is, however, very obvious that
throughout the reign of this emperor, God gave manifest tokens of His displeasure and permitted
many calamities to befall several of the provinces of the Roman Empire. He visited the earth
with such fearful earthquakes, that the buildings were shaken, and no more safety could be found
within houses than in the open air." Then follow the inundations of the Nile ; the drought and
the famine in the empire, and on their heels the pestilences (vi. 2). Under Valens we read:
" In the meantime although hail-storms of extraordinary magnitude fell in various places, and
although many cities, particularly Nicaea in Bithynia, were shaken by earthquakes, yet Valens the
emperor and Eudoxius the bishop paused not in their career, but continued to persecute all
Christians who differed from them in opinion" (vi. 10). He does not make the same reflection
upon Constantius, when the earthquake at Nicomedia intercepted the meeting of a council
(iv. 16) ; Gainas' attempted revolution is " pre-announced by the appearance of a comet directly
over the city ; this comet was of extraordinary magnitude, larger, it is said, than any that had
previously been seen" (viii. 3). After Chrysostom's exile, "hailstones of extraordinary magni-
tude fell at Constantinople and in the suburbs of the city. Four days afterwards, the wife of the
emperor died. These occurrences were regarded by many as indications of Divine wrath, on
account of the persecutions that had been carried on against John " (viii. 27).

But the earthquakes and famines and invasions that happened under Theodosius the Great and
Theodosius Junior are not mentioned directly. By such unfair pragmatism Sozomen, as all his
fellow-historians, sought to answer the allegations, now more directly affirmed, in the period of
barbarian irruption, that the calamities were due to the desertion of the gods. Sulpicius Severus,
Augustine, and Orosius built up a somewhat better apology.

4. Another object he kept before him, we will let him state in his own words : "The doctrine
of the Catholic Church is shown to be especially the most genuine, since it has been tested fre-
quently by the plots of opposing thinkers ; yet, the disposal of the lot being of God, the Catholic
Church has maintained its own ascendancy, has re-assumed its own power, and has led all the
churches and the people to the reception of its own truth" (i. i). Catholicity and Orthodoxy,
as defined at Nicaea, are synonymous. The creed of the fathers is final. The Church which spoke
in 325 and 381 is the historic and Catholic Church, and the Theodosian line is the Divinely ap-
pointed instrument for laying its foundations immovably, the others having failed. Church and
State are to be indissolubly wedded. This faith is made mechanically the test of goodness and
badness, and this expresses his personal belief.

He speaks of the Scriptures with uniform reverence, and holds to the deoipia as the method
of interpretation, as we see in v. 22, where he says of the Jews: "They were only acquainted
with the mere letter of Scripture, and could not, like the Christians and a few of the wisest among
the Hebrews, discover the hidden meaning (tt/jos OoDptav) " ; yet he speaks with respect (viii. 2)


2o6 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

of Chrysostom's way of expounding the sacred records and of his " teacher Diodorus' method,
employed in the many books of that bishop," in which he explained the significance of the sacred
words and avoided allegory (<?cwpta). But when bishops and monks are declared to be skilled
in the Scriptures, it is in this mystical sense. His own grandfather was a solver of the amphibolies
of the Word, doubtless by this convenient key (v. 5).

The dogmatic standpoint, as we have seen, was traditionalism, toward which the Church gravi-
tated under the dictation of the councils, the influence of bishops like Athanasius, the almost uni-
form ictus of the Roman see, Ambrose, the Gregories, Basil the Great, Ephraim, F^usebius, and
Epiphanius, the majority of monks, and finally the whole force of the State. He opposes all
shades of Arianism, as also Apolinarianism ; had he completed his work, from what he says of
Pulcheria's conquest over heresies, he would have opposed the Nestorian views of the Theotokos.
But of Donatism and Cyprianism he has not a word. Of the anthropological struggles of the West
there is not a syllable. Here is the place, also, to consider his attitude toward heresies. Sozo-
men does not assail any phase of Arianism with the intemperate epithets which Eusebius employed
to condemn the earlier innovators, or such as abound in Theodoret and Evagrius and later histo-
rians. Indeed, he sometimes calls them Christians and members of the Catholic Church. His
treatment of the Novatians, while a little offish, is yet generous as compared with other writers,
except Socrates, from whom he obtains almost all their history ; he devotes much space ; he is
generally courteous in tone; and when he speaks of the proposed union (iv. 2) between the
Catholic Church and that body of believers, he omits the cause of the failure ; viz., the reluctance
of some legalistic Novatians to acquiesce, — a point which Socrates does not fail to expose. He
mentions Montanism (Phrygianism) several times, but with no new facts, save that they were
numerous in Phrygia in his day, and had peculiar Paschal usages (i. 6, ii. 18, 32, vii. 18, 19).
Of the Gnostic sects, he alludes to the Valentinians only, whose conventicles were repressed by
an edict of Constantius (ii. 32). The Manichseans are mentioned only as they are one of the
three sects excepted from Gratian's law of toleration (vii. i). Of the Pricillianists, whose
attempt at a world religion falls so wholly within his time, he says nothing. The Quartodecima-
nians are still numerous and tenacious (vii. 18). He has a bare allusion to the Encratites (v.
11). Of the Origenistic controversy, he has no more to say than he is compelled to, in order to
state correctly the conflict between Theophilus and Chrysostom. Over against the Origenists
he places the Anthropomorphists (viii. 12). Of Lucifer's separatism, he gives only the rise
(iii. 15). With all his emphatic adherence to the current orthodoxy, he must be regarded as
the most charitable of historians next to Socrates. Mention has already been made of his kindly
disposition toward the Novatians. When writing fully and favorably, as was his duty, about Aetius
(iii. 15), he is constrained to make an apology: "Let it not be accounted strange if I have
bestowed commendations upon the leaders or enthusiasts of the above-mentioned heresies. I
admire their eloquence and their impressiveness in discourse : I leave their doctrines to be judged
by those whose prerogative it is."

On the one hand, we find him insisting on the right of private judgment, as when he discusses
the overruling Providence in Julian's life, and especially on the infatuation which led the emperor
to Persia in spite of Sallust (vi. i ) : " This obser\'ation, however, is only inserted lest I should be
blamed for omitting it. I leave every one to form his own opinion." So, after discussing the use
of penance, he remarks in the following chapter (vii. 17) : "Such subjects as the above, how-
ever, are best left to the decision of individual judgment." He would also allow latitude in cere-
monials (vii. 19), as we shall see. On the other hand, he dreads the progressive and unsettling
outcome of the private judgment in exercise. He expresses this fear in iv. 27 : "The spirit of
innovation is self-laudatory ; hence it advanced farther and farther, and crept along to greater
novelties. With increasing self-conceit, and in scorn of the fathers, it enacted laws of its own.
Nor does it honor the doctrine of the ancients concerning God, but is always excogitating strange
dogmas and restlessly adds novelty to novelty, as the events now show."


INTRODUCTION. 207


Of the threatening strategies of free thought in his own day, he devoutly exclaimed : " That new
heresies have not prevailed in our times, we shall find to be due especially to her " (Pulcheria)
(ix. i). Consequently he deprecates the deleterious influence of polemics. On the accession of
Jovian, he says ; " The presidents of the churches now resumed the agitation of doctrinal ques-
tions and discussions. They had remained quiet during the reign of Julian, when Christianity
itself was endangered, and had unanimously offered up their supplications for the mercy of God.
It is thus that men, when attacked by foreign enemies, remain in accord among themselves ; but
when external troubles are removed, then internal dissensions creep in " (vi. 4 and in vi. 25).

" Thus do the private animosities of the clergy from time to time greatly injure the Church and
divide religion into many heresies ! And this is a proof; for had George, like Theodotus, received
Apolinarius, on his repentance, into communion, I believe that we should never have heard of the
heresy that bears his name. Men are prone, when loaded with opprobrium and contempt, to
resort to rivalries and innovations ; whereas, when treated with justice, they become moderate
and remain in the same position." More emphatic still is his protest in vi. 26 : "Those varying
dogmas are the source of innumerable troubles to religion, and many are deterred from embracing
Christianity by the diversity of opinion which prevails in matters of doctrine." In the beginning
of this same chapter, in speaking of the Eunomians, he delineates them thus : " They do not
applaud a good course of life or manner of conduct, or mercy towards the needy, unless
exhibited by persons of their own sect, so much as skill in disputation and the power of
triumphing in debates." This is a great blow at the sectores cymini, and at pride in polemics ;
the whole tone is much more liberal than that of the ecclesiastic Theodoret, or even the lawyer
Evagrius. Sozomen, like Socrates, represents a generous feeling current among the laymen
of Constantinople in court and among the trades and professions. The attitude of the
Catholic Church with regard to baptism, he sets forth adequately as trivial, and argues against
the Eunomian innovation of one baptism and a change in the formula (vi. 21) : "But whether
it was Eunomius or any other person who first made these innovations upon the tradition of
baptism, it seems to me that such innovators, whoever they may have been, were alone in
danger, according to their own representation, of quitting this life without having received
Divine baptism." The argument here is an unusually long one ; with his generation he held
to the magical efficacy of the rite. The theory of the sacraments as mysteries or arcana, was
one which controlled him throughout, and even limited his fidelity as a historian. Thus in
i. 20 : "I thought it necessary to reproduce the very document (the Nicene Creed) concerning
these matters, as an example of the truth, in order that posterity might possess in a fixed and
clear form, the symbol of that faith which proved pacifying at the time ; but since some pious
friends who understood such matters, recommended that these truths ought to be spoken of and
heard by the initiated and their initiators only, I agreed with their counsel : for it is not unlikely
that some of the uninitiated may read this book : while I have concealed such of the prohibited
material as I ought to keep silent about, I have not altogether left the reader ignorant of the
opinions held by the Synod." Nor will he repeat the symbol as subjoined to the letter of the
council of Antioch (vi. 4) ; and when the Macedonian commission to Liberius make their state-
ment, and the text is given to show their entire acceptance of the Nicene view, Sozomen will
not reproduce it. Again in vi. 29, Mark was a monk of " such eminent piety, that Macarius
himself, the presbyter of Celliae, declared that he had never given to him what priests present
to the initiated at the holy table ; but that an angel, administering it to him, whose hand up to
the forearm, he declared himself to have seen." In viii. 5, in giving the account of a marvelous
judgment wrought on a Macedonian wife, who pretended to be a convert to the Nicene views,
and thus frequented the orthodox ceremony of the Supper, he remarks, " At the time of the
celebration of the mysteries (the initiated will understand what I mean), this woman kept what
was given her, and held down her head as if engaged in prayer." In reciting the disturbances
at the Easter celebration over the decree of exile against Chrysostom (viii. 21), he says : " They


2o8 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OE SOZOMEN.

were charged with the commission of such disorderly acts as can be readily conceived by those
who have been admitted to the mysteries, but which I consider it requisite to pass over in silence,
lest my work should fall into the hands of the uninitiated." Here we have a glimpse of the scope
of the arcarta as well as the weakness of the historian in submitting to the advice of narrow
friends ; no other historian felt bound to restrict himself in such matters. Sozomen here joined
the most extreme sacramentarians of his day. On the weighty matter of discipline, he believes
with the Catholic Church in receiving back the penitent into the Church, against Novatian and
Donatistic practices. He expresses his opinion at some length, though not so fully as Socrates,
in the chapter which relates to the abolition of the penitential presbyter (vii. i6) : "Impecca-
bility is a Divine attribute, and belongs not to human nature ; therefore God has decreed that
pardon should be extended to the penitent even after many transgressions. As in supplicating
for pardon, it is requisite to confess the sin, it seems probable that the priests, from the begin-
ning, considered it irksome to make this confession in public, before the whole assembly of the
people. They appointed a presbyter of the utmost sanctity and the most undoubted prudence,
to act on those occasions : the penitents went to him and confessed their transgressions ; and it
was his office to indicate the kind of penance adapted to each sin, and then when satisfaction
had been made, to pronounce absolution." He deplores the abolition of the office as the
occasion of laxity. The deterrent force of public confession was now lost, and that to the danger
of Christian conduct. He sympathizes also with that form of martyrdom which wantonly and
ruthlessly assails paganism and is slain in the attempt. The system of relic-worship, so character-
istic of any decline of opportunity for heroic action, had set in overwhelmingly, and he believed
in it vigorously. Our own age reproduces the same tendency not only in religious, but in secular
forms, and among Protestants as well. Thus he commemorates : of Old Testament prophets,
Micah and Habakkuk (vii. 29), Zechariah (ix. 17); of the preparatory period, the head of
John the Baptist (vii. 21) ; of the Apostolic Church, St. Stephen (vii. 29, ix. 16) ; of the
martyrs, Babylas (v. 19), Forty Soldiers (ix. 2) ; of the monks, Hilarion (iii. 14), the four
brothers (vii. 9). The most prominent of secondary relics is the cross with its inscriptions and
nails (ii. i). The discovery of these is mainly through prayer and heavenly signs; their pos-
session is an object of imperial ambition ; the removal and transportation of them are effected
with most gorgeous and reverent pomp ; and the sacred treasures become the agents of endless
miracles.

Sozomen, like Socrates and Chrysostom, believes in freedom as to old-time ceremonials. H6
has a chapter on the varieties of religious usage (vii. 19) ; and the record is largely the result
of his own inquiry. He remarks in conclusion : " Many other customs are still to be observed
in cities and villages ; and those who have been brought up in their observance would, from
respect to the great men who instituted and perpetuated these customs, consider it wrong to
abolish them. Similar motives must be attributed to those who observe different practices in the
celebration of the fast, which has led us into this long digression." From his point of view,
uniformity may not encroach upon individualism beyond a certain point. He is certainly quietly
and with dignity attacking a party of narrow uniformitarians, who are already pressing for a
harmony of all ceremonials in Christendom.

Another feature of the Catholic system that he traces carefully, is the relation between Church
and Empire. He devotes more attention to this aspect of polity than to its internal develop-
ment ; this latter he touches upon incidentally, and not at all carefully. We have seen how
painstakingly he cites the imperial edicts with regard to the Church. The state laws, which
at first expressed conciliar decisions, were followed by independent im])erial enactments.
These, indeed, are at first sporadic, but become more and more the rule. The personal views
of Sozomen appear in the narrative, but they are fluctuating. He acquiesces in the imperial
convocation of councils, as do all his cotemporaries. ,0n the death of Constantine, in comment-
ing upon the hereafter fixed Christian character of the state, he says : " The sacerdotal dignity


INTRODUCTION. 209


is not only equal in honor to imperial power, but in sacred places even takes the ascendancy "
(ii. 34). With the plan of producing uniformity of religion in the empire, he seems to
sympathize (iv. 11). He is indignant at Julian's indifference to the murder of Zeno by the
inhabitants of Gaza, and at the deprivations of the Christians, when all their political and
personal rights were taken from them (v. 9). To the charge of Libanius, that the man who
aimed the dart at Julian was a Christian, and belonged to the race of habitual transgressors of
the law, Sozomen replies by defending the regicide : " In the documents above quoted, Liba-
nius clearly states that the emperor fell by the hand of a Christian ; and this probably was the
truth. It is not unlikely that some of the soldiers who then served in the Roman army might
have conceived the idea, since Greeks and all men until this day have praised tyrannicides, for
exposing themselves to death in the cause of liberty, and spiritedly standing by their country, their
famihes, and their friends. Still less is he deserving of blame, who for the sake of God and of reli-
gion, performed so bold a deed" (vi. 2). This is the highest stand that a lawyer could take in
support of individualism. In his view of the exalted prerogatives of the Church, the reply of Val-
entinian to the bishops, who desired to hold a council, would seem happy. " I am but one of the
laity, and have, therefore, no right to interfere in these transactions ; let the priests, to whom
such matters appertain, assemble where they please " (vi. 7). Theodosius' compulsory course
with regard to paganism and orthodoxy, and the choice of Nectarius, are approved. On the other
hand, he selected two instances out of many from the life of Ambrose, for the purpose of illustrat-
ing how, in God's behalf, that bishop conducted himself towards those in power (vii. 25).

Throughout we find him recognizing the practical headship of Rome ; he expresses himself
unconsciously in vi. 22, "The question having been thus decided by the Roman Church, peace
was restored and the inquiry ended." This ignores the action of the Synod of Alexandria and
that of Constantinople itself, for both had decreed the consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit and
opposed the christology of Apolinarius, prior to the action of the Roman Synod. The power
delegated to Julius by the council of Sardica (iii. 8), the conflict between tb** East and the
West conducted in mutually arrogant epistles (iii. 10), the subordination of new to old Rome
(vii. 9), show the drift toward concentration. Sozomen does not seem to understand the
rival movements of Alexandria under Athanasius and Theophilus ; nor the Eastern imperial
attempts to elevate Constantinople to the supremacy, nor the mutterings of Antiochan jealousy.

The Church's servility toward the orthodox rulers is fairly expressed, and yet with comparative
moderation, by Sozomen. He is an apologist for Constantine, and reflects, as do all the his-
torians, and especially Evagrius in his criticism of Zosimus, the adulations and subterfuges of
Eusebius. The religious fluctuation of that emperor is masked ; his crimes are suppressed ; he is
made to appear orthodox, even when at his worst Eusebian stage. No wonder that Philostorgius
charged the Homoousians with worshiping Constantine as a god in the ceremonies connected
with his image ! Constantius, a vacillating, cruel, incompetent, is also apologized for, but to the
damage of his intelligence. Julian, for his years in some respects, one of the most promising and
earnest rulers of ancient times, is loaded with obloquy, his highest motives and ideals ridiculed,
his victories belittled, his death savagely exulted in. Jovian's and Valentinian's toleration are not
understood, but their personal orthodoxy is in so far praised. Valens is looked at through the eyes
of his two fierce Cappadocian assailants. His excellences are entirely ignored ; the most incon-
sequent views are imputed to him while attempting to glorify Basil ; in the sad story of the emperor's
dying son, that bishop appears as a brute in his treatment of the agonized father. The stories of
heroism attributed to the orthodox are only examples of insufferable insolence ; one must marvel
at the patience of Valens, if there be any truth in them. Gratian, that beau-ideal of Western
orthodoxy, was really a nose of wax in the hands of Ambrose ; he was esteemed more moderately
by the East, and that rather for having called Theodosius to a share in the throne, than for any
quality in himself; but his utter moral collapse, after the magnificent promise of his youth, is
wholly veiled from sight. Theodosius the Great is glorified, not for his superior statecraft and


2IO THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


generalship, but for his efforts to suppress paganism and heresy. The charges against his private
life such as Eunapius and Zosimus suggest, are not hinted at. He is a man of prayer and visions^
a relic-worshiper, and a persecutor of pagans and Arians. Great as he certainly was, his dis-
tinguishing and conspicuous qualities are passed by. His pitiful children, Arcadius and Honorius,
the sorriest quidnuncs of those stormy times, are heroes of piety. Pulcheria, excellent as she was,
was not worthy of the excessive flattery poured out upon her ; while Anthemius, Troilus, Valerianus,
and other noble figures of the day are passed by. The younger Theodosius, with his good training
and generally fair endeavor, is delineated in the dedication as the consummate man of all time,
while he is a very third-rate soul at best. The eulogies by Socrates (vii. 22 and 42) are just
as fulsome. This was the grave sin of the State Church ; the Arian State Church did the same
for Constantius and Valens ; more and more as history reveals the truth concerning many of those
idols, does the revulsion increase against a union of two functions which could so degrade both.

The relation of Church and State involves the question of persecution. It is not the history
of the endeavor to enforce uniformity, with which we shall concern ourselves, but rather the views
Sozomen sets forth, as to the policy of repression. The laws of Constantine suppressing heretics
did not affect the Novatians (ii. 32), concerning which justice, he remarks: "The emperor, I
believe, willingly relaxed the rigor of the enactment in their favor, for he only desired to strike
terror into the minds of his subjects, and had no intention of persecuting them." The punish-
ments inflicted in Constantius' time on the orthodox in Constantinople, both by Macedonius
(iv. 23) and Eudoxius (iv. 26), call forth this reflection: "For, if the persecution did not occa-
sion such tortures to the body as preceding ones, it appeared more grievous to all who reflected
aright, on account of its disgraceful nature, for both the persecutors and the persecuted belonged
to the Church ; and the one was all the more disgraceful in that men of the same religion treated
their fellows with a degree of cnielty which the ecclesiastical laws prohibit to be manifested
towards enemies and strangers." He spares himself the pain of registering all who were ejected
from their sees (iv. 27), for no province was without its list of sufferers. The cruelties inflicted
by George on pagan and orthodox, furnish a mournful narrative (iv. 30). On the elevation of
Julian, a great dread fell upon the Christian world, intensified by the portents which befell him.
The series of edicts soon wrought mutual dissension in the Christian ranks, as well as suffering
from without. But while Sozomen attributes the refinements of cruelty to Julian, and lays the
miseries of the saints at his door as parts of a subtle plan, he nevertheless cannot conceal from
himself the absence of direct interference on the part of the State ; these calamities were the
results of a restoration of the old religion to its ancient union with the State ; it was an imperial
act ; and he is compelled to confess the seeming magnanimity of Julian in certain cases, but even
then maligns his motives. The imperial clemency did not arise from any feeling of compassion,
but because persecution would only increase the number of Galilean adherents ; because he was
envious of their glory, did he resort to argument instead of cruelty, and manifest an unexpected
benevolence instead of proceeding to rigorous measures (v. 4, 5). "It may be concluded from
what has been said, that if Julian shed less blood than preceding persecutors of the Church, and
that if he devised fewer punishments for the torture of the body, yet that he was severer in other
respects." Nevertheless, this statement is followed by a record of suffering in all quarters of the
empire and the impression of purposed directness is given, as if the State had inflicted them,
especially when we read that the emperor would not listen to the cautions of Sallust (v. 20).
He does not comment on Jovian's toleration, but only rejoices in the return of the Church to
ascendency. Unsparing is his picture of the dastardly measures of Valens against the professors
of the faith ; he regards that persecutor as the special victim of Divine wrath ; while, on the other
hand, he does not hesitate to call the Arian Goths, who fell under the anger of Athanaric, martyrs
(vi. 37). He does not express an opinion as to the partial toleration of Gratian's edict (vii. i) ;
but in explanation of Theodosius' law forbidding heretics, i.e. all anti-Nicenists, from holding
churches and from exercising any clerical function, he says : " Great as were the punishments-


INTRODUCTION. 211


adjudged by the laws against heretics, they were not always carried into execution ; for the
emperor had no desire to persecute his subjects ; he only desired to enforce uniformity of view
about God, through the medium of intimidation. Those who voluntarily renounced heretical
opinions, received commendation from him." And it is true that the court practice of perse-
cuting emperors, orthodo.v or Arian, was utterly in the teeth of their own edicts, and their most
intimate counselors were elected without regard to religion. When Justina sought to revive the
Arian standard in the West, her treatment of Ambrose is called persecution (vii. 13) ; but
Ambrose's intolerant procedures against the Arians are not even noticed. No quizzical wrinkle
disturbs the flow of his narrative in vii. 15, wHen Theodosius I. gives a heathen temple to
the Christians, and the pagans resolve to defend their rights, and do so effectually ; but the
Christians who perish in that hateful conflict are crowned as martyrs by an imperial edict !
For the religious tyranny of Theodosius the Great he is a warm apologist, and disguises the
perversion of that principle of freedom for which he pleads most earnestly, when the Arians hold
the reins of power, and abuse their opportunity. The contradictions are perfectly apparent and
irreconcilable, because uniformity by force has always been impossible. Yet logical men will state
the most contradictory reasons, which no quidnunc can refrain from laughing at. Themistius'
plea for toleration (vi. 36) in matters of intellectual belief, on the ground of secular diversities
in philosophy and from the incomprehensible nature of God, shows the existence of a party
who believed in this principle. W^hile Sozomen gives it place, and hailed the Gothic Arians who
compelled Valens to cease his oppressions, he has no word of approbation for the proposition
or the argument.

5. Another design of his history is stated in i. i : "I have had to deliberate whether I ought
to confine myself to the recital of events connected with the Church under the Roman govern-
ment ; but it seemed more advisable to include, as far as possible, the record of transactions
relative to religion among the Persians and barbarians." He regards Christianity as the universal
and sole religion, and would trace its extension in all directions. Hence he is the first historian
to give us a larger account of religion in Syria and Palestine, introducing us especially to some
aspects of Christian life and suffering in Edessa ; we are all the more surprised to have no mention
of the Church in Africa, and so very little of the Church in the West, except when it comes into
close relations with the East, as in the larger controversies, and especially after Arianism threatened
to keep its hold upon the Byzantine section of the empire ; and the Orient had to cry to the
cold and unsympathetic Occident for help, and often in vain. He is also careful to give us some,
if not a very original, account of the work of missions. He repeats the story of the Iberians,
Armenians, Indians, Saracens, and Goths. He gives us a larger insight into Persia ; the errors
with which he is charged as swarming, are no more numerous than those of his cotemporaries.
Of the large work of Theophilus of Dhu, or the extension of Arianism among the Germanic tribes,
he says nothing. Chrysostom's real missionary enterprises are passed by, excepting his expendi-
ture of the funds furnished by Olympias for the redemption and restoration of Isaurian captives
(viii. 27). His reflections on the methods of Church extension are more interesting and
numerous. Thus, in ii. 5, of the attempt of Constantine to abolish idolatry and introduce
the faith, Sozomen says, " Soldiers were not necessary ; the courtiers effected it " ; he does not
consider it advisable to give all the details as to all the lands then won to the state religion.
The barbarians he notices as converted through the instrumentality of Christian captives (ii. 6, 7).
Armenian influence carried Christianity into Persia (ii. 8). Prodigies, too, are helpful agents
(vi. 5, v. 22). The hieroglyphs and crux-symbols discovered in the Egyptian temples led to
the repentance of pagans (vii. 15). Sometimes a kingdom will solicit the instruction of an
orthodox monk, as in the case of the Saracens (vi. 38). The legal suppressions of paganism
facilitate a change of sentiment on the part of many (vii. 15). The very ambitions of their clergy
led numbers of the Arians to embrace Nicene views (vii. 17) ; and the doctrinal discussions
among heretics constrain others to embrace a more uniform system of belief (viii, i). The


212 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

efficiency of the monks as evangelists is found in nearly all the biographies of them. On the other
hand, he makes confession to the baleful effects of incessant indulgence in polemics. " These
varying dogmas are the sources of innumerable troubles to religion ; and many are deterred from
embracing Christianity by the diversity of opinion which prevails in matters of doctrine " (vi. 26).
This thought of universality, then, is a feature of his history.

6. Another design is to dignify monasticism as the true ethical ideal and goal of Christianity,
— as the philosophy which is to supplant all the ancient intellectual strivings of reason, — and he
announces this purpose as follows : " Nor is it foreign to ecclesiastical history to introduce in this
work an account of those who were the fathers and originators of what is denominated monach-
ism, and of their immediate successors, whose celebrity is well known to us either by observation
or report. For I would neither be considered ungracious towards them, nor willing to consign
their virtue to oblivion, nor yet be thought ignorant of their history ; but I would wish to leave
behind me such a record of their manner of life that others, led by their example, might attain
to a blessed and happy end" (i. i). He is here quietly resisting a school of Christians and
politicians who were opposed to the absorbing and destructive qualities of this manner of life ;
Athanasius, Basil the Great, Jerome, Chrysostom, had to write in its defense for the same
reason, and he sided with these supporters of its virtues, very naturally. He is a full believer in
the Divine philosophy which nurtured him ; monasticism with its practical strivings after con-
formity to the Divine-human Pattern, and its attempt to enthrone the spiritual over the material
has a zealous defender in him, of all its rapt and grotesque forms. He determined therefore to
make it a unique portion of his history. The discussion of its aims in i. 12 will give us a clue
to his own desire to represent it as almost the resultant force in the progress of the Divine king-
dom ; one reads the historian's responsive feeling between the lines. This philosophy was the
most useful thing received by man from God ; it was superior to all other knowledge, and war-
ranted the neglect of all worldly science ; it strove to eliminate the adiaphora from ethics, and
to make everything have a moral complexion ; one must be doing good, or else he is doing evil.
Its great duties are the discipline of self, the worship of the Creator, and the cultivation of a spirit
of other-worldness. These canons and goals are the life of the system. It is the philosophy
which is to take the place of the old theoretical schemes ; and it is the great school to fill up
the gap made by the decay of the Hellenic universities. The Christian university founded by
Theodosius in Sozomen's day, was indeed a blow to this educational ideal. While we may have
no accord with his view of this ethical phenomenon, we must concede him the merit of dis-
cerning its significance and intent, and allow that he was wise to give us so full an account of
its elaboration, and so much detail and scrap of biography ; for it was a dominant element in the
history of this time. It formed men and measures. The reproach of Sozomen on this score is
wholly a mistake \ he has done us capital service in not neglecting this element, otherwise we
could have but little conception of its historical setting, of its patience, its tireless devotion, and
we would have to resort to Palladius or Rufinus and the individual biographies. Moreover, it
is an uncritical spirit which recoils from dissecting the awful and often repulsive details of legal-
istic self-denial. After discoursing on the local origin of monasticism and the forms it assumed,
we have chapters containing brief sketches of hermits, laurists, and coenobites (i. 12, 13, 14, iii.
14). The people looked to the rrfonks for the color of their theology (iv. 10). Arianism felt its
weakness without them and ineffectually sought their suppression (vi. 20). The Nicene faith uni-
formly received the support of these communities (vi. 27), to which they remained devoted under
all persecutions. Another series of biographies follows in vi. 28-34: Theophilus (viii. 12) has
a preliminary struggle with them to carry forward his plots against John. The royal court itself
under Pulcheria's leadership reflected its severe discipline (ix. 13). Sozomen seems also to
have studied the rules of various bodies, some of whose details he gives, and indulges in a sort of
comparative study of their regulations (vi. 30). Yet with all his implied admiration of the
heroes of this system, who went to the almost extreme of abstinence, he remarks in reviewing the


INTRODUCTION. 213


discipline of Theotimus (vii. 26) : " I consider it to be the part of the philosopher to yield to
the demand of these appetites from necessity, and not from the love of sensual gratification."
It is to be noted that he omits for the most part the immoral forms of monasticism, such a.s
Evagrius gives us a highly rhetorical account of.

7. A more subordinate aim is to present selected secular matters so-called ; he does not con-
sider these to be wholly foreign to the scope of his work. He handles such with considerable
largeness in Constantine's life, and keeps up a thread under Constantius and Julian. He is more
sparing until he reaches Arcadius and Honorius, and the chapters 3-15 of Book ix. are largely
devoted to the Western struggles with usurpers.

8. A final and subordinate aim is the development of imperial law with regard to the Church ;
he gives little of purely synodical canons, but remarks, " I consider it necessary, however, to
mention the laws enacted for the honor and consolidation of religion, as they constitute a con-
siderable portion of ecclesiastical history." And in the next chapter, " Having arrived at this
point of my history, it would not be right to omit all mention of the laws passed in favor of those
individuals in the churches, who had received their freedom" (i. 9). We have already seen how
continuously this plan is sustained.

His Method, i. He is conscious of certain limitations, and expresses them frankly, (a) A
modest estimate of his own powers (Proemium, i. i). (/') The excess of material compels him
to a constant process of selection (ii. 3, 5, 14, iii. 14, 15, 16, iv. 4, 27, vii. 17. 28, ix. i. (r) A
sense of incapacity to handle some aspects of doctrine fvii. 17). (//) An occasional insufficiency
of daia to state a positive conclusion (iv. 2, viii. 16).

2. He acknowledges the need of research, and presents his ideal purpose in i. 7 : "I shall
record the transactions with which I have been connected, and also those concerning which I
have heard from persons who knew or saw the affairs in our own day, or before our own
generation. But I have sought for records of events of earlier date amongst the established laws
appertaining to religion, amongst the proceedings of the Synods of the period, amongst the
innovations that arose, and in the epistles of kings and priests." His recurring intention was to
reproduce the documents just as they were, but he finally decided to epitomize their contents
and to present the entire instrument, only when the state of controversy compelled it in order
to fairness. The difficulty in the way of consulting these sources lay in the fact of their dispersion
in palaces, churches, and the private libraries of the erudite. He anticipates criticism by
acknowledging that contradictions are likely to appear in his work, not from any fault of his own,
but because of the partisan and arbitrary nature of the documents ; he ingenuously confesses
that men's passions and conceptions have shaped many of these writings, and that the factious
spirit has often been guilty of the willful omission of material, which was not of its side. He
distinctly avers that he felt it his duty to examine all writings of this class according to his ability.
Such was his intention. If now we turn to his actual methods, we can group his ways of accumu-
lating material, somewhat as follows : —

(a) His own observation by hearing or sight, and hence knowing, as in ii. 3 ; vii. 19, 28.

(^) By obtaining a personally clear knowledge, the medium being undefined, as in the elec-
tion of Maximus to be bishop of Jerusalem, and Macarius' sympathy therewith ; here his better
information was probably due to his Palestinian origin. 'Io-tcW fiivroL cu? 01 ra'Se T^K/at/^wKOTes,

Kara yviojxrfv Ma/captov yevicrOaL re *<ai CTTrouoau^vai raJ TrXrjOeL ravra, ia)^vpi^ovTaL (ii. 20). As tO
Serapion and Severianus to. /xlv wSe lyvwv (viii. 10). As to Zechariah, where the same phrase
occurs (ix. 17). At the close of a universal review of monasticism roSe cyvwv dk (rvveypaipa
(iii. 14). As to the Syrian and Persian monks eis yvaJcrtv ifjirjv rjXOov (vi. 34). 'AXAa to. fiiv
a(f>r]yrjadiJ.rjv c<^' ocrov fnoi fxadelv e^eytVero, Trcpi tQ>v t6t€ eKK\r](nacrTiKwv <f>i\oa6<f>wv (vi. 35).

(c) By hearing from those who knew the facts avep irapa dK/ai/Jws iirta-TaiJievwv aKtjKoa (ii. 21).
As to Arsacius : dl napa twv ApcraKLov avTov OeacrapLevoyv aKrjKoevat e<f}aaav (iv. 1 6). As tO the

mutual prophecies of Epiphanius and John KaKclvov 8i dcriTi vl-v ttoXXCjv ovra rbv Xoyov eTrvOofjLTjv
(viii. 15). As to Atticus : koL t6v fiiv tolovSe y^vicrOai <f>aarlv, 01 ye tov av^pa tyvwcrav (viii. 27).


2 14 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

(</) The correction of a false story by inquiring of trustworthy persons. Thus as to the
origin of the Apocalypse of Paul. 'Epofiiviu Si fxoi Trepl tovtov, i/'cvSo? €(f>r}(Tcv ai/at Ki'Ai^ (vii. 19).
As to an accusation against John : tovtov Se iTp6<j>a(nv kripav Xiyuv ovk tx^- '"'^W ^^' di/'ci'Sr/s tis
ot/tai Trvdavofj-evw Trcpi tovtov t<^r], k.t.A. (vili. 9). The true and twofold causes of difficulty
between Theophilus and Isadore : tCiv ye iirjv crvyyevofjievtov tovtois totc toi? fiova)(OLs avSpos oiou
yrKTTevtadj.!. iirvdofirjv, k.t.A. (viii. 12).

((f) To these may be added the very frequent usage of TrvvOdvopuii as a means of expressing
his knowledge acquired in any form whatsoever, by hearing, by inquiry, by tradition (i. 21, ii. 8,
iii. 14, iv. 25, V. 2, 9, vi. 2 bis, 17, 34 bis, 37, vii. 8, 15, 17, 20, 21, 25, viii. 2, 7, 9, 19.

(/) Also his use of dKptySow, showing his effort to attain accurate information, and laxypiCofmL
less frequently, to indicate the strongest confirmation. Both these are used with reserve, and not
lightly. Several times he acknowledges his resort to tradition, when he uses the word 7rap€i\rj4>afjiev,
but we cannot always be sure of the form of transmission (iii. 15, 30, vi. 38).

{g) Also his reference to those who had more accurate information, or to works whose detail
he could not reproduce, or which lay without the province of history (iv. 3).

We see then an ideal and actual plan of research, and a real effort at personal investigation ;
to deny his frequently iterated language, is to accuse him of deliberate falsehood ; and this is
palpably unfair ; this his honest purpose and work must be borne in mind, in the discussion of his
relation to Socrates.

3. As to method in textual criticism, there is none ; we find variations in the texts quoted
from those of Socrates, Athanasius, and Theodoret, but no more in him than in the rest from
one another. When he reports Constantine's speech, he treats it as Thucydides did the orations
of his worthies, and as the high-flying Eusebius and the indiscriminating Theodoret do. When
he copies a translatioH from the Greek, he simply says that he gives it just as he found it. On
the whole, one is surprised at so fair an agreement in the readings of the documents.

4. There is an entire lack of genuine analytical criticism; the love of allegory (i. i, ii. i),
the credence given to the Christie sections of Josephus (i. i), the unquestioning acceptance of
Eusebius' turgid statements about Constantine's life, are proofs enough of its absence ; and yet
Sozomen was careful to present the variety of accounts, so that one might have all points of view,
if he did not carefully sift the evidence. This is indeed quite a marked feature of his method.
Thus concerning the death of Arius, he gives five different views (ii. 29, 30). He states care-
fully the varying shades of opinion concerning Marcellus (ii. ^;^). The two classes of views of
the election of Macedonius are recorded and skillfully weighed (iii. 3). The divisions of senti-
ment after the Synods of Sardica and Philippopolis are accurately grouped (iii. 13). Other
instances occur in iii. 14, 18, 23, v. 2, 22, vi. 2, 12, 26, vii. 5, 22. These are but a selec-
tion of what is habitual with him, and show a desire to present all sides of a question, and to
reflect the divergent convictions of his time about men and measures ; but he does not always
try to find the just opinion and weigh the testimony ; he never tests the validity of his docu-
ments, and only a few times tries to decide between clashing judgments, as to which of them
rests on a solid foundation of testimony. It is, however, to his credit, when he confesses that his
research is baffled, as in iv. 2, with respect to the manner of Paul's death, or suspends his judg-
ment, because the data are insufficient, as in the application to the empress, of Chrysostom's
homily on female peccadilloes (viii. 6). Such language shows that he not only sought to ascer-
tain the truth, but to elicit the facts out of conflicting testimony. We may not always think the
game worth the powder, but the temper and intent are' commendable.

5. Sozomen has a marked zeal for interpreting the events of history ; and we can gather these
hints of histories, although they do not seem to have been defined as principles in his own mind.

{a) He criticises by the rules of traditionalism and monasticism ; we find small men given
undue prominence, and large ones put far below their proper place (iv. 6, 9, 28, v. 7, 12, vi. 17,
26, vii. 12).


INTRODUCTION. 215


{i>) He seems to have regarded it his occasional duty to explain the moral intent of a period,
of the lives of men, of a special incident ; in other words, he used history reflectively and
■ethically (viii. 4, 12, 17).

(<r) He is fertile in suggesting motives for which he has no documentary warrant. The entire
history of Julian is replete with the insinuation of mean motives (oJ? o-ii^/3aA.Xw). The solitary
commendation of him for lowering the price of provisions in Antioch (v. 19) is only a ground
for holding him up to ridicule for want of judgment (iii 5, 15, v. 2, 4, 5, n, 19, 15, 22,
vi. 12).

(^/) He deems it necessary to apologize for his favorites if they are in a questionable position
{iii. 18, V. 6, viii. i).

(g) He thinks it right to give recognition to men or measures who have enlisted his admiration
{vii. 10).

(/) He traces cause and effect in a pragmatic way (vi. 16, 38).

(g) He delights in taking prominent figures of a period as the remarkable men who have
-created a remarkable time, and are Divine instruments, or as objects of Divine protection on
account of their piety (iii. 13, 19, iv. 16, v. 13, vi. 17, 26, 27, viii. 3, 4, 6).

{/i) He dwells at times on characteristics of human nature at play (vi. 4, 26).

(/') He gives a favorable explanation of the bad actions of the orthodox (iv. 16).

(_/') He sometimes introduces speculative explanations or reflections (vi. 2, 4, 37, viii. 5).

6. Chronological method, (i) The imperial reigns are taken as the great periods for the
books, and the material is distributed under them ; no dates are given, only the names of the
emperors. This is stated in the proemium, and is carried out in the history. (2) He uses
the consulates —

(a) To mark the beginning and the end of the entire history.

(3) Also occasionally to indicate the synchronous occupants of the apostolic sees (i. 2) ;
the convocation of a council (iii. 12, 19, iv. 6, 17, vii. 12) ; the enthronement of a bishop
(iv. 26) ; the death of an emperor (vii. 29, ix. i) ; some general but important event (vii. 5,
viii. 4).

(r) With this the corresponding year of the emperor is sometimes but rarely given.

{d) Another conspicuous chronological system with Sozomen, as in Eusebius, Socrates, and
the church historians in general, is to keep up the roll of succession in the greater sees. This
had become an essential note of the visible and Catholic Church. „^— — '

(<f) Occasionally intervals are indicated as so many years after such and such an event
(iii. 5, II, 12, iv. I, ix. i).

(/) The length of a reign or of an episcopate, the duration of the life of an emperor or
bishop, and of a tendential period are stated, but not often, and without uniformity (iv. 11, v. i,
vii. 5).

(g) An unusual number of particles for indefinite time occur as substitutes for an exact
method. Nevertheless, one of his main purposes was to narrate his history in strict chronological
order, so as to contain the virtue of a chronicle together with a more developed presentation of
events. This is almost entirely forgotten, except that the sequence of occurrences is fairly kept
up. Yet he does not hesitate to break through even this sequence, when he thinks the collocation
of later facts, under the head that he is writing of, may contribute to clearness and completeness,
as he directly avers in iii. 3, 14, iv. 10, 11, 12, v. 11, ix. 2, It is no easy task to make a
Regesta of Sozomen's history ; moreover, he often blunders in the very few dates he gives, as
■well as in the arrangement of the events themselves ; these errors are due to the lack of a fixed
system.

7. The contributions to geography are mainly confined to Palestine. Passing more familiar
ones, we have a list as follows: Helenopolis (ii. 2), Majuma (ii. 5, v. 3, vii. 28), Anthedon,
Bethagathon, Asalea, Thabatha (iii. 14), Diocaesarea (iv. 17), Bethelia (v. 15, vi. 32), Besan-


2i6 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

duca, Capharchobia, Gerara (vi. 32), Botolium (vii. 28), Ceila, Berathsabia with its tomb,
Nephsameena (vii. 29), Chaphar Zacharia (ix. 17). Most of these terms are Hebraic or Syrian.
ScythopoHs is mentioned as abundant in palms (viii. 13). There is no direct, and very Httle
indirect Hght on the political or ecclesiastical geography of the time ; of course the seats of
the bishops and of the monks that are enumerated yield a few new names of places. There are
equally few hints in the physical features of the empire ; the great rains, or hail-storms, or earth-
quakes are recorded chiefly with regard to their special ethical bearing. The topography of
Constantinople has been indicated previously; outside of these, details of Alexandria, Antioch,
Caesarea, Cappadocia are given, but none of them new.

8. Statistics. There is of course no method in the presentation of statistics ; there are gen-
eral proportions, as in ii. 6, iv. 27, v. 15, vi. 20; and special detail, as in the enumeration of
monks, iii. 14, vi. 29-34. The best illustration one finds in the account of the Persian martyrs,
where there was a distinct effort at registration by Persian, Syrian, and Edessan authorities
(ii. 13, 14).

9. Biography is one of the chief constituents of his history. He gives us an account of most
of the distinguished Christian masters in theology, in monasticism, martyrdom, oratory, scholar-
ship, administration ; and he is refreshingly fair in giving a place to those who were not friendly
to his view of the faith. Athanasius may be a chief hero, but Arius is not neglected. Here we
may observe that Sozomen makes Aetius the second head of rationalism, and the man who gave
it breadth of culture by building the system on the basis of Aristotle (iii. 15, iv. 12) ; he
regards Eunomius as but a reflection of Aetius (vi. 29). This position accorded to Aetius is
one deserving special note and study. Philostorgius exalted Eunomius both in his special enco-
mium and in the history. Of course the two Cappadocians, as well as Epiphanius and Chrysos-
tom, are liberally sketched. The imperial biography is fairly full, and a large space is accorded
Julian. In every book parts are devoted to the vitcB sanctorum, as the best way to set before us
the inner life of the Church and the fairest exhibition of Christian character ; these monastic
sketches are, for the most part, mere glimpses of individuals (a line or two suffices) ; whereas the
more conspicuous founders and organizers, such as Antony, Hilarion, Pachomius, the Macarii,
Evagrius, receive a larger recognition. He feels the need of selection in the multipHcity of illus-
trious characters, and after a sketch of Acacius, Zeno, and Ajax, he says : " I have mentioned
these as examples of those who served as priests at this period. It would be a task to enumerate
all, when the major part of them were good, and God bore testimony to their lives by readily
hearing their prayers and by working many miracles" (vii. 28). Prominent as is the biograph-
ical element, and earnestly as he endeavors to substantiate its claims, he confesses, as to Ephraim
(iii. 16), "it would require a more experienced hand than mine to furnish a full description of his
character and that of the other illustrious men, who, about the same period, had devoted them-
selves to a life of philosophy ; and it is to be regretted that Ephraim did not enter upon thi&
undertaking. The attempt is beyond my powers, for I possess but little knowledge of those great
men, or of theii exploits."

10. In ecclesiastical culture we have many and important incidental hints, but no direct
general chapter except vii. 19; and on special topics, those on the Easter controversy (i. 16,
21, vi. 24, vii. 18, viii. 17) on the penitential presbyter (vii. 16), and on relic worship, are the
most significant.

11. Nor is there any methodical statement of growth in the acquisition and exposition of
truth ; his traditionalism in a measure precluded that, and his acknowledged incapacity to go
deeply into the differentiation of these discussions prevented any system ; there is no real history
of dogma and ethics, except on the external side. He is frank to say : " I leave their doctrines
to be judged by those whose right it is. For I have not set forth to record such matters, nor is
it befitting in history " (iii. 15); that he does "not profess easily to understand or to expound
these matters" (vi. 27) ; and again, "I should be prolix were I to enter into further particulars.


INTRODUCTION. 217


and under the subject would be by no means an easy one to me, since I have no such dialectic
skill" (vii. 17). He furnishes us only with such a statement of doctrine, as sprang out of polem-
ics and councils and the variety of creeds.

12. And so with the history of literature there is no such sustained account of Christian writ-
ers and works as in Eusebius ; the second stage of historians did not see fit to be as complete
and accurate as their exemplar in this particular, and Photius was left to gather up the fragments for
us. What strikes us as peculiar is his confessed ignorance of the works of the greatest theologians.
He passes by all the technical writings of Athanasius ; he has no direct knowledge of the works
of Hilary, though that might be excused. Of the purely theological works of Basil and Gregory
Nazianzen, whom he regards as the pillars of the Nicene faith, he makes no mention ; and indeed
makes but the slightest use of their letters and special orations. Of the Arian theologians of all
shades, he has no closer knowledge ; he confesses at the outset that he had not read the Thalia
(i. 21), but condemns it on Socrates' authority; and he speaks of Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, in
language that displays unfamiliarity with his treatises (viii. 2).

13. There are no conceptions of the philosophy of history or of histories in general, other
than those which have been discussed before.

14. If we pass to the styhstics of Sozomen, we find the quahty of the Greek to be excellent ;
the dedication is especially studied and rhetorical ; the first chapter of the first book is scarcely
inferior in these traits, after which the form becomes more abrupt, after the fashion of an epito-
mizer, and it is obviously affected by his authorities. The likeness to Xenophon is not continu-
ous, any more than Socrates sustainedly imitates Thucydides, although in elevated conception,
Socrates is more in the vein of that philosophic master of history, than Sozomen is a reflec-
tion of the writer of the Hellenics. The vocabulary, too, is quite meager ; the same forms of
expression occur again and again, yet Photius considers him superior in diction to Socrates,^
which only one who admires rnere form above spirit, can affirm. Certainly it would not be the
view of this more subjective age. Of course he reflects the decline of meaning in particles and
prepositional prefixes and participial constructions. He does not begin his books with formal
prefaces, such as Socrates indulges in ; chapter i of Book i. may, however, be regarded as intro-
ductory ; and it serves to link Christianity with Judaism. In the distribution of his material there
is no system agreeing with his own outline of aims or any other order that is discoverable. The
main topics are : Secular affairs, relations of the emperor to Christianity, laws and privileges,
missions and persecutions, polemics and irenics, biographies ; but there is no regular discussion of
these, either under the reigns or in the books. None of the historians are any better in this regard.

A characteristic of our historian is the admirable generalization and the summaries he pauses
to make here and there. The most notable are in iii. 1 7, a generalized description of the period
of the Constantines. iii. 18, a doctrinal summary, iv. 17-19, conciliar movement in the West,
iv. 20-22, conciliar movement in the East. iv. 23-25, united results, vi. 6, a succinct
comparison of Valens with Valentinian. vi. 10, geographical centers of Nicenism. vi. 21,
geographical centers of Arianism and Orthodoxy, vi. 22, geographical distribution of Mace-
donianism. vi. 26, genesis of Aetianism (Eunomianism). vi. 27, geographical distribution
of beliefs, vi. 28-34, geographical grouping of the monks, vii. 2, geographical supremacy of
Arianism in the East. vii. 4, geographical survey of religion, vii. 17, divisions of Arianism.
viii. I, summary of Apostolic succession. The selective process is often alluded to (ii. 3, iii.
14, 15, iv. 3, 23, 27, vii. 25, 28, ix. i) ; and we must confess that he has kept a very just
proportion in this way among the subjects he has elected for his narrative.

The Period described.

The work was to have covered the time from 323 to 439, a period of 116 years ; whereas, in
fact, he writes continuously only to the death of Honorius as the latest event, 423, and the

1 Myrobib. cod. XXX.


2i8 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


accession of Valentinian TIL in 425 ; beyond that in time, but mentioned anticipatively in the
narrative (ix. 2), is the transfer of the forty martyrs, which happened certainly after 434, the year
of the election of Proclus, therefore probably not far from the proposed limit of his work, say
437 or 438 ; this would give a period of about 114 or 115 years. He divides the record of this
time into nine books, distributed among the emperors.

i. and ii. To Constantine, 323-337 = 14.

iii. and iv. His sons, 337-361 = 24.

V. and vi. Julian, Jovian, Valentinian I., Valens, 361-375 = 17.

vii. and viii. Gratian and Valentinian II., Theodosius I., Arcadius (and Honorius), 375-
408 = 33.

ix. (Honorius) and Theodosius II., 408-437 = 25.

A noticeable feature, save in the case of Book ix., is the grouping of books by twos, in which
the intervals discussed vary from fourteen to thirty-three years. This grouping seems entirely
arbitrary.

For whom he wrote.

The question for whom he wrote has been somewhat obscured by those who regard him simply
as a plagiarist. He evidently turned himself to this task under the conviction that there was
need of some such work as his. He addressed himself chiefly to Christians and not only to
monks, because he defers to the narrow views of some friends about the mysteries, — and
represses creeds and sacraments, for fear the book might fall into the hands of the uninitiated.
He moreover designed his record, not for the more learned classes, but for the instruction of
ordinary believers, since he professes uniformly a great modesty in treating the profounder themes
of theology and the characters of the more eminent men. Yet he did not hesitate to submit it to
the criticism of his emperor and invited the most erasive and final judgment. This is probably
as far as we may go in the absence of any direct address to specific readers.

The Sources.

I. Those enumerated in his ideal plan (i. l).

1 . The transactions in which he was engaged.

2. The transactions in which others were engaged, who either knew or saw the events in his day, or in prior
generations.

3. Laws established concerning religion.

4. Acts of Synods.

5. Record of innovations.

6. Imperial letters.

7. Clerical letters.

II. The sources actually mentioned, (l) Documents.

(a) Documents actually quoted with text.

The retractation, by Eusebius and Theognis (ii. 16).

The confession of Arius and Euzoius to Constantine (ii. 27).

The Epistle of Constantine to the Synod of Tyre (ii. 28).

Constantine Caesar to the people of the Catholic Church of the city of Alexandria (iii. 2).

Epistle of the Synod of Jerusalem in behalf of Athanasius (iii. 22).

Ursacius and Valens to Julius (iii. 23).

Ursacius aud Valens to Athanasius (iii. 24).

George of Laodicea to Macedonius, Basilius, Cecropius, and Eugenius (iv. 13); new.

Epistle of Constantius to the church at Anlioch (iv. 14); new.

Epistle of the Synod of Ariminum to the Emperor Constantius (iv. 18).

Epistle of Julian to Arsacius, the high-priest of Galatia (v. 16).

Epistle of Julinn to the bishops, only a phrase quoted (v. 18); new.

Synod at Antioch, to Jovian (vi. 4).


INTRODUCTION.


219


Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus to Liberius (vi. 11).

Synod of Rome to bishops of lUyricum (vi. 23) ; first with Sozomen; repeated by Theodoret (^H. E. ii. 22).
Innocent to John (viii. 26); also in Palladius' Dial.

Innocent to the presbyters, deacons, all the clergy, and the people of the church of Constantinople
(viii. 26) ; also in Palladius' Dial. ,

There are five imperial letters, four synodical letters, seven- episcopal letters, one presbyterial letter, making
seventeen in all. This is not nearly so large a number as is given by Socrates, but we must remember the expressed
purpose of Sozomen, that, as a rule, he would give abstracts only, and text when in his judgment fairness made
it necessary. Of these documents, there are at least three found in no earlier author. In them all, there is only
one symbol transcribed, and that is from Arius and Euzoius !


(J>) Documentary acts of Synods which are mentioned by name.
Acts of the Synod of Tyre (ii. 25).
Acts of the Synod of Seleucia, taken down by tachygraphists (iv. 22).

(f) Acts of those Synods only, of which an abstract is recorded.


Alexandria i- i S*

Bithynia i. 15-

Palestine i. 15.

Egyptian i. 16.

NicEEa i. 17-23.

Antioch ii. 19.

Tyre "-25.

Jerusalem ii. 27.

Constantinople ii. 29, 33.

Constantinople iii. 3.

Antioch iii. 2.

Antioch iii. 8.

Philippopolis iii. 1 1 .

Sardica iii. 11, 12.

Jerusalem iii. 21, 22.

Alexandria iv. i .

Sirmium iv. 6.

Antioch iv. 8.

Milan iv. 9.

Antioch iv. 1 2.

Ancyra iv. 13.

Ariminum iv. 16-19, 23.


Seleucia ^ . . . iv.

Constantinople iv.

Alexandria v.

Macedonian Council, s. 1 v.

Antioch vi.

Lampsacus vi.

Nicsea vi.

Macedonian, s. 1 vi.

Sicily vi.

Tyana vi.

In Caria vi.

Rome vi.

Pazucomen vi.

Rome vi.

Antioch (Caria) vii.

Constantinople vii.

Sangurum vii.

Constantinople viii.

Cyprus viii.

Of the Oak at Chalcedon viii.

Constantinople viii.

Constantinople viii.


22, 23.
24, 25.
12.
14.
4-

7-

8.

10, II.

12.

12.

12.

23-
24.

25-
2.

7-9-
18.
2.
14.

17-
19-
20.


(^) Letters of which an abstract is given, or the general object is stated.


Constantino's Letter to Alexander and Arius i. 16.

Imperial Letters about the Nicene Council i. 21, 25.

Constantine to Sapor ii. 15.

Constantine to the people of Alexandria ii. 22.

Constantine to Athanasius ii. 23.

Synod of Tyre to the bishops ii. 25.

Antony's letters to the Emperor ii. 31.

Constantine's letter to the Alexandrians ii. 31.

Eusebius to Julius iii. 7.

Julius, bishop of Rome, to the bishops of the

East iii. 8.

Synod of Antioch to Julius iii. 8.

Constantius to Philip, prefect of Constantinople . .iii. 9.

Bishops of Egypt in favor of Athanasius iii. 10.

Julius to the bishops of Antioch iii. 10.

Constans to Constantius iii. 10.

Constans to Constantius iii. 1 1.

Athanasius to Constans iii. 1 1.


Paul, bishop of Constantinople iii. 11,

The bishops of Philippopolis to the bishops of

the West iii. 11,

Constans to Constantius iii. 20,

Constantius to Athanasius iii. 20,

Constantius to the Alexandrians iii. 20

Julius to clergy and people of Alexandria iii. 20,

Constantius to the bishops, presbyters, and to the

people of the church of Alexandria iii. 21.

Cyril of Jerusalem to Constantius iv. 5.

Constantius to Athanasius iv. 9.

Constantius to Basil of Ancyra iv. 16

Basil of Ancyra to Constantius iv. 16

Constantius to Basil iv. 16,

Basil to all the bishops iv. 16,

Athanasius to a friend iv. 17

Constantius to the Synod of Ariminum iv. 19

Reply of the bishops , iv. 19,


220


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


Julian to the Alexandrians v. 7.

Titus of Bostra to Julian v. 15.

Julian to Jewish patriarchs, leaders, and people. . .v. 22.

Reply of the Jews v. 22.

Julius to Arsacius, king of Armenia vi. I.

Jovian to the governors of the provinces vi. 3.

Basil of Ancyra, Silvanus of Tarsus, Sophronius

of Pompeiopolis et al., to Jovian vi. 4.

Liberius and the Western bishop to the East vi. 12.

Memorial of grievances presented by eighty eccle-
siastics to Valens vi. 13.


Damasus in behalf of Peter of Alexandria vi. 39.

Synodical epistles of Rome to Paulinus, bishop

of Antioch vii. 1 1 .

The Western bishops and Gratian to the East-
ern bishops vii. 1 1 .

Irenic letters to the adherents of Flavian from

the priests of Egypt and the West viii. 3.

Theophilus of Alexandria, paschal letter viii. 1 1,

Theophilus of Alexandria to Epiphanius viii. 14.

Epiphanius to the bishops and the bishop of Con-
stantinople against Origenism viii. 14.


(2) Authors.
(a) Authors from whose works a textual quotation, appears.


Apolinarius, the Syrian, on the succession of

Athanasius ii. 17, new.

Extract from Athanasius' Epistola ad Episco-
pos /Egypti et Libyce ii- 30.


(J)) Authors and works directly referred to as used.

The Sibyl i. i, ii. i.

Joseph us i. I .

Clemens (Romanus) i. i.

Hegesippus i. i .

Julius Africanus i. I.

Eusebius Pamphili, Nisloria Ecclesiastica . . .i. i.

Vita Constantini 1.3, extract.

Philo (Pythagorean) i. 12.

Biographies of Monks i. 14.


Extract from Libanius, the Sophist; in oratione

funebri dc latidibus jfutiani vi. i.

Gregory Nazianzen to Nectarius, on Apolinarius;

Ep. ccii vi. 27.

The first extract alone is known through no other source.


Eusebius' Oration i. 19.

Address of Constantine i. 19.

Collection of Nicene Canons i. 22.

Syrians' Account of the actions and life of Bishop

Milles ii. 14.

Persian, Syrian, Edessan, martyrology of Persians, .ii. 14.

Discourse of Eudoxius, extract from iv. 26.

Meletius' first discourses at Antioch iv. 28.

Athanasius, on his flight . . . . ; v. 12.


(f) Authors and their works mentioned, but not used.

Arius, the Thalia, not read i. 21 .

Eustathius, bishop of Antioch ii. 19.

Marcellus {de Subjectione Filii Dei) ^^- Zi-

Asterius, a treatise on the defense of the Arian

doctrine ^^- ii-

Acacius, bishop of Caesarea, works iii. 2.

Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste, an ascetic treatise,

also attributed to Basil the Great iii. 14.

Eusebius, bishop of Emesa, works iii. 14.

Titus, bishop of Eostra, works iii. 14.

Serapion, bishop of Ancyra, works iii. 14.

Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia, works iii. 14.

Acacius, bishop of Qcsarea, works iii. 14.

Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, works iii. 14.

Didymus, works iii. 15.

I.ucifer, bishop of Calaris, works iii. 15.

Hilar)', bishop of Pictavium, works iii. 15, v. 13.

Aetius, works iii. 15.

Ephraim Syrus, works and translations iii. 16.

Bardasanes, poems iii. 1 6.

Harmonius, poems iii. 16.


Photinus, a work before Constantius, and many

works iv. 6.

Acacius, literary works iv. 23.

Apolinarius, works, with those against him., .v. 18, vi. 27.

Julian, Misopogon v. 19.

Eunomius, works, especially Exercises for the Mind,

with those against him vi. 27, vii. 17.

Evagrius, works vi. 30.

Themistius, oration, outline vi. 36.

Ulfilas, translation of Bible into Gothic vi. 37.

Sisinnius, bishop of the Novatians in Constantino-
ple, works viii. i.

Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, works viii. 2.

Theodore, bishop of Mopsuestia, works viii. 2.

Chrysostom, Ep. to Theodore viii. 2.

on Eutropius viii. 7.

Vices of females viii. 16.

Extempore discourse after his return viii. 18.

About the Silver Statue viii. 20.

Origen, works; especially the one from which

Bishop Theotimus read viii. 14.

An unecclesiastic but ancient Hebrew document ... ix. 17.


{d) Hymns of which a line or thought is given.

Refrain of the odes at Antioch iii. 20. | To Dionysos, by Epiphanius the Sophist vi. 25.

At procession of Babylas, Antioch v. 19. | Arian hymns viii. 8.


INTRODUCTION. 221


Unmentioned Authorities.

Sozomen has refrained in large measure from indicating directly his chief authorities for
political or ecclesiastical affairs ; he has indicated, indeed, some minor springs, as we have seen,
but the major ones are passed by. He imitated neither Eusebius, nor Socrates, nor P^agrius in
this omission. He does abound in phrases indicative of authorities ; thus of the forms of Xiyw,
Aeyouo-i, Xiyovrai, IXeyov, eXeyero are used somewhat sparingly, while Aeyerai occurs over eighty
times, and Aoyos about twenty ; of (i>r)ixi, e<^i/(rev and c^t^/xt; occasionally, while <f>-q<Ti or </>ao-i intro-
duces about thirty statements ; dp-qaOui and dprjraL also appear in a few cases. One has no
assurance of either the method or the validity of the sources from such vague terms, and it is this
uncertain and incautious manner that has so often led critics to impeach his general worth, and
it must be conceded with some degree of justice ; the endless iteration of such words savors of
gossip rather than history ; this obscurity is not diminished by his persistent otfiai and less frequent

I. In the discussion of his unmentioned authorities, the first to be considered is Socrates.
He is nowhere hinted at, unless under an indefinite " some say," when Sozomen presents a group
of opinions.

Socrates preceded Sozomen by a few years, writing his history not long after 439.^ Sozomen
undoubtedly produced his record later, as we have already seen, and it would be just as likely
that Socrates should be in the hands of Sozomen as that Phihp of Side's contemporary Christian
History should have been open to the criticism of Socrates ; indeed, the predecessor's work was
quite probably an incentive to the task proposed by Sozomen to himself. The internal evidence
makes the use sure. We have only to note how Socrates derived his statements about the Nova-
tians from members connected with that body of believers ; these very facts are reproduced by
Sozomen as Socrates gives them, with the slightest of differences ; there is no refutation of this
possible. Socrates, therefore, manifestly preceded, and Sozomen employed the material thus
amassed.

There are three views of the connection : ( i ) that Sozomen, excepting a few and not very
valuable additions of his own, plagiarized Socrates ; ( 2 ) that he used the same authorities as
Socrates independently, and the points of identity arose from the language of the original in the
hands of both ; (3) that Socrates was his guide to the chief writers from whom he drew directly
with more or less freedom ; and when no other light presented itself or was to be found, he would
use his path-finder. There is scarcely a more fascinating and genuine field for analytical criticism
than this. It should be remarked at the outset that we cannot justly apply this term plagiarism,
in its modern sense, to the use of material current in these earlier days of history. There was
no more intention to appropriate the work of another in Sozomen, than there was in Socrates,
when he fails to note his authority, and yet very evidently has followed him closely ; or when
Theodoret has taken his stuff from Sozomen, and says nothing about the original. To assail
Sozomen as if he were a deliberate thief, and stigmatize him as a feeble reviser of Socrates, is
wholly unfair and unwarranted by the general usage of his day and by the facts of the case.
In no way can it be proved that Sozomen was a general plagiarist in the opprobrium and iniquity
conveyed by the modern use of that term. That Socrates was the finer mind, that he had larger
sympathies, that he was concerned to reproduce documents in an ampler degree, that he follows
the development of the Church with a sharper and brighter criticism, no one can doubt ; he is
conspicuously superior in almost every quality of a historian, and confined himself more nearly to
the modern idea of which the science should aim to do ; but that does not set aside the distinct
and supplemental value of Sozomen and his fullness in lines, however zigzag, which had been
neglected by others. The acknowledged precedence of Socrates does not warrant us in assailing
the fidelity of the lesser light. Since the notes are designed to indicate the relationship between

1 H. E. vii. 48.


222 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

the two, the passages need not be anticipated here. (2) The second view, that Sozomen made
an independent use of the same source which Holzhausen revived, StaudUn supported, Hefele and
Nolte have espoused, seems less tenable than the first. The Novatian material cannot, under any
possible conditions, be so explained ; the arrangement of the details in eight of the books will not
permit any such view. The very corrections of that arrangement require us to be convinced that
Socrates was in the corrector's eye ; the close resemblance of language in many places where he
might easily have expanded from the originals, but preferred to confine himself to the equally
meagre tracings of his predecessor, leave no basis for this solution. (3) The third explanation of
the interrelation seems thus far the most accurate.^ Sozomen took Socrates for a guide in the main,
(a) as to consecution of events, {l>) as to sources, much as students would use a Church history
to base their own studies upon. Socrates was a director to the authorities ; these Sozomen would
use freely ; when they failed him, he would take the facts given by Socrates, precisely as he did
those which Eusebius or Sabinus furnished, because he had nothing better, and in spite probably
of his own inquiries ; for let us remember how he insists that he has investigated the originals, and
that he had been conscientious in his researches. Now it must be said in further modification of
this statement :

(a) That some of the sources obviously consulted by both were doubtless known to Sozomen
without Socrates to point them out. Rufinus and Eusebius and Sabinus were known to everybody.
In all such cases we may concede an independent reading of those authors, and yet the order in
which the subject-matter is arranged is at times more that of his guide-book than of his original.

(^) Moreover, he introduces many new outlines and abstracts, particularly in the transactions
of the synods.

(r) He also has independent sources of biography.

(//) His ninth book is wholly unique and entirely out of the leading-strings of the master, for
unexplained reasons.

The notes also try to indicate in a measure these more independent traits.

2. Th^ next unmentioned source is Rufinus, in his continuation of Eusebius in two books ; this
Sozomen certainly read independently of Socrates, very likely in a Greek translation. That
author's Historia Monachorum also was sifted for a few of the monastic biographies ; in these
cases there is a closer resemblance to Rufinus than to the parallel sketches of Palladius.

3. Eusebius' Life of Constantine is a primary source for Books i. and ii. In all the events
pertaining to that emperor, it is drawn upon freely, just as freely as Socrates employs it, or as
Sozomen handles Socrates.

4. Athanasius is also used independently, although in collocating the events, Socrates is
followed. There is direct reference to one work only (v. 12), as we have seen. The unmentioned
are as follows : —

The Life of St. Antony : Antonii Vita.

Epistola de Synodis Arimini in Italia et Seleucice in Isauria celebratis.

Epistola ad Serapionem, de morte Arii.

Synodicon ; lost.

Tomus ad Antiochenses.

Epistola ad Episcopos ^gypti et Libya ; ep. encyclica contra Arianos.

Epistola Encyclica ad Episcopos.

Historia Arianorum ad Monachos.

Apologia contra Arianos.

Apologia ad Constantium imperatorem.

Epistolce heortasticce.

5. Philostorgius : Historia Ecclesiastica, also fiimished occasional material, as even the
excerpts remaining to us indicate.

1 Jeep: QuelltnunttrsuchuHgen zu dtn gritckischen Kirckenhiitorikern, pp. 137-147.


INTRODUCTION. 223

6. Sabinus : Collection of Synods (Swayuiyr; twv a-woBwv), which is lost; this book was
written in the Macedonian and Arian interest ; the author is mentioned by Socrates and criticised
for his partiality. We can observe how Sozomen used it, where he adds to the statements of Soc-
rates, which the latter had borrowed from that work. These additions are quite frequent in the
transactions of the synods ; and again a few records of councils, otherwise unknown, are thus pre-
served for us. We have here a proof of how Sozomen improved on his guide in the details.

7. Philippus of Side ; the Christian History (xpto-rtaviK^ lo-ropta) ; a few fragments are pre-
served ; Socrates criticises him severely.^

8. For the laws, outside of the records alluded to, he probably used the Codex Gregorianus
and the Codex Hermogenianus, his old text-books, and not unlikely the Codex Theodosianus

(438).

9. Basil the Great : the limited use is indicated by the notes.

ID. Gregory Nazianzen : Orationes contra Julianum. Other occasional citations are indicated
in the notes.

1 1 . Sulpicius Severus : vita S. Martini was undoubtedly the source, possibly through a Greek
translation of the same, for the summary of that saint's life in iii. 14.

Historia sacra : sometimes there is a hint as if this work had been before him.

12. Palladius : Historia Za«i-/<r« was not so constant a companion as some have suggested;
Sozomen has rather borrowed from the sources out of which the bishop of Helenopolis gathered
his sketches of the monks.

Dialogus de vita S. Joannis Chrysostomi was used in narrating the incidents of John's life
in Book viii. There is no indication of any large draught of Chrysostom's own writings : they
may have been used for a few suggestions, contained in the orations before mentioned.

One does not feel sure that Hieronymus or Orosius came under his eye.

He does not seem to have made any direct use of Ammianus Marcellinus {Res gestce), nor
of the earlier Latin chroniclers. The points of resemblance with Eutropius {Breviarium Historic
Romance) are very doubtful in my judgment; Eunapius {^ex historia excerpta et /ragmen ta)
seems to have been used in his full form; Zosimus {Historia), pretty surely; and for the
ninth book, hardly with a doubt the full Olympiodorus, of whom fragments only remain, and yet
in that same ninth book there are entirely independent political chapters whose source cannot
yet be determined.

The Ninth Book.

The most curious feature of all is Book ix., in the entire change of its method ; even were
the ecclesiastical affairs to have been presented, he has given here in remarkable excess the
events affecting the Western state ; he has done it nowhere else ; to be sure, he proposes it as a
demonstration of the value of imperial piety, and of the ever-present Divine grace, but nowhere
else has he done this in so cumulative a form. Some wonderful change came over his purpose,
whether that were a fuller view of the relation between state and church, or the desire to deepen
the impression of his philosophy of history ; or did some imperial domestic catastrophe make him
reluctant to dwell upon the sad events AVhich darkened the court he had so glorified ?

The grave question arises, Is anything of Book ix. lost ?

That it is unfinished cannot be doubted ; for (a) In the Proemium he announces his purpose
to carry it to the year a.d. 439, or the seventeenth consulate of Theodosius ; but this is not done
with any of his ordinary fullness, although his hints reach beyond, as we have seen, (b) In laud-
ing Pulcheria (ix. i) he remarks, "That new heresies have not prevailed in our time, we shall
find to be due especially to her, as we shall subsequently see." Here is the declared purpose of
delineating the history of Nestorianism and its overthrow, but there is no appearance of the struggle
in the record itself; he altogether passes by Nestorius, as bishop of Constantinople, (c) The

* H. E. vii. 27.


224 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

record of the forty martyrs he purposely took out of its normal order, to illustrate the excellence
of Pulcheria ; a late event is anticipated, but the whole of what would have been its normal set-
ting is not there, (d) One would naturally expect that a book which had thus far treated mainly
of state difficulties would have the usual balance, at least, and that ecclesiastical affairs would
have preponderated in the remaining chapters ; but there is only an initial chapter. Seventeen
chapters are not his usual tale for a book ; there is an evident break ; the discussion of Nestori-
anism is not written. Most of all would one expect some allusion to the restoration of Chrysos-
tom under Proclus. (e) In ix. i6, he says, "Among other relics, those of Zechariah, the very
ancient prophet, and of Stephen, who was ordained deacon by the Apostles, were discovered ;
and it seems incumbent upon me to describe the mode, since the discovery of each was mar-
velous and divine ; " but he gives only the invention of Zechariah (c. 17). The story of Stephen
fails us, and would doubtless have followed immediately. It was his purpose to narrate the story, —
this story which Theophanes and Marcellinus mention and Lucianus wrote a book about, (f) In
c. ix. 1 7, this is confirmed ; for he says, " I shall first speak of the relics of the prophet " ; to his
second he does not come, (g) The close is abrupt ; one feels instinctively that something is
amiss. Hence the work, as we have it, is obviously not complete.

Did he finish it, and is the conclusion lost?

The mistake into which Gregory I. fell in ascribing to Sozomen the commendation of Theodore
of Mopsuestia, with which Theodoret really closes his history, led Baronius to maintain that we
did not have the whole of Sozomen ; and others have asserted the same for reasons which are
indeed sufficient to prove that the history is unfinished, but not that anything is lost. That
we have all that Sozomen wrote is more likely, because the Tripartite History at x. 24 makes
the last use of Sozomen at viii. 25 ; it would surely have gone further in its dependence upon
him had the later controversy been treated of, since he had been already a chief authority.
Nicephorus Callistus, Historia Ecclesiastica, xiv. 8, gives the account of the finding of Zechariah
in c. 9 ; the story of Stephen in c. 10 ; then the story of the forty martyrs. His source beyond
is Socrates, until Evagrius takes up the thread of affairs. If Sozomen had written the more
recent events parallel with Socrates, Nicephorus would undoubtedly have followed him as
before. Of Theophanes, one cannot speak so confidently. Moreover, we cannot help asking,
since we have Socrates, Theodoret, and Evagrius complete, why should Sozomen, who was
so admired an author, have suffered any loss? Now, if we have Sozomen entire so far
as he wrote, why did he stop where he did? There are no sufficient subjective reasons to be
offered. It could scarcely have been in any unfavorable criticism of his prince, for the work
seems to have been accepted by his imperial patron ; and there was certainly nothing as objec-
tionable in Sozomen, as in Socrates or in Olympiodorus. Nor is it likely that the unhappiness
which invaded the court, the domestic jealousies, which rent its religious as well as connubial
peace, or the quarrels over Cyrus or Paulinus or Chrysaphius, in any way restrained him ; for he
was beyond some, if not all of these agitations, at the time of his writing, and he had deliberately
chosen to ignore such noble personages as Anthemius, Troilus, Synesius, Aurelianus, and Eudocia,
so that we can argue little from his silence, save his manifest jealousy for Pulcheria, and his
hostility to certain more liberal tendencies developed under Eudocia. The Nestorian controversy
would have been a choice field wherein to exalt the influence of Pulcheria, as he himself sug-
gested. On the whole, one is constrained to believe that Sozomen died before he had completed
the record which he had proposed to himself. He must have been nearing his seventieth year
when thus suddenly arrested in his chosen study.

The Major Uses made of his Work.

The major uses of him subsequently were by {a) Epiphanius Scholasticus, who made a translation
into Latin, which Cassiodorus abbreviated, polished, and incorporated in the Historia Tripartita}

' See preface of that work.


INTRODUCTION. 225


(i>) The deacon Liberatus, in his Historia Nestorianorum, used the Tripartita.

(r) Theophanes, in his Chronographia.

(^/) Theodorus Lector in his Historia Tripartita.

(<f) Nicephorus CalUstus, in his Historia Ecclesiastica incorporating Theodorus' Tripartita.

The Errors.

The errors are numerous, as already suggested by Possevin, on dogmatic grounds ; Du Pin,
and more recently by Harnack, for historic reasons. They are due to the lack of a systematic
chronology, and the blind copying of his authority, especially Socrates, and occasionally to his
attempts to correct the order given by his authority.


PART III. — Bibliography.
A. Bibliography of Bibliography.

Gesner: Bibliotheca universalis, s.v. 1545.

Possevin: Apparatus sacer. s.v. 1608.

DuPiN: Nouvelle bibl. d. Auteurs Eccles. Tom. iii. Pt. ii. 189-90. 1690.

Sluter: Propylaeum Historic Christianae, ix. 6, p. 45. 1696.

Ittig: De bibliothecis patrum apostol. s.v. 1 699-1 700.

Olearius: Bibliotheca scriptorum eccles. Tom. ii. s.v. 171 1.

Fabricius: Bibliotheca Grsec. Vol. vi. Lib. v. c. 4. xxxi. 1726.

Cave: Scriptorum Eccles. Hist. Literaria. p. 427. 1740-

Walch: Bibl. Theol. Tom. iii. p. 1 14. 1762.

DeBure: Bibliographic instructive. Nos. 4393-5. 1768.

Nodier: Bibliotheque sacree gr.-lat. s.v. 1826.

BooSE: Grundriss der Christl. Liter., § 230. 1828.

Clarke: Concise view of the succession of Sac. Lit. Vol. ii. p. 225. 1831.

Hoffmann, S. F. W. : Lexicon Bibliog. s.v. 1833-38.

Walch, J. G. : Biblioth. Patristica, ii. § 16. 2. ed. Danz. 1834.

Vossius (ed. Westermann) : De Historicis Grsecis, ii. 20. 1838.

Ceillier: Hist. Gen. des Auteurs Sacres. Tom. viii. c. 39. 1858 sqq.

Alzog: Handb. d. Patrologie. 3d ed. 1876.

NicOLAi : Griech. Literaturgesch. in neuer Bearbeitung. 1874-8.

Chevalier: Repertoire des sources hist. d. M. A. s.v. 1877 sqq.

NiRSCHL: Lehrbuch der Patrologie u. Patristik. Vol. iii. c. 4, 235. 188 1 sqq.

Harnack: Herzog R. E., Vol. xiv. s.v. 1884.

: Encycl. Br., Vol. xxii. s.v. 1887.


Thuille: Patristisches Handbuch. i{

B. Texts.

\. Manuscripts. — It would indeed be a desirable work to have a uniform apparatus of the codices, not only
of Sozomen, but of all the Greek Church historians. Admirable as is Heinchen's survey of Eusebian MSS., it is
neither uniform nor complete. No editor of Sozomen from Stephen down, has deemed it necessary to work up the
detail even as well as Heinchen. Nolte evidently had the material in hand, but the labor remains to be done.
The numbers and positions of many codices have been changed since the days of Valesius, Montfaucon, and Haene-
lius, and it is impossible to bring harmony out of the differences without direct inspection. It would seem as if no
one had consulted some of those mentioned by Montfaucon; e.g. in the Inventarium MSS. monasterii S. Petri Carnu-
Jensis, the title is given without number; Socratis, Sozomenis et Theodoreti historia Ecclesiastica, vol. in fol. notat
P. sseculo ix. (ii. 1246); and the two described by Haenehus {a) Socratis, Sozomenis historia ecclesiastica memb.
fol. exemp. vetus, at Chartres (Fasc. i. col. 130). {F) iv. 2, Hermise Sozomeni Salaminis, historicae ecclesiasti-
cae lib. ix. (Fasc. iii. c. 93) in the Escorial.

II. Editions of Text. — I. The first printed text without translation was by Robert Stephen: Eusebii Pamphili,
Ecclesiasticae historiae, libri x.; ejusdem de vita Constantini, libri v.; Socratis, libri vii. ; Theodoreti episc. Cyrenensis,
libriv. ; CoUectaneorum ex historia ecclesiastica Theodori lectoris, libri ii.; Hermiae Sozomeni, libri ix.; Evagrii,
libri vi.; (iraece Excud. Rob. Steph. Lutetia; Parisior. (pridie Cal. Jul.) 1544- Fol.


226 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

The sole manuscript at the basis of this edition is the Codex Regius bihliothecoe Parisiensis, n. 1437 (Nolte, 1444^
Possevin (App. crit.) says: A Graeca vero editio proviget ann. 1545, but this seems a mistake.

2. The next edition of the text was accompanied with a Latin translation; Graece et Latine ex interpretatione
J. Christophorsoni et recognitione SutTredi Petri una cum vaiiis lectionibus, J. Christophorsoni, Jos. Scaligeri, Jac.
Cuiaci, Jan. Gruteri, Jac. Bongarsii, Col. All. (Geneva) 161 2. 2 vols, in fol. This was the text of Stephen with
marginal notes of the above [see Hussey, Nolte]. The sources of the notes are not sure.

3. Reprint of Geneva edition : Bibliotheca magna veterum patrum et antiq. Scriptorum eccles. primo a MargarinO'
de la Bigne coUecta. Tom. v. has Soc. and Soz. with the Latin of Christophorson and Suff. Petrus. Colon.
1618-22.

4. The edition of Valesius, 1659- 1668, with a new translation by himself. Socratis Scholastic! et Hermiae
Sozomeni historia ecclesiastica. Henricus Valesius graecum textum collatis MSS. Codicibus emendavit, Latine
vertit, et annotationibus illustravit. Adjecta est ad calcem disputatio Archelai Episcopi adversus Manichaeum. Pari-
siis, 1668. Fol. In this edition there are the preface to the reader, explaining his sources; an essay on the life and
writings of the historians; and the text is followed by annotations. This edition is conspicuous for the number of
codices, more or less accurately collated. The Codex Fuketanus is his chief reliance; the previous annotations-
were used; he claims to have made no alteration without warrant.

5. Bibliotheca Maxima Veterum Patrum M. de la Bigne, Lugd. 1677. In vol. vii. of this series; this repro-
duces the Genevan edition.

6. A reprint of Valesius. Eusebii Pamph. Ep. Caesar, et Theodoreti, Evagrii, Socratis et Sozomeni Historia
Ecclesiastica. Gr. Lat. cum notis Valesii. 3 Tomi. Paris, 1678. Fol.

7. A reprint of Valesius. Socratis et Sozomeni historia ecclesiastica. Gr. et Lat. Paris, 1686. Fol.

8. A reprint of Valesius. Historiae Ecclesiasticae Eus. Pamph., Soc, Soz., Theodore ti, et Evag. cum excerptis
ex historia Philost. et Theod. Lee. Graec. et Lat. c. Annot. H. Valesii. 3 Tomi. Moguntiae, 1677-79. Fol.

9. Another reprint of Valesius, but from the Mayence edition : Historiae Ecclesiasticae Eus., Soc, etc.
Gnec.-Lat. 3 Tomi. Amst. 1695. ^°'-

10. Historiae ecclesiasticae Scriptores Graeci cum excerptis ex historia Philostorgi et Theodori Lect. Gr. et
Lat. c interpret. H. Valesii. Amst. 1699. Fol. (Georgi.)

11. A separate edition of Socrates and Sozomen, with the usual Valesian apparatus, and the debate of Bishop
Archelaus against the Manichaeans: Socratis Scholastici et Hermiae Sozomeni historia ecclesiastica graece et
latine. Henricus Valesius Graecum' textum collatis MSS. codicibus emendavit, Latine vertit, et Annotationibus-
illustravit. Adjecta est ad calcem disputatio Archelai Episcopi adversus Manichaeum. Ad novissimam editionem.
Parisiensem castigatissime recusa prostat Amstelodami apud Henricimi Wetstenium. 1700.

12. Valesian text as basis and apparatus, with new emendations. General title:

Eusebii Pamphili, Socratis Scholastici, Hermiae Sozomeni, Theodoreti et Evagrii, Item Philostorgii et Theo-
dori Lectoris quae extant historiae ecclesiasticae graece et latine, in tres tomos distributas. Henricus Valesius
graecum textum ex MSS. codicibus emendavit, latine vertit et Annotationibus illustravit.

Gulielmus Reading novas Elucidationes, praesertim Chronologicas, in hac Editione adjecit. Cantabrigiae, 1720.

Special title: Socratis Scholastici et Hermice Sozomeni historia ecclesiastica graece et latine. Henricus
Valesius graecum textum collatis MSS. codicibus emendavit, latine vertit et Adnotationibus illustravit. Adjecta.
est ad calcem disputatio Archelai Episcopi adversus Manichaeum. Hanc Editionem Criticis plurium Erudito-
rum Observationibus locupletavit Gulielmus Reading. Cantabrigiae, 1 720.

He restores readings of Stephen for some changes made by Valesius; uses Valesius' own manuscript annota-
tions, suggestions of Lowth, Casaubon's variae lectiones from the codex Jonesianus, and the codex Jonesianus itself*
But there is no general collation.

13. Reprint of the Reading edition. 3 vols. Augustae Taurinorum (Tur'n).

14. Valesian text as basis; partially new apparatus and emendations.

Sozomeni ecclesiastica historia edidit Robertus Hussey, S. T. B. Oxonii: e typographeo academico, i860.
Three volumes, two of text, and the third of annotations. The Latin version is by Valesius.

Hussey died before completing his work ; the apparatus was prepared by John Barrow. Besides other not
far-reaching collations, Hussey used a codex in the Bodleian, called the codex Barrocianus (B.), and a partial
collation of codex Severniensis, which is of inferior value.

15. Reproduction of Reading-Valesius :
Patrologiae Cursus Completus.

Socratis Scholastici, Hermiae Sozomeni Historia Ecclesiastica. Henricus Valesius graecum textum collatis
MSS. codicibus emendavit, latine vertit notis illustravit; cujus editionem criticis observationibus locupletavit
Gul. Reading. Accurante et denuo recognoscente. J. P. Migne. Paris. 1864.

16. The English catalogue announced in August, 1874: Sozomeni Historia Ecclesiastica, edited by Robert
Hussey, vol. i., 8°, Macmillan; but it did not appear.


INTRODUCTION. 227


C. Textual Criticism.

We have here (i) the apparatus mentioned in the greater editions; (2) the marginal notes and papers of
various readings by Bishop Christophorson, Scaliger, Casaubon, Curicius, Gurterius, etc. (3^ The sohtary work
of Dr. Nolte, who, in i860, wrote a recension of Hussey's edition of Sozomen. Theolog. Q. Schrift. 1861. iii.
417-451; as he had done for Socrates, and did later for Evagrius. He dwells especially on the valuable readings
which could be derived from the translation of Epiphanius Scholasticus and from Nicephorus Callistus.

This shows the urgency of collation de novo, and a new edition of the text.

D. Analytical Criticism.

Besides the meagre apparatus of the editions, the following works assist in the study, although some are not
directly related.

Holzhausen, F. A. Commentatio de fontibus quibus Socrates, Sozomenus ac Theodoretus in scribenda his-
toria sacra usi sunt, adiuncta eorum epicrisi, scripta a Friderico Augusto Holzhausen. Gottingae, 1825.

Rosenstein, J., in Forschung z. deutsch. Gesch. 1862, i., 166.

Matin: de fontibus Zosimi. Dissert. Berlin, 1865.

Sudhans: de Ratione quae intercedat inter Zosim. et Amm. cet. relationes. Dissert. Bonn, 1870.

Holden-Egger, Untersuchungen iiber einige annalist. Quellen z. Gesch. des v. u. vi. Jahrh. Neu. Archiv. d.
Gesch. f. alt. deutsch. Gesch. 1876, i. i.

Giildenpenning, A., Die Quellen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Theod. d. Gr. Dissert. Halle, 1878.

Guldenpenning, A., and Ifland, J. : Der Kaiser Theodosius der Grosse. Halle, 1878. Cf. Harnack in T. L, Z.
1879, 18.

Jeep, Ludwig. Quaestiones Fridericianae, Dissert. 188 1.

Sarrazin, J. V. De Theodoro Lectore Theophanis fonte praecipuo. Dissertatio inauguralis. Lips. 1881.

Jeep. L. : Quellenuntersuchungen zu den Griechischen Kirchenhistorikern. Bes. Abdruck aus dem vierzehnten
Supplementbande der Jahrbiicher fiir classische Philologie. Leipzig, 1884.

Guldenpenning, A. : Die Kirchengeschichte des Theodoret von Kyrrhos, eine Untersuchung ihrer Quellen.
Halle, 1889.

The above show the sources and their interrelation.

E. Translations.

I. Latin. — I. Epiphanius Scholasticus. At the suggestion of Cassiodorus he translated Theodoret, Socrates,
and Sozomen. This version, Cassiodorus polished and selected from, for his Historia Ecclesiastica Tripartita. (See
Preface to that work.) This was frequently printed. The first edition, Paris, s. a.; Basle, 1523, and after.

2. Eusebii. Pamph. Historia Ecclesiastica c. Sozomeno et Socrate. Basle, 1544. Fol.
This was in the Stephen text. Possevin has severe criticism for Musculus (App. crit.).

3. The same : cum Eus., Soz., Theod. Lect., Evag., et Dorothei Tyri vitis Prophetarum et Apostolorum ex
ejusdem Musculi interpretatione et Theodoreti H. E. ex versione Joach. Camerarii. Basle, 1549. Fol.

4. The same in Basle, 1557. Fol.

5. Ecclesiasticae Scriptores Grieci c. Interpretatione lat. Jo. Christophorson i, recogniti a .Suffrido Petro.
Col. Agr. 1562. Fol.

Six books of Soz. were by J. C. ; the remaining three by S. P.

6. A reprint of (5). Louv. 1569. 8vo.

7. The same with all the translators. Jo. Jacobi Grynaei recognitione atque cum ejus notis. Basle, 1 5 70.
Fol.

8. The reprint of (5), according to Possevin: apud haeredis Arnoldi Birckmanni. Basle, 1570. Fol.

9. The reprint of (5), at Paris, 1571. Fol.
10. A reprint of (7). Basle, 1572. Fol.

II. The reprint of (5), Veteres Scriptores Historiae Ecclesiasticae Graeci. Col. Agr. 158 1. Fol.

12. A reprint of (7). Basle, 1587. Fol.

13. Reprint of (3). Basle, 1594. Fol.

14. A new version from new collations and improvements by Gryna;us :

Eusebii Pamphili, Ruffini, Socratis, Theodoriti, Sozomeni, Theodori, Evagrii, et Dorothei Ecclesiastica Historia,
sex prope secvlorvm res gestas complectens : Latine iam olim a doctissimis viris partim scripta, partim e Graeco a
clarissimis viris, Vuolfgango Musculo, Joachimo Camerario, et Johanne Christophersono Britanno, eleganter
conversa: et nunc ex fide Graecorum codicum sit ut novum opus videri possit, per Joan. Jacobum Grynasum locis
obscuris innameris illustrata, dubijs explicata, mutilis restituta: Chronographia insuper Abrahami Bucholceri, ad


228 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

Annum Epochse Christianae 1598, et lectionis sacne historiae luculenta Methodo exornata. Cum continuatione in
praesentem annum 1611. Et Indicibus rerum verborumq' : lucupletiis. Basileae, 161 1. Pol.
The sources for the new readings are not given.

15. Ecclesiastics Historiae Scriptores. Laline tantum. Basle, 161 2. Fol (Georgi.)

16. A reprint of (11). Coll. All. 1 61 2. Fol.

17. Ecclesiasticae historiae Eusebii. Soc, Soz., Theodoret, Evag., Latine tantum ex Valesii versione. Paris,
1677. Fol.

II. German. — I. Eusebii Pamphili, Sozomeni, Socratis und Theodorets Kirchen Historic dutch Hestionera
(Caspar Hedio). Strassb. 1545. Fol.

This was on the basis of the H. E. Tripartita.
2. A reprint of (l). Basle, 1 607. Fol.

III. French.— I. General title : Histoire de I'Eglise. 1675.

Special title for Vol. iii. : Ilistoire de I'eglise, ecrite par Sozomene. Traduite par Monsieur Cousin, President
en la cour des Monnoyes. Tome iii. a Paris, 1676. 4°.

2. Reprint of (i). Amst. 1686. 6 vols, in 12°.

3. There was a French version of the Tripartite by Ludovicus Cyaneus. Paris, 1568. Fol.

4. Possevin (App. Crit. s. Soc.) ascribes a translation of Socrates (including Soz.?) into French in his day to
Jacobus Billius Prunaeus.

IV. English. — I. An Abridgement of the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and Theo-
doret, translated into English by Samuel Parker. 2 vols. London, 1707. 8*^.

2. A reprint of (i). London, 1 709. Fol.(?)

3. A third edition: The Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodorit Faithfully
Translated and Abridg'd from the Originals. Together with A brief Account of the Lives of these Historians, and
several Useful Notes and Illustrations, and a copious Index. By Mr. Parker.

The Third edition, carefully Review'd by the Author, and very much Corrected, Improv'd and Enlarg'd. To
which is now added, by a Friend, an Abridgment of the History of Evagrius Scholasticus. The Whole chiefly
design'd for the Use of Young Students in Divinity, and Families I^eligiously disposed. London, 1729. 4°.

4. A History of the Church in nine books from A.D. 324 to A.D. 440 : a new translation from the Greek, with
a memoir of the author. London, 1846. 8°.

This is in the Bagster series of the Greek Ecclesiastical Historians of the first six centuries. 1843-46.

5. A reprint of (4), Bohn's Ecclesiastical Library.

History of the Church by Sozomen and Philostorgius. The Ecclesiastical History of Sozomen, comprising
a History of the Church, from a.d. 324 to A.D. 440. Translated from the Greek, with a memoir of the author.

Also the Ecclesiastical History of Philostorgius, as epitomized by Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople. Trans-
lated by Edward Walford, Late Scholar of Balliol College, Oxford. London, 1855. 8°.

6. A reprint of (4). London, 1868. 8°.

F. Historiography.

The usual Introductions to Church Histories: on the History of Church History; particularly Schrockh, i. 148-
9, vii. 188-90.

Staijui-IN C. F. (Hemsen). Geschichte und Literatur der Kirchengeschichte. Hannover, 1827.

Baur, J. Ch. : Die Epochen der kirchlichen Geschichtschreibung. Tiib. 1832.

DOWLING, J. G. : An introduction to the critical study of Ecclesiastical History. London, 1838.

Ten Haar, B. : de Ilistoriographie der Kerkgeschiedenis. Utrecht, 1870.

NiRSCHL, Jos. : Propadcutik d. Kirchengeschichte. Mainz, 1888.

Ceillier and Harnack as before.

This is also a field that needs scholars.

G. Literature.

[This does not pretend to be exhaustive.]

1. Biographical.

Photius : Myrobiblion : codex 30, a few lines of biography and authorship.

SiGEBERT OF Gembloux : de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis (ed. Fabricius), c. II.

TrithemU'S: de Ecclesiasticis scriptoribus (ed. Fabricius), cxxxvi.

Hoffmann, Jo. Jac. : Lexicon Universale historiam sacram et profanam, etc. Tom. iv. s.v.

MoRERi : le Granrl Dictionnaire Historiquc. Tom. vi. s.v.

Zedler: Universal Lexicon. Tom. x.\.\viii. s.v.


INTRODUCTION. 229


Wetzer u. Welte : Lexicon. Art. Kirchengeschichte. vi.^
Smith: Diet. G. R. Biog. and Myth. (Art. by J. C. Means). Vol. iii.
MiCHAUD : Biographic Universelle. Tom. xxxix. s.v.
DidotFr£res: Nouvelle Biographic General. Tom. xliv. s.v.
Glaire, J-B. : Diet. univ. des Sciences Eeelesiastiques, s.v.
LiCHTENBERGER : Encyclopedic des Sciences Religieuses. Tom. xi. s.v.
Smith : Art. Vol. iv. Diet. Christ. Biog. Art. by William Milligan.

2. Historical.

(a) Theodorus Lector was the first to have used Sozomen for a Tripartite history, and doubtless alluded to
him (cf. Nic. Call. H. E. i. i).

EvAGRius ScHOLASTicus : H. E. i. Preface.

Epiphanius Scholasticus and Cassiodorus in the preface to H. E. Tripartita.

Gregory the Great mentions him by mistake for Theodoret, in Book vii. of his letters; Ep. 34.

NiCEPHORUS Callistl^s: H. E. i. I.

Baronius: An. Eccl. Vols, iii.-v., ed. 1707.

Bellarmin-Labbe: Dissertationes philologicae de Seriptoribus ecclesiasticis. Vol. ii. 371, 372.

Pagi : Critica hist. Chronol. in An. Eeeles. Baronii Saec. iv. 76-292.

TiLLEMONT: Histoire des Emper. Rom. vi. 123-7; 613-4.

DuCange: Historia Byzantina. Paris, 1680.

Gibbon: Decline and Fall. Vols. ii. iii. Boston, 1862.

Hertzberg, W. : D. Gesch. Griechenlands unter d. Herrschaft d. Romer. 3 Bde. Halle, 1866-75,

SiEVERS, G. R. : Studien z. Gesch. d. rom. Kaiser. Berlin, 1870.

Finlay: History of Greece. Vol. i. Oxford, 1877.

(*) Holder, Alf. : Inventio sanctae erucis : Actorum Cyriacus, pars i. lat. et gr. &c. Leipzig, 1889.

Nestle, Eberh. : De Sancta Cruce, ein Beitrag z. christl. Legendengeschichte. Berlin, 1889.

Draseke, J. : zu Apollinarius v. Laodicea. L zu den dogmat. Bruchst. des A. II. zur Psalmen- Metaphrase
des A. Zwth. xxxi. 469-487. Die Abfassungszeit der Psalm. -Metaphr. des Apoll. ZwTh. xxxii. 108-120.

Vitalios von Antiochia u. sein Glaubensbekenntniss. ZWL, 186-201, 1888.

Ihm, M. : Studia Ambrosiana. Jahrbucher f. class. Philologie, 1889. Suppl. Bd. xvii. i, pp. 1-124. rec.
JiUicher, Theol. L. Z. 1889, 26.

Draseke, J.: ApoUinarios' von Laodicea Dialoge "Uber d. heil. Dreieinigkeit." TSK 1890, i, pp. 137-171.

Des ApoUinarios v. Laodicea Schrift. wider Eunomius. ZKG, xi. i, 1889.

Phobadius von Agennum und seine Schrift gegen die Arianer. ZWL, 335-343; 391-407. 1889.

Batiffol, R. : Fragmente d. Kirchengesch. d. Philostorgius, Rom. Quartalschr. f. christl. Alterthumskunde
u. f. Kirchengesch. 1889, 2 and 3.

Batiffol, P. : Studia patristica. fitudes d'ancienne litterature ehretienne. Fase. i (v. d. Wilpert; rom.
Quartalschrift 1890, i; v. Funk; TQS, 1890, 2).

(c) Gelzek, H. : Sextus Julianus Africanus u. d. byzantin. Chronographie. Leipzig, 1880-85 (ii.); rec. Hil-
genfeld, ZwTh, 30, 3, 1887.

(d) DE Broglie (le due Albert) : L'Eglise et I'Empire remain au IV« siecle. 3 parties. Paris, 1867-9.
Proudhon, p. J. : Cesarisme et Christianisme de I'an 45 avant J.-C. ^ I'an 476 apres. 2 vols. Paris, 1883.
Tozer, H. F. : The Church and the Eastern Empire. London, 1888.

Langen, Jos.: Gesch. d. Rom. Kirche bis zum Pontificate Leo's I. Bd. i.; von Leo L bis Nicolaus I. Bd.
ii. Bonn, 1 881-5.

Wolff, P. : Die irp6fdpoi auf d. Synode zu Nicaa. ZWL. 1889, 3, pp. 137-151.

Bright, Wm. : History of the Church, a.d. 313-451. 2d edition. London, 1869.

Newman, J. H. : Arians of the Fourth Century. 3d edition. London, 1871.

Tracts Theological and Ecclesiastical. Nos. ii. and iii. London, 1874.

GWATKIN, H. M. : Studies of Arianism chiefly referring to the character and chronology of the reaction which
followed the council of Nicaea. 1882.

The Arian Controversy. (Epochs of Church History, Vol. 15.) New York, 1890.

SoNNiNO, G. : Di uno scisma in Roma i tempi di Valentiniano L Livorno, 1888.

Draseke,}.: Der Sieg d. Christenthums in Gaza. ZWL, 20-40. 1888.

BiRT, Thdr. : De fide Christiana quantum Stilichonis state in aula imperatoria occidentali valuerit. Mar-
burg, 1885.


230 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

Bright, Wm. : Notes on the canons of the first four general councils. London, 1882.

Martin, P. : Le Pseudo-Synode connu dans I'histoire sous le nom de Brigandage d'Ephese, etudie d'apr^s ses
actes, retrouves en syriaque. Paris, 1875.

SCHULTZE, v.: Gesch. d. Untergangs d. Griech.-R6m. Heidenthums. Bd. i. Jena, 1887; rec. Wissowa:
Nuova Centologia, Ser. iii.. Vol. xvii. Fasc. 18, 1888. Dtsche. Litztg. 1888, 44, Gwatkin, H. M. : The Engl.
Hist. Rev. 1889, Jan.

Martin, J. P. P. : Les origines de I'eglise d'Edesse et des eglises syriennes. Paris, 1889.

GiJRRES, J.: D. Christenthum im Sassanidenreich. ZwTh, xxxi. 449-468.

BoissiER, G. : Etudes d'histoire religieuse. Le Christianisme et I'invasion des Barbares . . . le lendemain de
I'invasion. Revue des deux mondes, 1890. i*"" mai, pp. 145-172.

(e) Manso: Das Leben Constantin d. Grossen. Breslau, 1817.
BuRCKHARDT: D. Zeit Constantin's d. Grossen. 2 Aufl. Leipzig, 1880.
Keim: D. Ubertritt Constantin's d. Grossen z. Christenthum. Zurich, 1862.
Zahn: Constantin d. Grosse u. d. Kirche. Hannover, 1876.

Brieger : Konstantin d. Grosse als Religionspolitiker. Gotha, 1880.

GOrkes, F. : Weitere Beitraege z. Gesch. d. constantinischen Zeitalters. ZwTh, xxxiii., 2, pp. 206-215
1890.

Crivellucci, a.: Delia fide storica di Eusebio nella vita di Constantino, 1889; rec. Schultze : Theol. Litblt.
1889, 9-10.

Mariano, R. : Constantino Magno e la chiesa cristiana (Nuova Antologia, xxv., fasc. 10; 16 maggio, 1890,
pp. 271-299.

Mucke, J. F. A.: Flavius Claudius Julianus. 2 abthl. Gotha, 1867-9.

Kendall, G. H.: The Emperor Julian; Paganism and Christianity. London, 1879.

Neumann, K. J.: Prolegomena zu Juliani imperatoris librorum contra Christianos quae supersunt. Lips. 1880.

, : Juliani Imperatoris Librorum contra Christianos quae supersunt. Leipzig, 1880.

, : Kaiser Julians Biicher gegen d. Christen. Leipzig, 1880.

King, C. W. : Julian, the emperor ; containing Greg. Nazianzen's two invectives, and Libanius' Monody with
Julian's extant theosoph. works. London, 1888.

2toECKLER, O. : Julianus u. s. christl. Gegner. B. G. 41-48, IOI-I13. 1888.

ScHWARZ: De vita et de scriptis Juliani Imperatoris. Bonn, 1888; rec. Neumann: TLz, 1889, 5.

Largajolli, D., e Pietro Parisio: Nuovi studi intorno a Guiliano imperatori. Torino, 1889. (Estr. della
Riv. di filol. e d'istruz. class, xvii. 7-9.)

Stuffken, J. M. : Diss, de Theodosii Magni in rem christianam meritis. Lugd., Bat., 1828.

GUldenpenning, a., Ifland, J. : D. Kaiser Theodosius d. Gr. Ein Beitrag zur rom. Kaisergeschichte.
Halle, 1878.

RiCHTER, H. : D. Westrom. Reich besonders unter den Kaisern Gratian, Valentinian II., und Maximus.
Berlin, 1865.

GiJLDENFENNiNG, A.; Gesch. d. ostrom. Reiches unter den Kaisern Arcadius u. Theod. II. Halle, 1885.

(/) Pallmann : D. Gesch. d. Volkerwanderung v. d. Gothenbekehrung bis z. Tode Alarichs n. d. Quellen
dargestellt. i. Tl. Gotha, 1863. 2. Tl. Weimar, 1864.

WiETERSHEiM, Ed. V. : Gesch. d. Volkerwanderung. 2 Aufl. bes. v. F. Dahn. Leipzig, 1880.

itiJPKE, RUD. : Deutsche Forschungen, Die Anfange des Konigtums bei den Gothen. Berlin, 1859.

ASCHBACH : Gcsch. d. Westgothen. Frankfurt, 1827.

Mannert: Gesch. d. Vandalen. Leipzig, 1785.

Papencordt, Fel. : Gesch. der vandal., Herrschaft in Africa. Berlin, 1837.

Procop. : Vandalenkrieg fibers, v. Coste. Leipzig, 1885.

Schmidt, L. : Aelteste Gesch d. Vandalen. Beitrag. z. Volkerwanderung. Leipzig, 1888.

Klemm: Attila u. Waltter v. Aquitanien nach d. Geschichte, Sage u. Legende dargestellt. Leipzig, 1827.

Haage: Gesch. Attila's. Prgr. Celle, 1862.

Thierry: Histoire d' Attila et de ses successeurs. Paris, 5 6d. 2 vols., 1874.

Dahn, F. : D. Konige d. Germanen. Wurzburg, 1861-70.

Arnold, W.: Deutsche Geschichte. Gotha, 188 1-3.

(f) Hertzberg, W. : Gesch. Griechenlands seit d. Absterben d. antiken Lebens (in Heeren u. Ukert 40, iii.).
Gotha, 1879.

Walter, Ferd. : Gesch. d. rom. Rechts bis auf Justinian. 2 Tie. 3 Aufl. Bonn, i860.

Kruger, Gust. : Monophysitische Streitigkeiten im Zusammenhange mit der Reichspolitik. Jena, 1 884.


INTRODUCTION. 231


Brother Azarias: Aristotle and the Christian Church. London, i{

BoissiER, G. : Etudes d'hist. rel. V. L'affaire de I'autel de la Victoire. Rd. m. Juli, 61-90 1888.

Schick, C. : D. Stephanskirche der Kaiserin Eudokia bei Jerusalem, 1888. Z. d. Dtsch. Palaestina-Ver.
xi. 3-4.

Seeck, O. : Quaestiones de notitia dignitatum. Inaug. Diss. Berlin, 1873.

, : Notitia dignitatum, accedunt notitia urbis Constantinopolitanae et laterculi provinciarum.

Berlin, 1876.

HuDEMANN, E. E. : Gesch. d. rom. Postwesens wahrend d. Kaiserzeit. (Calvary's philol. u. archaeol. Bibl.
Bd. 32.) Berlin, 1875.

Leora, a. : Des Publicains et des societes vectigalium. Paris, 1876.

Matthiass, Bernh.: D. rom. Grundsteuer u. d. Vectigalrecht. Erlangen, 1882.

Seeck, O. : Die Zeitfolge d. Gesetze Constantius. Z. f. Rechtsgeschichte, romanist. Abthl. x. 2,3, 1-44;
177-251.

(/4) Amelineau, E. : Hist, de S. Pakhome et de ses communautes (Annales de mus6e Guiniet. T. 17). (v. J.
Reville h. Revue de I'hist. des religions. 1890, janv.-fevr.)

Barbier, p.: Vie de S. Athanase. Tours, 1888; rec. Martinor : Etudes relig., philos., hist, et litt., 1889, fevr.;
Piolin, P. : Revue des questions hist. 1889, avril.

Reynolds, H. R. : Athanasius, his Life and Work. (Church History Series.) London, 1889.

Martin, C : Life of St. Jerome. London, Paul, i888.

EiRAiNER, C. : Der hi. Ephriim d. Syrer. Kempten, 1889. (Rec: Janetschek, Stud. u. Mitthlgn. aus d.
Benedictiner u. Cistercienser Orden, x. Bd. i. 2, 1889; L. Atzberger, Liter. Rundschau f. d. kathol. Deutsch-
land, 1890, 6).

Lamy, T. J. : Etudes de patrologie orientale! Saint Ephrem. L'Universite Catholique NST, iii. 3, mars,
1890. pp. 321-349; iv. 6, juin, pp. 161-190.

Waitz, G. : Ub. d. Leben u. d. Lehre des Ulfila. Hannover, 1840.

Bessel, W. : Ueb. d. Leben des Ulfilas u. d. Beckehrung der Gothen z. Christenthum. G6tt..i86o.

Scott, C. A. A.: Ultilas, Apostle of the Goths. London, 1S85.

Forster, Th. : Ambrosius, Bischof v. Mailand. Eine Darstellg. seines Lebens u. Werkens. Halle, 1884.

LuDWiG, F. : Der heil. Joh. Chrysostomos in seinem Veraltniss zum byzantinischem Hof. Braunsberg, 1883.

Hansen: De vita Aetii. Dissert. Dorpat. 1840.

Richter: de Stilichone et Rufino. Dissert. Halse, i860.

VoLKMANN : Synesius v. Kyrene. Berlin, 1869.

Gregorovius, F. : Athenais, Gesch. e. byzantin. Kaiserin. 2 Aufl. Leipzig, 1882.


PART IV. — Conclusion.

The original translation, with its many excellences, seems to belong to an earlier school. It
is free both in enlargement and in compression ; words at times, and occasionally clauses, are
inverted. The editor felt the difficulty of recasting such a flowing style ; yet, in spite of the
resulting infelicity, he felt constrained to make every possible correction, and these have been
very numerous and extended in caption and text.

Sozomen uniformly describes the ancient heathen cult, of whatever form it might be, as
Hellenism, and its followers, Hellenists. It seemed advisable to retain the rendering " paganism,"
which the first translator used toward the middle and the end of his work, although he had not
been uniform in the beginning ; any other translation would cause a constant confusion between
nationality and religion.

In order to give a better impression of the author and text, the spelHng of the proper names
indicated by the text has been adhered to ; the orthography " Novatus " is not a real exception.
Where the spelling of a proper name in the caption differs from that of the text, the difference of
origin between the two must be borne in mind. To the Pseudo-Nicephorus are due the headings ;
these variations have been preser\'ed purposely.

The notes have been for the greater part limited to the sources, previous or contemporary.
It has not been deemed necessary to load the text with references to the literature, ancient or


232 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

modern, sufficiently indicated in the Bibliography. It is just for the editor to say, that while the
literature is not unfamihar to him, he does not believe in the modern German method of annota-
tion and allusion to every book under the sun, to the grave impediment of individual study.
Similarly, the dictionaries show the biography and archaeology in a better form than can be
compressed into a note. Nor did the editor think it best to introduce into the translation
any technical discussion as to the errors of Sozomen.


PREFATORY REMARKS, BY VALESIUS,


CONCERNING THE


LIFE AND WRITINGS OF SOZOMEN.


•oJJKoo

Hermias Sozomen practiced the law at Constantinople, at the same time with Socrates. His ancestors were
not mean; they were originally natives of Palestine, being inhabitants of a village near Gaza, called Bethelia.
This village was very populous in times past, and had most stately and ancient churches. But the most glorious
structure of them all was the Pantheon, situated on an artificial hill, which was the tower as it were of Bethelia,
as Sozomen relates in chap. xv. of his fifth book. The grandfather of Hermias Sozomen was born in that village,
and first converted to the Christian faith by Hilarion the monk. For when Alaphion, an inhabitant of the same
village, was possessed with a devil, and the Jews and physicians, attempting to cure him, could do him no good by
their enchantments, Hilarion, by a bare invocation of the name of God, cast out the devil. Sozomen's grand-
father, and Alaphion himself, amazed at this miracle, with their whole families embraced the Christian religion.
The grandfather of Sozomen was eminent for his expositions of the Sacred Scriptures, being a person endowed
with a polite wit, and an acuteness of understanding ; and besides, he was well skilled in literature. Therefore he
was highly esteemed by the Christians inhabiting Gaza, Ascalon, and the places adjacent, as being useful and
necessary for the propagating of religion, and could easily unloose the knots of the Sacred Scriptures. But Ala-
phion's descendants excelled others in their sanctity of life, in kindness to the indigent, and in other virtues; and
they were the first that built churches \and monasteries there, as Sozomen says in the passage above cited, where he
also adds, that some holy persons of Alaphion's family were surviving even in his own days, with whom he himself
conversed when very young, and concerning whom he promises to speak more afterwards. Most probably he
means Salamanes, Phusco, Malchio, and Crispio, brothers, concerning whom he speaks in chap, xxxii. of his sixth
book. For he there says that these brethren, instructed in the monastic discipline by Hilarion, were, during the
empire of Valens, eminent in the monasteries of Palestine; that they lived near Bethelia, a village in the country of
the Gazites, and Were descendants of a noble family in those parts. He mentions the same persons in the fifteenth
chapter of book viii., where he says that Crispio was Epiphanius's archdeacon. It is evident, therefore, that the
brothers were of Alaphion's family. Alaphion, too, was related to Sozomen's grandfather, as we may conjecture;
first, because the grandfather of Sozomen is said to have been converted (together with his whole family) to the
Christian religion, upon account of Alaphion's wonderful cure, whom Hilarion had healed by calling on the name of
Almighty God. Secondly, this conjecture is confirmed by what Sozomen relates, viz., that when he was very young,
he conversed familiarly with the aged monks that were of Alaphion's family. And, lastly, from the fact that
Sozomen took his name from those persons who were either the sons or grandchildren of Alaphion. For he was
called Salamanes Hermias Sozomenus (as Photius declares in his Bibliotheca), from the name of that Salamanes
who, as we observed before, was the brother of Phusco, Malchio, and Crispio. Wherefore Nicephorus, and others,
are mistaken in supposing that Sozomen had the surname of Salaminius because he was born at Salamis, a city of
Cyprus. But we have before shown from .Sozomen's own testimony, that he was not born in Cyprus, but in Pales-
tine. For his grandfather was not only a Palestinian, as is above said, but Sozomen himself was also educated in
Palestine, in the bosom (so to say) of those monks who were of Alaphion's family. From this education Sozomen
seems to have imbibed that most ardent love of a monastic life and discipline, which he declares in so many places
of his history. Hence it is, that in his books he is not content to relate who were the fathers and founders of
monastic philosophy; but he also carefully relates their successors and disciples, who followed this way of life both
in Egypt, Syria, and Palestine, and also in Pontus, Armenia, and Osdroena. Hence also it is, that in the twelfth
chapter of the first book of his history, he has proposed to be read (in the beginning as it were) that gorgeous
account of the monastic philosophy. For he supposed that he should have been ungrateful, had he not after this
manner at least made a return of thanks to those in whose familiarity he had lived, and from whom, when he was
a youth, he had received such eminent examples of a good conversation, as he himself intimates, in the opening of

233


234 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

his first book. It is inferred that SoZomen was educated at Gaza, not only from the passage above mentioned, but
also from chap, xxviii. of his seventh book, where Sozomen says that he himself had seen Zeno, bishop of Majuma,
for this Majuma is a sea-port belonging to the Gazites. Although Zeno was nearly a hundred years old, he was
never absent from the morning and evening hymns, unless sickness detained him. After this Sozomen applied
himself to the profession of the law. He was a student of the civil law at Berytus, a city of Phoenicia, not far
distant from his own country, where there was a famous school of civil law. But he practiced the law at Constan-
tinople, as himself asserts, book lii. chap. iii. And yet he seems not to have been very much employed in pleading
of causes; for at the same time that he was an advocate in Constantinople, he wrote his Ecclesiastical History;
as may be concluded from his own words in the last-mentioned passage. Before he wrote his nine books of
Ecclesiastical History, Sozomen composed a Breviary of Ecclesiastical Affairs, from our Saviour's ascension to the
deposition of Licinius. This work was comprised in two books, as himself bears witness in the opening of his first
book; but these two books are now lost.

In the composure of his History, Sozomen has made use of a style neither too low nor too high, but one
between both, as is most agreeable to a writer of ecclesiastical affairs. Photius prefers Sozomen's style to that of
Socrates, and we agree with him in his criticism. But though Sozomen is superior in the elegance of his expres-
sion, yet Socrates excels him in judgment. For Socrates judges incomparably well, both of men, and also of
ecclesiastical business and affairs; and there is nothing in his works but what is grave and serious, nothing that
can be expunged as superfluous. But on the contrary, some passages occur in Sozomen that are trivial and
childish. Of this sort is his digression in his first book concerning the building of the city Hemona, and concern-
ing the Argonauts, who carried the ship Argo on their shoulders some furlongs, and also his description of Daphne
without the walls of the city Antioch, in chap. xix. of his sixth book; to which we must add that observation of
his, concerning the beauty of the body, where he treats of that virgin at whose house the blessed Athanasius was
concealed a long while. Lastly, his ninth book contains little else besides warlike events, which ought to have no
place in an Ecclesiastical History. Sozomen's style, however, is not without its faults. For the periods of his
sentences are only joined together by the particles 5e and t€, than which there is nothing more troublesome. Should
any one attentively read the epistle in which Sozomen dedicates his work to Theodosius junior, he will find it true
that Sozomen was no great orator.

It remains, that we inquire which of these two authors, Socrates or Sozomen, wrote first, and which of them
borrowed, or rather stole, from the other. Certainly, since both of them wrote almost the same things of the
same transactions, inasmuch as they both began at the same beginning, and concluded their liistory at the same
point (both beginning from the reign of Constantine, and ending at the seventeenth consulate of Theodosius
junior), it must needs be true, that one of them robbed the other'sjdesk. This sort of theft was committed by
many of the Grecian writers, as Porphyry testifies, Eusebius' Pneparatio Evangelica, bk. x. But which was the
plagiary, Socrates or Sozomen, it is hard to say, in regard both of them lived in the same times, and both wrote
their history in the empire of Theodosius junior. Therefore, in the disquisition of this question, we must make
use of conjecture. So Porphyry in the above-mentioned book, since it was uncertain whether Hyperides had
stolen from Demosthenes, or Demosthenes from Hyperides, because both had lived in the same time, decided to
use conjecture. Let us therefore see upon which of them falls the suspicion of theft. Indeed, this is my sentiment,
I suppose that the inferior does frequently steal from the superior, and the junior from the senior. But Sozomen
is in my judgment far inferior to Socrates; and he betook himself to writing his history when he was younger than
Socrates. P'or he wrote it whilst he was yet an advocate, as I observed before. Now, the profession of the
advocates amongst the Romans was not perpetual, but temporary. Lastly, he that adds something to the other,
and sometimes amends the other, seems to have written last. But Sozomen now and then adds some passages to
Socrates, and in some places dissents from him, as Photius has observed, and we have hinted in our annotations.
Sozomen therefore seems to have written last. And this is the opinion of almost all modern writers, who place
Socrates before Sozomen. So Bellarmine in his book " De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis"; who is followed by Miraeus,
Labbaeus, and Vossius. Amongst the ancients, Cassiodorus, Photius, and Nicephorus name Socrates in the first
place. Although Cassiodorus is found to have varied; for in the preface of the Tripartite History, he inverts the
order, and names Theodoret first, ranks Sozomen in the second place, and refers to Socrates as the last. So also
Theodorus Lector recounts them in his epistle which he prefixed to his Tripartite History. Thus far concerning
Sozomen.


MEMOIR OF SOZOMEN.

Little more than cursory allusions to Sozomen occur in the works of contemporary writers; and the materi-
als for a memoir of his life are therefore at best but few and scanty. We should, in fact, be destitute of almost all
knowledge as to his birth, education, mode of life, and private history, had not some information on these points
been furnished by himself. In the work before us, the only one which has caused his name to be handed down to
posterity, he draws aside the curtain which would otherwise have concealed his origin and parentage, and makes
known to us a portion of his family history. He tells us (book v. chap, xv.) that his grandfather was a native of
Palestine, and of Pagan parentage; that he, with all his family, was converted to Christianity on witnessing a mir-
acle wrought by St. Hilarion; and that, being possessed of great mental endowments, he afterwards became emi-
nently useful to the men of Gaza and Ascalon, by his extraordinary power in expounding the most obscure passages
of Holy Writ.

Our author himself seems to have been born about the beginning of the fifth century. He tells us that in his
youth some of the founders of monasticism in Palestine were still living, although they had reached a very advanced
period of life, and that he had enjoyed opportunities of intercourse with them. To this circumstance may probably
be attributed the tone of reverential admiration in which Sozomen invariably speaks of the ascetic inhabitants of the
desert.

The education of Sozomen was conducted with a view to the legal profession; and he studied for some years
at Berytus, then noted for its school of law. He afterwards established himself at Constantinople, and, it has been
conjectured, held some office at the court of Theodosius the Younger. He is reputed to have possessed some skill
in the law, but it is certain that he never attained any eminence in his profession. It is only in the character of an
historian that he has rendered himself conspicuous. His first work was an abridgment of Ecclesiastical History,
from the ascension of our Lord to the deposition of Licinius (a.d. 324), but this is not extant. The work before us
seems to have been commenced about the year 443. It embraces a period of 117 years; namely, from a.d. 323 to
A.D. 439. It is generally admitted to have suffered many alterations and mutilations; and this may, in some meas-
ure, serve to account for the frequent inaccuracies in point both of narrative and of chronology which pervade the
nine books of which it is composed. It is evident, from the very abrupt termination of this history, that it is but a
fragmentary portion of a larger work. The precise object of Sozomen in undertaking to write this history is not
apparent, as exactly the same ground had previously been gone over by Socrates, if we except the ninth book of the
former, which is almost entirely devoted to the political history of the times. The learned Photius prefers the style
of Sozomen to that of Socrates; yet Sozomen frequently evinces great deficiency in point of judgment, and on many
occasions enlarges upon details which are altogether omitted by Socrates, as unworthy of the dignity of Ecclesiasti-
cal History. To us, there is manifest advantage in possessing these separate chronicles of the same events. Facts
which might perhaps have been doubted, if not rejected, had they rested upon the sole authority of a single writer,
are admitted as unquestionable when authenticated by the combined testimony of Socrates, of Sozomen, and of
Theodoret. And, indeed, the very discrepancies which, on several minor points, are discernible in the histories of
these writers, are not without their use, inasmuch as they tend to the removal of all suspicion of connivance or
collusion.


ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR THEODOSIUS BY SALA-

MINIUS HERMIAS SOZOMEN, AND PROPOSAL

FOR AN ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


3j*iO<-


The popular saying is, that the former emperors were zealous about some useful matter or
other ; such as were fond of ornaments, cared for the royal purple, the crown, and the like ;
those who were studious of letters, composed some mythical work or treatise capable of fascmat-
ing its readers ; those who were practiced in war, sought to send the weapon straight to the mark,
to hit wild beasts, to hurl the spear, or to leap upon the horse. Every one who was devoted to
a craft which was pleasing to the rulers announced himself at the palace. One brings a precious
stone not easily susceptible of polish ; another undertakes to prepare a more briUiant color than
the purple robe ; one dedicates a poem or treatise ; another introduces an expert and strange
fashion of armor.

It is considered the greatest and a regal thing for the ruler of the whole people to possess,
at least, one of the homely virtues ; but no such great estimate has been made of piety, which
is, after all, the true ornament of the empire. Thou, however, O most powerful Emperor
Theodosius, hast in a word, by God s help, cultivated every virtue. Girt with the purple robe
and crown, a symbol of thy dignity to onlookers, thou wearest within always that true ornament
of sovereignty, piety and philanthropy. Whence it happens that poets and writers, and the
greater part of thy officers as well as the rest of thy subjects, concern themselves on every
occasion with thee and thy deeds. And when thou presidest as ruler of contests and judge
of discourses, thou art not robbed of thy accuracy by any artificial sound and form, but thou
awardest the prize sincerely, observing whether the diction is suitable to the design of the
composition ; so also with respect to the form of words, divisions, order, unity, phraseology,
construction, arguments, thought, and narrative. Thou recompensest the speakers with thy
favorable judgment and applause, as well as with golden images, erection of statues, gifts, and
every kind of honor. Thou showest greater personal favor toward the speakers than the ancient
Cretans did toward the much-sung Homer ; or the Alevadae did to Simonides ; or Dionysius,
the tyrant of Sicily to Plato, the companion of Socrates ; or Philip the Macedonian, to Theopom-
pus the historian ; or the Emperor Severus to Oppianus, who related in verse the kinds, nature, and
catching of fish. For after the Cretans had rewarded Homer with a thousand nummi, they
inscribed the amount of the gift on a public column as if to boast of their excessive munificence.
The Alevadae, Dionysius, and Philip were not more reserved than the Cretans, who boasted of
their modest and philosophical government, but quickly imitated their column, so that they might
not be inferior in their donative. But when Severus bestowed upon Oppianus a golden gift for
each line of his moderate verse, he so astonished everybody with his liberality, that the poems of
Oppianus are popularly called golden words to this day. Such were the donations of former
lovers of learning and discourses. But thou, O Emperor, surpassest any of the ancients in thy
liberality to letters, and thou seemest to me to do this not unreasonably. For while thou strivest
to conquer all by thy virtues, thou dost also conduct thine own affairs successfully, according to

236


ADDRESS TO THE EMPEROR THEODOSIUS. 237


thy thorough knowledge of the story of those ancient affairs, so prosperously directed by the
Greeks and Romans. Rumor says that during the day, thou takest military and bodily exercise,
and arrangest affairs of state by giving judicial decisions, and by making note of what is necessary,
and by observation, both in public and private, of the things which ought to be done ; and at
night that thou busiest thyself with books. It is a saying, that there serves thee for the study of
these works, a lamp which causes the oil to flow automatically into the wick, by means of some
mechanism, so that not one of the servants in the palace should be compelled to be taxed with
thy labors, and to do violence to nature by fighting against sleep. Thus thou art humane and
gentle, both to those near, and to all, since thou dost imitate the Heavenly King who is thy
pattern ; in that He loves to send rain, and causes the sun to rise on the just and unjust, as well
as to furnish other blessings ungnidgingly. As is natural, I hear also that by thy various learn-
ing, thou art no less familiar with the nature of stones, and the virtues of roots, and forces of
remedies, than Solomon, the wisest son of David ; while thou excellest him in virtue ; for Solomon
became the slave of his pleasures, and did not preserve to the end, that piety which had been for
him the source of prosperity and wisdom. But thou, most powerful Emperor, because thou
settest thy restraining reason in array against levity, art not only an autocrat of men, but also of
the passions of soul and body, as one would naturally suppose. And this, too, ought to be
remarked : I understand that thou dost conquer the desire for all food and drink ; neither the
sweeter figs, to speak poetically, nor any other kind of fruit in its season, can take thee prisoner,
except the little that thou dost touch and taste, after thou hast returned thanks to the Maker of all
things. Thou art wont to vanquish thirst, stifling heat, and cold by thy daily exercise, so that thou
seemest to have self-control as a second nature. Lately, as is well known, thou wast anxious to
visit the city of Heraclea in Pontus, and to restore it, prostrated by time, and thou tookest the
way in the summer season through Bithynia. When the sun about midday was very fiery, one of
the body-guard saw thee, heated with much sweat and clouds of dust, and, as if to do thee a favor,
he anticipatingly offered to thee a bowl which reflected brilliandy the rays of the sun ; he poured
in some sweet drink, and added cold water thereto. But thou, most powerful Emperor, didst
receive it, and didst praise the man for his good will, and thou didst make it obvious that thou
wouldst soon reward him for his well-wrought deed with royal munificence. But when all the
soldiers were wondering with open mouth at the dish, and were counting him blessed who should
drink, thou, O noble Emperor, didst return the drink to him and didst command him to use it in
whatever way he pleased. So that it seems to me that Alexander, the son of Philip, was surpassed
by thy virtue ; of whom it is reputed by his admirers, that while he, with the Macedonians, was
passing through a waterless place, an anxious soldier found water, drew it, and offered it to Alex-
ander ; he would not drink it, but poured out the draught. Therefore, in a word, it is appropriate
to call thee, according to Homer, more regal than the kings who preceded thee ; for we have
heard of some who acquired nothing worthy of admiration, and others who adorned their reign
with scarcely one or two deeds. But thou, O most powerful Emperor, hast gathered together all
the virtues, and hast excelled every one in piety, philanthropy, courage, prudence, justice, munifi-
cence, and a magnanimity befitting royal dignity. And every age will boast of thy rule as alone
unstained and pure from murder, beyond all governments that ever existed. Thou teachest thy
subjects to pursue serious things with pleasure, so that they show zeal for thee and public affairs,
with good will and respect. So that for all these reasons, it has appeared to me, as a writer of
Ecclesiastical History, necessary to address myself to thee. For to whom can I do this more
appropriately, since I am about to relate the virtue of many devoted men, and the events of the
Catholic Church ; and since her conflicts with so many enemies lead me to thy threshhold and
that of thy fathers? Come thou, who knowest all things and possessest every virtue, especially
that piety, which the Divine Word says is the beginning of wisdom, receive from me this writing,
and marshal its facts and purify it by thy labors, out of thy accurate knowledge, whether by
addition or elimination. For whatever course may seem pleasing to thee, that will be wholly


238 THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.

advantageous and brilliant for the readers, nor shall any one put a hand to it after thine approval.
My history begins with the third consulate of the Caesars, Crispus and Constantine, and stretches
to thy seventeenth consulship.' I deemed it proper to divide the whole work into nine parts :
the first and second books will embrace the ecclesiastical affairs under Constantine ; the third
and fourth, those under his sons ; the fifth and sixth, those under Julian, the cousin of the sons
of the great Constantine, and Jovian, and, further, af Valentinian and Valens ; the seventh and
eighth books, O most powerful Emperor, will open up the affairs under the brothers Gratian
and Valentinian, until the proclamation of Theodosius, thy divine grandfather, as far as thy
celebrated father Arcadius, together with thy uncle, the most pious and godly Honorius, received
the paternal government and shared in the regulation of the Roman world ; the ninth book I
have devoted to thy Christ-loving and most innocent majesty, which may God always preserve
in unbroken good will, triumphing greatly over enemies, and having all things under thy feet and
transmitting the holy empire to thy sons' sons with the approbation of Christ, through whom and
with whom, be glory to God, and the Father, with the Holy Spirit forever. Amen.


' This marks the proposed limits, a.o. 323 to a.d. 439, but he did not carry the narrative further than A.D. 425.


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


OF


SALAMINIUS HERMIAS SOZOMENUS.


3HHO


BOOK L


CHAP. I. — THE PREFACE OF THE BOOK, IN WHICH
HE INVESTIGATES THE HISTORY OF THE JEWISH
NATION ; MENTION OF THOSE WHO BEGAN SUCH
A WORK ; HOW AND FROM WHAT SOURCES HE
COLLECTED HIS HISTORY ; HOW HE WAS INTENT
UPON THE TRUTH, AND WHAT OTHER DETAILS
THE HISTORY WILL CONTAIN.

My mind has been often exercised in in-
quiring how it is that other men are very ready
to believe in God the Word, while the Jews are
so incredulous, although it was to them that
instruction concerning the things of God was,
from the beginning, imparted by the prophets,
who likewise made them acquainted with the
events attendant upon the coming of Christ, be-
fore they came to pass.^ Besides, Abraham, the
founder of their nation and of the circumcision,
was accounted worthy to be an eye-witness, and
the host of the Son of God." And Isaac, his
son, was honored as the type of the sacrifice on
the cross, for he was led bound to the altar by
his father and, as accurate students of the
sacred Scriptures affirm, the sufferings of Christ
came to pass in like manner. Jacob predicted
that the expectation of the nations would be for
Christ, as it now is ; and he likewise foretold
the time in which he came, when he said " the
rulers of the Hebrews of the tribe of Judah, the
tribal leader, shall fail." ^

This clearly referred to the reign of Herod,
who was an Idumean, on his father's side, and
on his mother's, an Arabian, and the Jewish
nation was delivered to him by the Roman sen-
ate and Augustus Caesar. And of the rest of the
prophets some declared beforehand the birth
of Christ, His ineffable conception, the mother


1 Cr. Eus. H. E
» Cf. Gen. xlix.


. 1. 4.
10.


* Cf. Gen. xviii.


remaining a virgin after His birth, His people,
and country.* Some predicted His divine artd
marvelous deeds, while others foretold His suf-
ferings, His resurrection from the dead. His as-
cension into the heavens, and the event accom-
panying each. But if any be ignorant of these
facts it is not difficult to know them by reading
the sacred books, Josephus, the son of Matthias,
also who was a priest, and was most distinguished
among Jews and Romans, may be regarded as
a noteworthy witness to the truth concerning
Christ^ ; for he hesitates to call Him a man since
He wrought marvelous works, and was a teacher
of truthful doctrines, but openly calls him Christ ;
that He was condemned to the death of the cross,
and appeared alive again the third day. Nor
was Josephus ignorant of numberless other
wonderful predictions uttered beforehand by
the holy prophets concerning Christ. He fur-
ther testifies that Christ brought over many to
Himself both Greeks and Jews, who continued
to love Him, and that the people named after Him
had not become extinct. It appears to me that
in narrating these things, he all but proclaims
that Christ, by comparison of works, is God. As
if struck by the miracle, he ran, somehow, a
middle course, assailing in no way those who
believed in Jesus, but rather agreeing with them.
When I consider this matter it seems reasonably
remarkable to me, that the Hebrews did not an-
ticipate, and, before the rest of men, immediately
turn to Christianity ; for though the Sibyl and
some oracles announced beforehand the future
of events concerning Christ we are not on this


* Isa. vii. 14, foretells that " a virgin shall conceive and bear a
son "; but he does not declare, in words, the perpetual virginity of
the mother of God. The Roman Catholic Church, however, infers
the doctrine from certain types in the Old Testament: such as
that of " the bush which burnt with fire, and was not consumed "
(Ex. iii. 2). * See Joseph. Antig. xviii. 33; xx. 9, i.


240


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[I.I.


account to attribute unbelief to all the Greeks.
For they were few, who, appearing superior in
education, could understand such prophecies,
which were, for the most part, in verse, and were
declared with more recondite words to the peo-
ple. Therefore in my judgment, it was the re-
sult of the heavenly preknowledge, for the sake
of the agreement in future events, that the com-
ing f.icts were to be made known, not only by
his own prophets, but in part also by strangers.
Just as a musician, under pressure of a strange
melody, may treat the superfluous tones of the
chords lightly with his plectrum, or add others
to those already existing.

Having now shown that the Hebrews, al-
though in the possession of numerous and more
distinct prophecies concerning the coming of
Christ, were less willing than the (rreeks to em-
brace the faith that is in Him, let what has been
said on the subject suffice. Yet let it by no
means be hence accounted contrary to reason
that the church should have been mainly built
u\) by the conversion of other nations ; for in
the first place, it is evident that, in divine and
great affairs, God delights to bring to pass
changes in a marvelous manner ; and then, be
it remembered, it was by the exercise of no
common virtues that those who, at the very be-
ginning, were at the head of religious affairs,
maintained their influence. If they did not, in-
deed, possess a language sharpened for expres-
sion or for beauty of diction, nor the power of
convincing their hearers by means of phrases
or mathematical demonstrations, yet they did
not the less accomplish the work they had un-
dertaken. They gave up their property, neg-
lected their kindred, were stretched upon a
cross, and as if endowed with bodies not their
own, suffered many and excruciating tortures ;
neither seduced by the adulation of the people
and rulers of any city, nor terrified by their
menaces, they clearly evidenced by their con-
duct, that they were supported in the struggle
by the hope of a high reward. So that they, in
fact needed not to resort to verbal arguments ;
for without any eflbrt on their part, their very
deeds constrained the inhabitants of every house
and of every city to give credit to their testi-
mony, even before they knew wherein it con-
sisted.

Since then so divine and marvelous a change
has taken place in the circumstances of men,
that ancient cults and national laws have fallen
into contempt ; since many of the most cele-
brated writers among the Greeks have tasked
their powers of eloquence in describing the
Calydonian boar, the bull of Marathon and
other similar prodigies, which have really, oc-
curred in countries or cities, or have a mystic
origin, why should not I rise above myself, and


write a history of the Church? For I am per-
suaded that, as the topic is not the achievements
of men, it may appear almo'st incredible that
such a history should be written by me ; but,
with God, nothing is impossible.

I at first felt strongly inclined to trace the
course of events from the very commencement ;
but on reflecting that similar records of the past
up to their own time had been compiled by
those wisest of men, Clemens' and Hegesippus,
successors of the apostles, by Africanus the his-
torian, and by Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus,''
a man intimately acquainted with the sacred
Scriptures and the writings of the Greek poets
and historians, I merely draw up an epitome in
two books of all that is recorded to have hap-
pened to the churches, from the ascension of
Christ to the deposition of Licinius.' Now,
however, by the help of God, I will endeavor to
relate the subsequent events as well.

I shall record the transactions with which I
have been connected, and also those concerning
which I have heard from persons who knew or
saw the affairs in our own day or before our
own generation. But I have sought for records
of events of earlier date, amongst the estab-
lished laws appertaining to religion, amongst the
proceedings of the synods of the period, amongst
the innovations that arose, and in the epistles of
kings and priests. Some of these documents are
preserved in palaces and churches, and others
are dispersed and in the possession of the
learned. I thought frequently of transcribing
the whole, but on further reflection I deemed it
better, on account of the mass of tlie documents,
to give merely a brief synopsis of their contents ;
yet whenever controverted topics are introduced,
I will readily transcribe freely from any work
that may tend to the elucidation of truth. If
any one who is ignorant of past events should
conclude my history to be false, because he
meets with conflicting statements in other
writings, let him know that since the dogmas of
Arius and other more recent hypotheses have
been broached, the rulers of the churches, difler-
ing in opinion among themselves, have trans-
mitted in writing their own peculiar views, for
the benefit of their respective followers ; and
further, be it remembered, these rulers convened
councils and issued what decrees they pleased,
often condemning unheard those whose creed
was dissimilar to their own, and striving to their
utmost to induce the reigning prince and nobles
of the time to side with them. Intent upon
maintaining the orthodoxy of their own dogmas,
the partisans of each sect respectively formed a

' More probably Clemens Alexandrinus than, as Valesius sug-
gests, Clemens Komaniis.

' See the /,//> o/' Eusebius, prefixed to his EccUs. Hist, in this
series.

' These books are not now extant.


1.3]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


241


collection of such epistles as favored their own
heresy, omitting all documents of a contrary
tendency. Such are the obstacles by which we
are beset in our endeavors to arrive at a conclu-
sion on this subject ! Still, as it is requisite, in
order to maintain historical accuracy, to pay the
strictest attention to the means of eliciting truth,
I felt myself bound to examine all writings of
this class according to my ability.

Let not an impertinent or malignant spirit be
imputed to me, for having dwelt upon the dis-
putes of ecclesiastics among themselves, con-
cerning the primacy and the pre-eminence of
their own heresy. In the first place, as I have
already said, an historian ought to regard every-
thing as secondary in importance to truth ;
moreover, the doctrine of the Catholic Church
is shown to be especially the most genuine, since
it has been tested frequently by the plots of
opposing thinkers ; yet, the disposal of the lot
being of God, the Catholic Church has main-
tained its own ascendancy, has reassumed its
own power, and has led all the churches and the
people to the reception of its own truth.

I have had to deliberate whether I ought to
confine myself to the recital of events connected
with the Church under the Roman government ;
but it seemed more advisable to include, as far
as possible, the record of transactions relative
to religion among the Persians and barbarians.
Nor is it foreign to ecclesiastical history to intro-
duce in this work an account of those who were
the fathers and originators of what is denomi-
nated monachism, and of their immediate suc-
cessors, whose celebrity is well known to us
either by observation or report. For. I would
neither be considered ungracious ^ towards them,
nor willing to consign their virtue to oblivion,
nor yet be thought ignorant of their history ;
but I would wish to leave behind me such a
record of their manner of life that others, led by
their example, might attain to a blessed and
happy end. As the work proceeds, these sub-
jects shall be noted as far as possible.

Invoking the help and propitiousness of God,
I now proceed to the narration of events ; the
present history shall have its beginning from
this point.

CHAP. II. OF THE BISHOPS OF THE LARGE TOWNS

IN THE REIGN OF CONSTANTINE ; AND HOW, FROM
FEAR OF LICINIUS, CHRISTIANITY WAS PROFESSED
CAUTIOUSLY IN THE EAST AS FAR AS LIBYA,
WHILE IN THE WEST, THROUGH THE FAVOR OF
CONSTANTINE, IT WAS PROFESSED WFTH FREEDOM.

During the consulate of Constantine Caesar
and Crispus Caesar, Silvester governed the

1 It is scarcely fair with Valesius to infer from this passage that
Sozomen was a monk himself.


Church of Rome ; Alexander, that of Alexandria ;
and Macarius, that of Jerusalem. Not one,
since Romanus,^ had been appointed over the
Church of Antioch on the Orontes ; for the
persecution it appears, had prevented the cere-
mony of ordination from taking place. The
bishops assembled at Nicaea not long after were,
however, so sensible of the purity of the life
and doctrines of Eustathius, that they adjudged
him worthy to fill the apostolic see ; although
he was then bishop of the neighboring Beroea,
they translated him to Antioch."'

The Christians of the East, as far as Libya on
the borders of Egypt, did not dare to meet
openly as a church ; for Licinius had withdrawn
his favor from them ; but the Christians of the
West, the Greeks, the Macedonians, and the Illy-
rians, met for worship in safety through the pro-
tection of Constantine, who was then at the
head of the Roman Empire.*


CHAP. m. BY THE VISION OF THE CROSS,

AND BY THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST, CONSTAN-
TINE IS LED TO EMBRACE CHRISTIANITY. HE

RECEIVES RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION FROM OUR
BRETHREN.

We have been informed that Constantine was
led to honor the Christian religion by the con-
currence of several different events, particularly
by the appearance of a sign from heaven.

When he first formed the resolution of enter-
ing into a war against Maxentius, he was beset
with doubts as to the means of carrying on his
military operations, and as to the quarter whence
he could look for assistance. In the midst of
his perplexity, he saw, in a vision, the sight of
the cross * shining in heaven. He was amazed at
the spectacle, but some holy angels who were
standing by, exclaimed, " Oh, Constantine ! by
this symbol, conquer ! " And it is said that
Christ himself appeared to him, and showed
him the symbol of the cross, and commanded
him to construct one like unto it, and to retain
it as his help in battle, as it would insure the
victory.

Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus," affirms that
he heard the emperor declare with an oath, as
the sun was on the point of inclining about the
middle of the day, he and the soldiers who were
with him saw in heaven the trophy of the cross


2 Who this Romanus was is uncertain, as his name does not
occur in the catalogue of bishops of Antioch, according to Hierony-
mus' edition of the Chronicon, nor in Nicephorus. In one index
at the end of a codex of Eusebius' History, in Florence, his name
occurs as the twenty-second, in order, and iJetween Philagonius and
Eustathius. Theodoret, H. E. i. 3, gives the succession Vitalis,
Philagonius. ^ Cf. Soc. i. 23, 24.

< For a narrative of the treatment of the Christians by Licinius,
and the war between Constantine and Licinius on their account, see
Soc. i. 3, 4.

5 With this chapter, cf. the parallel account in Soc. i. 2.

6 Cf. Eus. V. Q. i. 28.


242


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[1-3.


composed of light, and encircled by the follow-
ing words : " Ry this sign, conquer."

This vision met him by the way, when he was
perplexed as to whither he should lead his army.
While he was reflecting on what this could mean,
night came ; and when he fell asleep, Christ
appeared^ with the sign which he had seen in
heaven, and commanded him to construct a
representation of the symbol, and to use it as
his help in hostile encounters. There was noth-
ing further to be elucidated ; for the emperor
clearly apprehended the necessity of serving God.

At daybreak,- he called together the priests
of Christ, and questioned them concerning their
doctrines. They opened the sacred Scriptures,
and expounded the truths relative to Christ, and
showed him from the prophets, how the signs
which had been predicted, had been fulfilled.
The sign which had appeared to him was the
symbol, they said, of the victory over hell ; for
Christ came among men, was stretched upon the
cross, died, and returned to life the third day.
On this account, they said, there was hope that
at the close of the present dispensation, there
would be a general resurrection of the dead, and
entrance upon immortality, when those who had
led a good life would receive accordingly, and
those who had done evil would be punished.
Yet, continued they, the means of salvation and
of purification from sin are provided ; namely, for
the uninitiated,^ initiation according to the canons
of the church ; and for the initiated, abstinence
from renewed sin. But as few, even among holy
men, are capable of complying with this latter
condition, another method of purification is set
forth, namely, repentance ; for God, in his love
towards man, bestows forgiveness on those who
have fallen into sin, on their repentance, and the
confirmation of their repentance by good works.

CHAP. IV. CONSTANTINE COMMANDS THE SIGN

OF THE CROSS TO BE CARRIED BEFORE HIM IN
BATTLE ; AN EXTRAORDINARY NARRATIVE ABOUT
THE BEARERS OF THE SIGN OF THE CROSS.

The emperor, amazed at the prophecies con-
cerning Christ which were expounded to him by
the priests, sent for some skillful artisans, anil
commanded them to remodel the standard
called by the Romans Labarum* to convert it
into a representation of the cross, and to adorn
it with gold and precious stones. This warlike
trophy was valued beyond all others ; for it was
always wont to be carried before the emperor,
and was worshiped by the soldiery. I think
that Constantine changed the most honorable

1 Cf. Eus. r. C. i. 29.
' id. i. 32. '

' That IS, for the unbaptized and catechumens; the baptized
were called the " initiated " (01 ti.tii.vnii.tvoi).
* Eus. V. C. i. 30, 31.


symbol of the Roman power into the sign of
Christ, chiefly that by the habit of having it
always in view, and of worshiping it, the
soldiers might be induced to abandon their
ancient forms of superstition, and to recognize
the true God, whom the emperor worshiped,
as their leader and their help in battle ; for this
symbol was always borne in front of his own
troops, and was, at the command of the em-
peror, carried among the phalanxes in the
thickest of the fight by an illustrious band of
spearmen, of whom each one in turn took the
standard upon his shoulders, and paraded it
through the ranks. It is said that on one
occasion, on an unexpected movement of the
hostile forces, the man who held the standard in
terror, placed it in the hands of another, and
secretly fled from the battle. When he got
beyond the reach of the enemy's weapons, he
suddenly received a wound and fell, while the
man who had stood by the divine symbol
remained unhurt, although many weapons were
aimed at him ; for the missiles of the enemy,
marvelously directed by divine agency, lighted
upon the standard, and the bearer thereof,
although in the midst of danger, was preserved.
It is also asserted that no soldier who bore
this standard in battle ever fell, through any
dark calamity, such as is wont to happen to
the soldiery in war, or was wounded, or taken
prisoner.

CHAP. V. REFUTATION OF THE ASSERTION THAT

CONSTANTINE BECAME A CHRISTIAN IN CONSE-
QUENCE OF THE MURDER OF HIS SON CRISPUS.

I AM aware that it is reported "by the pagans
that Constantine, after slaying some of his near-
est relations, and particularly after assenting to
the murder of his own son Crispus, repented
of his evil deeds, and inquired of Sopatcr,* the
philosopher, who was then master of the school
of Plotinus, concerning the means of purifica-
tion from guilt. The philosopher — so the story
goes — replied that such moral defilement could
admit of no purification. The emperor was
grieved at this repulse, but happening to meet
wilh some bishops who told him that he would
be cleansed from sin, on repentance and on
sul)niitting to baptism, he was delighted with
their representations, and admired their doc-
trines, and became a Christian, and led his
subjects to the same faith. It appears to me
that this story was the invention of persons who
desired to vilify the Christian religion. Crispus,"
on whose account, it is said, Constantine re-

* Or Sosipater of Apamea. Cf. Eunap. V. S. (iCdesius).

• The earlier church historians, except Philost. H. E. ii. 4, are
silent as to the cause of his death, while the pagan authorities speak
freely, but variously; later Christian writers take their statements
from the pagans. Cf. Eutrop. Brev. hist. Rotn. x. 6.


I. 7-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


243


quired purification, did not die till the twentieth
year of his father's reign ; he held the second
place in the empire and bore the name of Caesar,
and many laws, framed with his sanction in favor
of Christianity, are still extant. That this was
the case can be proved by referring to the
dates affixed to these laws, and to the lists of
the legislators. It does not appear likely that
Sopater had any intercourse with Constantine,
whose government was then centered in the
regions near the ocean and the Rhine ; for his
dispute with Maxentius, the governor of Italy,
had created so much dissension in the Roman
dominions, that it was then no easy matter to
dwell in Gaul, in Britain, or in the neighboring
countries, in which it is universally admitted
Constantine embraced the religion of the Chris-
tians, previous to his war with Maxentius, and
prior to his return to Rome and Italy : and this
is evidenced by the dates of the laws which he
enacted in favor of religion. But even granting
that Sopater chanced to meet the emperor, or
that he had epistolary correspondence with him,
it cannot be imagined the philosopher was
ignorant that Hercules, the son of Alcmena,
obtained purification at Athens by the celebra-
tion of the mysteries of Ceres after the murder
of his children, and of Iphitus, his guest and
friend. That the Greeks held that purification
from guilt of this nature could be obtained, is
obvious from the instance I have just alleged,
and he is a false calumniator who represents
that Sopater taught the contrary.

I cannot admit the possibility of the philos-
opher's having been ignorant of these facts ;
for he was at that period esteemed the most
learned man in Greece.

CHAP. VI. THE FATHER OF CONSTANTINE AL-
LOWS THE NAME OF CHRIST TO BE EXTENDED ;
CONSTANTINE THE GREAT PREPARED IT TO
PENETRATE EVERYWHERE.

Under the government of Constantine the
churches flourished and increased in numbers
daily, since they were honored by the good
deeds of a benevolent and well-disposed em-
peror, and otherwise God preserved them from
the persecutions and harassments which they had
previously encountered. When the churches
were suffering from persecution in other parts of
the world, Constantius alone, the father of Con-
stantine, accorded the Christians the right of
worshiping God without fear. I know of an
extraordinary thing done by him, which is wor-
thy of being recorded. He wished to test the
fidelity of certain Christians, excellent and good
men, who were attached to his palaces. He
called them all together, and told them that if
they would sacrifice to idols as well as serve


God, they should remain in his service and retain
their appointments ; but that if they refused
compliance with his wishes, they should be sent
from the palaces, and should scarcely escape his
vengeance. VVhert difference of judgment had
divided them into two parties, separating those
who consented to abandon their religion from
those who preferred the honor of God to their
present welfare, the emperor determined upon
retaining those who had adhered to their faith
as his friends and counselors ; but he turned
away from the others, whom he regarded as
unmanly and impostors, and sent them from his
presence, judging that they who had so readily
betrayed their God could never be true to their
king. Hence it is probable that while Constan-
tius was alive, it did not seem contrary to the
laws for the inhabitants of the countries beyond
Italy to profess Christianity, that is to say, in
Gaul, in Britain, or in the region of the Pyrenean
mountains as far as the Western Ocean. When
Constantine succeeded to the same government,
the affliirs of the churches became still more
brilliant ; for when Maxentius, the son of Her-
culius, was slain, his share also devolved upon
Constantine ; and the nations who dwelt by the
river Tiber and the Eridanus, which the natives
call Padus, those who dwelt by the Aquilis,
whither, it is said, the Argo was dragged, and
the inhabitants of the coasts of the Tyrrhenian
sea were permitted the exercise of their relig-
ion without molestation.

When the Argonauts fled from ^etes, they
returned homewards by a different route, crossed
the sea of Scythia, sailed through some of the
rivers there, and so gained the shores of Italy,
where they passed the winter and built a city,
which they called Emona. The following sum-
mer, with the assistance of the people of the
country, they dragged the Argo, by means of
machinery, the distance of four hundred stadia,
and so reached the Aquilis, a river which falls
into the Eridanus : the Eridanus itself falls into
the Italian sea.

After the battle of Cibalis^ the Dardanians
and the Macedonians, the inhabitants of the
banks of the Ister, of Hellas, and the whole
nation of Illyria, became subject to Constantine.

CHAP. VII. CONCERNING THE DISPUTE BETWEEN

CONSTANTINE AND LICINIUS HIS BROTHER-IN-
LAW ABOUT THE CHRISTIANS, AND HOW LICINIUS
WAS CONQUERED BY FORCE AND PLfT TO DEATH.

After this reverse, Licinius,- who had previ-
ously respected the Christians, changed his
opinion, and ill-treated many of the priests who


• One of the battles in which Licinius was routed by Constan-
tine, A.D. 314. Eutrop. Brev. hist. Rom. x. 5.

- Cf. Soc. i. 3, 4, and especially various parts of Eus. V. C.


244


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[1.7.


lived under his government ; he also persecuted
a multitude of other persons, but especially the
soldiers. He was deeply incensed against the
Christians on account of his disagreement with
Constantine, and thought to wound him by their
sufferings for religion, and besides, he suspected
that the churches were praying and zealous that
Constantine alone should enjoy the sovereign
rule. In addition to all this, when on the eve
of another battle with Constantine, Licinius, as
was wont to be done, made a forecast of the
expected war, by sacrifices and oracles, and,
deceived by promises of conquest, he returned
to the religion of the pagans.

The pagans themselves, too, relate that about
this period he consulted the oracle of Apollo
Didymus at Miletus, and received an answer
concerning the result of the war from the demon,
couched in the following verses of Homer : *

" Much, old man, do the youths distress thee, warring

against thee !
Feeble thy strength has become, but thy old age yet shall

be hardy."

From many facts it has often appeared to me
that the teaching of the Christians is supported,
and its advancement secured, by the providence
of God ; and not least from what then occurred ;
for at the very moment that Licinius was about
to persecute all the churches under him, the war
in Bithynia broke out, which ended in a war
between him and Constantine, and in which
Constantine was so strengthened by Divine as-
sistance that he was victorious over his enemies
by land and by sea. On the destruction of his
fleet and army, Licinius threw himself into Nic-
omedia, and resided for some time at Thessa-
lonica as a private individual, and was eventu-
ally killed there. Such was the end of one who,
at the beginning of his reign, had distinguished
himself in war and in peace, and who had been
honored by receiving the sister of Constantine
in marriage.

CHAP. VTII. LIST OF THE BENEFITS WHICH CON-
STANTINE CONFERRED IN THE FREEDOM OF THE
CHRISTIANS AND BUILDING OF CHURCHES ; AND
OTHER DEEDS FOR THE PUBLIC WELFARE.

As soon as the sole government of the Roman
empire was vested in Constantine, he issued a
public decree ^ commanding all his subjects in
the East to honor the Christian religion, carefully
to worship the Divine Being, and to recognize
that only as Divine which is also essentially so,
and which has the power that endures for ever
and ever : for he delights to give all good

' Iliad, viii. 102.

* ypanMo *7)n6crioi'. The decree is given at full length in Eus.
K. C. ii. 24-42 : and the other legislative chapters of Bks. ii . and
iv. Cf. Eus. H. E. X. 5-7; Soc. i. 18.


things ungrudgingly to those who zealously em-
brace the truth ; he meets their undertakings
with the best hopes, while misfortunes, whether
in peace or in war, whether in public or in pri-
vate life, befall transgressors. Constantine then
added, but without vain boasting, that, God hav-
ing accounted him as a fitting servant, worthy
to reign, he had been led from the British sea to
the Eastern provinces in order that the Christian
rehgion might be extended, and that those who,
on account of the worship of God had remained
steadfast in confessions or martyrdoms, might be
advanced to public honors. After making these
statements, he entered upon a myriad other de-
tails by which he thought his subjects might be
drawn to religion. He decreed that all acts and
judgments passed by the persecutors of the
church against Christianity should be revoked ;
and commanded that all those who, on account of
their confession of Christ, had been sent to ban-
ishment— either to the isles or elsewhere, con-
trary to their own inclination — and all those
who had been condemned to labor in the mines,
the public works, the harems, the linen factories,
or had been enrolled as public functionaries,
should be restored to liberty. He removed
the stigma of dishonor from those upon whom
it had been cast, and permitted those who had
been deprived of high appointments in the
army, either to reassume their former place, or
with an honorable discharge, to enjoy a liberal
ease according to their own choice ; and when
he had recalled all to the enjoyment of their
former liberties and customary honors, he like-
wise restored their possessions. In the case of
those who had been slain, and whose property
had been confiscated, he enacted that the inher-
itance should be transferred to the next of kin,
or, in default of heirs, to the church belonging
to the locality where the estate was situated ;
and when the inheritance had passed into other
hands, and had become either private or national
property, he commanded it to be restored. He
likewise promised to resort to the fittest and
best possible arrangements when the property
had been purchased by the exchequer, or had
been received therefrom by gift. These meas-
ures, as it had been said, having been enacted
by the emperor, and ratified by law, were fonh-
with carried into execution. Christians were
thus placed in almost all the principal posts of
the Roman government ; the worship of false
gods was universally prohibited ; and the arts
of divination, the dedication of statues, and the
celebration of pagan festivals were intt-rdicted.
Many of the most ancient customs observed in
the cities fell into disuse : and among the Egyp-
tians the measure used to indicate the increase
of the waters of the Nile was no longer borne
into pagan temples, but into churches. The


I. 9.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


245


spectacle of gladiators was then i)rohibited
among the Romans ; and the custom which i)re-
vailed among the Phuunicians of Lebanon and
Heliopolis of prostituting virgins before mar-
riage, wlio were accustomed to coliabit in lawful
marriage after the first trialof aniUicit intercourse,
was abolished. Of the houses of prayer, the
emperor repaired some which were of sufficient
magnitude ; others were brilliantly restored by
additional length and breadth, and he erected
new edifices in places where no building of the
kind had existed previously. He furnished the
requisite supplies from the imperial treasury, and
wrote to the bishops of the cities and the gov-
ernors of the provinces, desiring them to con-
tribute whatever might be wished, and enjoining
submission and zealous obedience to the priests.
The prosperity of religion kept pace with the
increased prosperity of the empire. After the
war with Licinius, the emperor was successful in
bitde against foreign nations; he conquered
the Sirmatians and the people called Goths, and
concluded an advantageous treaty with them.
These people dwelt upon the Ister ; and as they
were very warlike, and always ready in arms
both by the multitude and magnitude of their
bodies, they kept the other tribes of barbarians
in awe, and found antagonists in the Romans
alone. It is said that, during this war, Constan-
tine perceived clearly, by means of signs and
dreams, that the special protection of Divine
Providence had been extended to him. Hence
when he had vanquished all those who rose up
in batde against him, he evinced his thankfulness
to Christ by zealous attention to the concerns
of religion, and exhorted the governors to rec-
ognize the one true faith and way of salvation.
He enacted that part of the funds levied from
tributary countries should be forwarded by the
various cities to the bishops and clergy, wherever
they might be domiciled, and commanded that
the law enjoining this gift should be a statute
forever. In order to accustom the soldiers to
worship God as he did, he had their weapons
marked with the symbol of the cross, and he
erected a house of prayer in the palace. When
he engaged in war, he caused a tent to be borne
before him, constructed in the shape of a church,
so that in case he or his army might be led into
the desert, they might have a sacred edifice in
which to praise and worship God, and partici-
pate in the mysteries.^ Priests and deacons
followed the tent, who fulfilled the orders about
these matters, according to the law of the church.
From that period the Roman legions, which now
were called by their number, provided each its
* own tent, with attendant priests and deacons.
He also enjoined the observance of the day


• Mu<i-n)p»ti)»', that is to say, the sacraments of the church.


termed the Lord's day,- which the Jews call the
first day of the week, and which the pagans
detlicate to the sun, as likewise the day before
the seventh, and commanded that no judicial
or other business should be transacted on those
days, but that God should be served with pray-
ers and supplications. He honored the Lord's
day, because on it Christ arose from the dead,
and the day above mentioned, because on it he
was crucified. He regarded the cross with pe-
culiar reverence, on account both of the power
which it conveyed to him in the battles against
his enemies, and also of the divine manner in
which the symbol had appeared to him. He-
took away by law the crucifixion customary
among the Romans, from the usage of the courts.
He commanded that this divine symbol should
always be inscribed and stamped whenever coins
and images should be struck, and his images,
which exist in this very form, still testify to this
order. And indeed he strove in everything,
particularly in the enactment of laws, to serve
God. It appears, too, that he prohibited many
flagitious and licentious connections,^ which till
that period had not been forbidden ; as one,
who cares about it, may see at a glance from
these few instances what the laws were, which he
established about these points ; it appears to me
unreasonable now to treat them exhaustively. I
consider it necessary, however, to mention the
laws enacted for the honor and consolidation of
religion, as they constitute a considerable portion
of ecclesiastical history. I shall therefore pro-
ceed to the recital.


CHAP. IX. CONSTANTINE ENACTS A LAW IN FAVOR

OF CELIBATES AND OF THE CLERGY.

There was an ancient Roman law, by which
those who were unmarried at the age of twenty-
five were not admitted to the same privileges as
the married ; * amongst other clauses in this
law, it was specified that those who were not the
very nearest kinsmen could gain nothing from a
will ; and also, that those who were childless
were to be deprived of half of any property that
might be bequeathed to them. The object of
this ancient Roman law was to increase the
population of Rome and the subject people,
which had been much reduced in numbers by
the civil wars, not a long while before this law.
The emperor, perceiving that this enactment
militated against the interests of those who con-
tinued in a state of celibacy and remained child-
less for the sake of ( iod, and deeming it absurd
to attempt the multiplication of the human

2 Eus. v. C. iv. 18, 19.

3 He probably alhules to the law of Constantihe, " de raptii
virginum vel viduanini." See Codex Theodos. ix. 24

* The I^ex Papia Poppa:a. For its origin under Augustus, see
Tacil. Ann. iii. 25; Eus. /'. C. iv. 26.


246


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[1.9.


species by the care and zeal of man (since
nature always receiving increase or decrease ac-
cording to the fiat from on high), made a law
enjoining that the unmarried and childless should
have the same advantages as the married. He
even bestowed peculiar privileges on those who
embraced a life of continence and virginity, and
permitted them, contrary to the usage which
prevailed throughout the Roman empire, to
make a will before they attained the age of
puberty ; for he believed that those who de-
voted themselves to the service of God and the
cultivation of philosophy would, in all cases,
judge aright. For a similar reason the ancient
Romans permitted the vestal virgins to make a
will as soon as they attained the age of six years.
That was the greatest proof of the superior rev-
erence for religion. Constantine exempted the
clergy everywhere from taxation, and permitted
litigants to appeal to the decision of the bishops
if they preferred them to the state rulers.^ He
enacted that their decree should be valid, and
as far superior to that of other judges as if pro-
nounced by the emperor himself; that the gov-
ernors and subordinate military officers should
see to the execution of these decrees : and that
the definitions made by synods should be irre-
versible.

Having arrived at this point of my history, it
would not be right to omit all mention of the
laws passed in favor of those individuals in the
churches who had received their freedom.
Owing to the strictness of the laws and the
unwillingness of masters, there were many diffi-
culties in the way of the acquisition of this
better freedom ; that is to say, of the freedom
of the city of Rome. Constantine therefore
made three laws, enacting that all those indi-
viduals in the churches, whose freedom should
be attested by the priests, should receive the
freedom of Rome.-

The records of these pious regulations are
still extant, it having been the custom to engrave
on tablets all laws relating to manumission.
Such were the eilactments of Constantine ; in
everything he sought to promote the honor of
religion ; and religion was valued, not only for
its own sake, but also on account of the virtue
of those who then participated in it.

CHAP. X. — CONCERNING THE GREAT CONFESSORS
WHO SURVIVED.

Since the persecution had recently ceased,
many excellent Christians, and many of the
confessors who had survived, adorned the

I Constantine makes mention of this law in his Epistle to the
bishops of Numidia, in Baronius, A. E. a.d. 316: n. Ixiv.; Eus.
H. E. x.y: Cod. Theod. i. 27, de episcopali definitione, i ; xvi. 2,
de episcopes ecclesiis et clencis, 2.

' Cod. Theod. iv. 7, de manumissionibus inecclesia, 1.


churches : among these were Hosius,'' bishop of
Cordova ; Amphion,'* bishop of P^piphania in
Cilicia ; Maximus, who succeeded Macarius in
the church of Jerusalem ; and Paphnutius,* an
Egyptian. It is said by this latter God wrought
many miracles, controlling demons, and giving
him grace to heal divers kinds of sickness.
This Paphnutius, and Maximus, whom we just
mentioned, were among the number of confes-
sors whom Maximinus condemned to work in the
mines, after having deprived them of the right
eye, and the use of the left leg.

CHAP. XI. ACCOUNT OF ST. SPYRIDON : HIS MOD-
ESTY AND STEADFASTNESS.

Spvridon,* bishop of Trimythun in Cyprus,
flourished at this period. To show his virtues,
I think the fame which still prevails about him
suffices. The wonderful worics which he wrought
by Divine assistance are, it appears, generally
known by those who dwell in the same region.
I shall not conceal the facts which have come
to me.

He was a peasant, was married, and had chil-
dren ; yet was not, on this account, deficient in
spiritual attainments. It is related that one
night some wicked men entered his sheepfold,
and were in the act of stealing his sheep, when
they were suddenly bound, and yet no one
bound them. The next day, when he went to
the fold, he found them fettered, and released
them from their invisible bonds ; but he cen-
sured them for having preferred to steal what it
was lawful for them to win and take, and also
for making such a great exertion by night : yet
he felt compassion towards them, and, desirous
of affording them instruction, so as to induce
them to lead a better life, he said to them, " Go,
and take this ram with you ; for you are wearied
with watching, and it is not just that your labor
should be so blamed, that you should return
empty-handed from my sheepfold." This action
is well worthy admiration, but not less so is
that which I shall now relate. An individual
confided a deposit to the care of his daughter,
who was a virgin, and was named Irene. For
greater security, she buried it ; and it so hap-
pened that she died soon after, without mention-
ing the circumstance to any one. The person
to whom the deposit belonged came to ask for
it. Spyridon knew not what answer to give

* For a further account of Hosius, cf. Soc. i. 7, 13; ii. ao, 39,

3' • '"• 7-

* Amphion and Lespus are mentioned as bishops of Cilicia in

Athan. Efi. ad Episc. /Eg. et /,/<>.,• another Amphion occurs in
Athan. Ap- cont. Arian, 7, as bishop in Nicomedia.

5 Ruf. H. E. i. 4; Soc. i. 8, II ; Tneodoret, H. E. i. 7.

0 Ruf. //. £■. i. 5: Soc. i. 8, 12. Ruf. gives the first two stories;
Soc. copies and gives credit: Soz. appends three more, and gives
credit to himself only throughout. Ruf. had already said, " sed et
multa alia ejus feruntur gesia mirabilia, quz etiam nunc ore omnium
celebrantur."


I. 12.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


247


him, so he searched the whole house for it ; but
not being able to find it, the man wept, tore his
hair, and seemed ready to expire. Spyridon,
moved with pity, went to the grave, and called
the girl by name ; and when she answered, he
inquired about the deposit. After obtaining the
information desired, he returned, found the
treasure in the place that had been signified to
him, and gave it to the owner. As I have en-
tered upon this subject, it may not be amiss to
add this incident also.

It was a custom with this Spyridon to give a
certain portion of his fruits to the poor, and to
lend another portion to those who wished it as
a gratuity ; but neither in giving nor taking
back did he ever himself distribute or receive :
he merely pointed out the storehouse, and told
those who resorted to him to take as much as
they needed, or to restore what they had bor-
rowed. A certain man who had borrowed in
this way, came as though he were about to re-
turn it, and when as usual he was directed to
replace his loan in the storehouse, he saw an
opportunity for an injustice ; imagining that the
matter would be concealed, he did not liquidate
the debt, but fraudulently pretending to have
discharged his obligation, he went away as
though he had made the return. This, how-
ever, could not be long concealed. After some
time the man came back again to borrow, and
was sent to the storehouse, with permission to
measure out for himself as much as he required.
Finding the storehouse empty, he went to ac-
quaint Spyridon, and this latter said to him,
" I wonder, O man, how it is that you alone
have found the storehouse empty and unsup-
plied with the articles you require : reflect
whether you have restored the first loan, since
you are in need a second time : were it other-
wise, what you seek would not be lacking. Go,
trust, and you will find." The man felt the
reproof and acknowledged his error. The
firmness and the accuracy in the administration
of ecclesiastical affairs on the part of this divine
man are worthy of admiration. It is said that
on one occasion thereafter, the bishops of
Cyprus met to consult on some particular
emergency. Spyridon was present, as likewise
Triphyllius,^ bishop of the Ledri, a man other-
wise eloquent, who on account of practicing the
law, had lived alone while at Berytus."

When an assembly had convened, having been
requested to address the people, Triphyllius had
occasion, in the middle of his discourse, to

1 This Triphyllius is mentioned by Hieron. c/e 7'/V. illitst. i. 02,
as the author of a commentary on the Song of Solomon, which his
biographer had read; and of many other works which had not come
into his hands.

- Berytus in Phoenicia was celebrated for its school of law, in
which, among others, Gregory Thaumaturqus is said to have studied.
Biographers, imitating Valesius, have imagined that Sozomen studied
there.


quote the text, "Take up thy bed and walk,'"
and he substituted the word " couch " (a-Kifji-
TTovs), for the word " bed " {Kpd/3ftaTo<;). Spyri-
don was indignant, and exclaimed, "Art thou
greater than he who uttered the word ' bed,'
that thou art ashamed to use his words?"
When he had said this, he turned from the
throne of the priest, and looked towards the peo-
ple ; by this act he taught them to keep the
man who is proud of eloquence within bounds ;
and he was fit to make such a rebuke ; for he
was reverenced and most illustrious for his
works : at the same time he was the superior of
that presbyter in age and in the priesthood.

The reception which Spyridon gave to stran-
gers will appear from the following incident.
In the quadragesima, it happened that a traveler
came upon a journey to visit him on one of
those days in which it was his custom to keep a
continuous fast with his household,^ and on the
day appointed for tasting food, he would remain
without nourishment to mid-day. Perceiving
that the stranger was much fatigued, Spyridon
said to his daughter, " Come, wash his feet and
set meat before him." The virgin replying that
there was neither bread nor barley-food in the
house, for it would have been superfluous to pro-
vide such things at the time of the fast, Spyridon
first prayed and asked forgiveness, and bade her
to cook some salt pork which chanced to be in
the house. When it was prepared, he sat down
to table with the stranger, partook of the meat,
and told him to follow his example. But the
stranger declining, under the plea of being a
Christian, he said to him, " It is for that very
reason that you ought not to decline partaking
of the meat ; for the Divine word shows that to
the pure all things are pure." ^ Such are the
details which I had to relate concerning
Spyridon.

CHAP. XII. ON THE ORGANIZATION OF THE

MONKS : ITS ORIGIN AND FOUNDERS.

Those who at this period had embraced mo-
nasticism ^ were not the least in manifesting the
church as most illustrious, and evidencing the
truth of their doctrines by their virtuous line of
conduct. Indeed, the most useful thing that has
been received by man from God is their philoso-
phy.' They neglect many branches of mathe-
matics and the technicalities of dialectics, because

3 Matt. ix. 6.

* T>)9 TtcrcrapaicocrTT? « I'cTTaoT)!. While it was Lent and probably
Holy Week. See TertuU. tie Pat. 13, and de Jejun. 14.

^ Tit. i- 15.

" On the origin and growth of the monastic system, see Soc. iv.
23, and cf. Gibbon, Decl. <5r» Fall, ch. 37, and Bingham's Christian
Antiq. Bk. vii. ; articles in Herz. R. E. Bk. iv.; D. C. A. Vol.
ii.; Ad Harnack: Das Monchthum, seine Ideale und seine Ge-
schichte.

' The verb ^i.Ko'to^tXv is constantly used by the early Christian
historians to signify the practice of asceticism.


248


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[I. 12.


they regard such studies as superfluous, and as
a useless expenditure of time, seeing that they
contribute nothing towards correct hving. They
apply themselves exclusively to the cultivation
of natural and useful science, in order that they
may mitigate, if not eradicate, evil. They invari-
ably refrain from accounting any action or prin-
ciple as good, which occupies a middle place
between virtue and vice, for they -delight only
in what is good. They regard every man as
wicked, who, though he abstain from evil, does
not do good. For they do not demonstrate
virtue by argument, but practice it, and count as
nothing the glory current among men. They
manfully subjugate the passions of the soul,
yielding neither to the necessities of nature, nor
succumbing to the weakness of the body. Hav-
ing possessed the power of the Divine mind, they
always look away to the Creator of the whole,
night and day worshiping him, and appeasing
him by prayers and supplications. By purity* of
soul and by a life of good works they entered
without guilt upon religious observances, and
despised purification, lustral vessels, and such
ceremonials ; for they think that sins alone are
blemishes. They are greater than the external
casualties to which we are liable, and hold, as it
were, all things under their control : and are
not therefore diverted from the path they have
selected by the disasters or the necessity which
sway the life. They are not distressed when
insulted, nor do they defend themselves when
suffering from malice ; nor do they lose heart,
when pressed by sickness or lack of necessaries,
but rather rejoice in such trials and endure them
with patience and meekness. They inure them-
selves through the whole of life to be content
with little, and approximate as nearly to God as
is possible to human nature. They regard the
present life as a journey only, and are not there-
fore solicitous about acquiring wealth, nor do
they provide for the present beyond urgent
necessities. They admire the beauty and sim-
plicity of nature, but their hope is placed in
heaven and the blessedness of the future.
Wholly absorbed in the worship of God, they
revolted from obscene language ; and as they
had banished evil practices, so they would not
allow such things to be even named. They
limited, as far as possible, the demands of
nature, and compelled the body to be satisfied
with moderate supplies. They overcame intem-
perance by temperance, injustice by justice, and
falsehood by truth, and attained the happy
medium in all things. They dwelt in harmony
and fellowship with their neighbors. They pro-
vided for their friends and strangers, imparted
to those who were in want, according to their
need, and comforted the afflicted. As they were
diligent in all things, and zealous in seeking the


supreme good, their instructions, though clothed
in modesty and prudence, and devoid of vain
and meritricious eloquence, possessed power,
like sovereign medicines, in healing the moral
diseases of their audience ; they spoke, too,
with fear and reverence, and eschewed all strife,
raillery, and anger. Indeed, it is but reasonable
to suppress all irrational emotions, and to sub-
due carnal and natural passions. Elias the
prophet and John the Baptist were the authors,
as some say, of this sublime philosophy. Philo
the Pythagorean ^ relates, that in his time the
most virtuous of the Hebrews assembled from
all parts of the world, and settled in a tract of
country situated on a hill near Lake Mareotis,
for the purpose of living as philosophers. He
describes their dwellings, their regimen, and
their customs, as similar to those which we now
meet with among the monks of Egypt. He
says that from the moment they began to apply
themselves to the study of philosophy, they gave
up their property to their relatives, relinquished
business and society, and dwelt outside of walls, in
fields and in gardens. They had also, he informs
us, sacred edifices which were called monasteries,
in which they dwelt apart and alone, occupied
in celebrating the holy mysteries, and in wor-
shiping God sedulously with psalms and hymns.
They never tasted food before sunset, and some
only took food every third day, or even at longer
intervals. Finally, he says, that on certain days
they lay on the ground and abstained from wine
and the flesh of animals ; that their food was
bread, salt, and hyssop, and their drink, water ;
and that there were women among them who
had lived as virgins to old age, who, for the love
of philosophy, and from their voluntary judg-
ment, practiced ceUbacy. In this narrative,
Philo seems to describe - certain Jews who had
embraced Christianity, and yet retained the cus-
toms of their nation ; for no vestiges of this man-
ner of life are to be found elsewhere : and hence
I conclude that this philosophy flourished in
Egypt from this period. Others, however, assert
that this mode of life originated from the perse-
cutions for the sake of religion, which arose from
time to time, and by which many were compelled
to flee to the mountains and deserts and forests,
and they became used to this kind of living.


CHAP. XIII. — ABOUT ANTONY THE GREAT AND ST.
PAUL THE SIMPLE.

Whether the Egyptians or others are to be
regarded as the founders of this philosophy, it is


> Valesius would prefer to read " The Platonist."

' Cf. Eiis. H. E. ii. 17, where he attributes to the Christians

what is said by Philo concerning the Therapcutse, as these ascetics

were called.


I- 13]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


249


universally admitted that Antony,^ the great monk,
developed this course of life, by morals and be-
fitting exercises, to the summit of exactness and
perfection. His fame was so widely spread
throughout the deserts of Egypt, that the em-
peror Constantine, for the reputation of the
man's virtue, sought his friendship, honored
him with correspondence, and urged him to
write about what he might need. He was an
Egyptian by race, and belonged to an illustrious
family of Coma, which was situated near the
Heraclea which is on the Egyptian borders.-
He was but a youth when he lost his parents ;
he bestowed his paternal inheritance upon his
fellow-villagers, sold the rest of his possessions,
and distributed the proceeds among the needy;
for he was aware that philosophy does not
merely consist in the relinquishment of prop-
erty, but in the proper distribution of it. He
obtained the acquaintance of the devoted men
of his time, and emulated the virtues of all. Be-
lieving that the practice of goodness would be-
come delightful by habit, though arduous at the
outset, he reflected on more intense methods of
asceticism, and day by day he augmented it by
self-control just as if he were always re-commenc-
ing his undertaking. He subdued the voluptu-
ousness of the body by labor, and restrained the
passions of the soul by the aid of the Divine
wisdom. His food was bread and salt, his drink
water, and he never broke his fast till after sun-
set. He often remained two or more days with-
out eating. He watched, so to speak, through-
out the night, and continued in prayer till
daybreak. If at any time he indulged in sleep,
it was but for a little while on a short mat ; but
generally the bare earth was his couch. He re-
jected the practice of anointing with oil, and
the use of baths and of similar luxuries likely to
relax the tension of the body by moisture ; and
it is said that he never at any time saw himself
naked. He neither possessed nor admired learn-
ing, but he valued a good understanding, as be-
ing prior to letters and as being the very dis-
coverer of it. He was exceedingly meek and
philanthropic, prudent and manly ; cheerful in
conversation and friendly in disputations, even
when others used the controverted topics as oc-
casion for strife. By his own habit and a kind
of intelligence he quieted contentiousness when
on the increase, and restored them to modera-
tion ; he also tempered the ardor of those who
conversed with him, and regulated their man-
ners. Although on account of his extraordinary
virtues, he had become filled with the Divine
foreknowledge, he did not regard foreknowledge


• Cf. Soc. i. 21, and his reference to the life attributed to Atha-
nasius.

'^ There were two cities of this name, Heraclea the greater and
Heraclea the less.


of the future as a virtue, nor did he counsel
others to seek this gift rashly, for he considered
that no one would be punished or rewarded ac-
cording to his ignorance or knowledge of futu-
rity ; for true blessedness consists in the service
of Ciod, and in keeping his laws. " But," said
he, " if any man would know the future, let him
continually be purified in soul, for then he will
have power to walk in the light, and to under-
stand things that are to happen, for God will
reveal the future to him." He never suffered
himself to be idle, but exhorted all those who
seemed disposed to lead a good life, to diligence
in labor, to self-examination and confession of
sin before Him who created the day and the
night ; and when they erred, he urged them
to record the transgression in writing, that so
they might be ashamed of their sins, and be
fearful lest any one should find the many things
recorded ; for he would be fearful, lest if the
document were traced to him he should become
disclosed to other people as a depraved charac-
ter. He above all others came forward spirit-
edly and most zealously for the defense of the
injured, and in their cause often resorted to the
cities ; for many came out to him, and com-
pelled him to intercede for them with the rulers
and men in power. All the people felt honored
in seeing him, listened with avidity to his dis-
courses, and yielded assent to his arguments ;
but he preferred to remain unknown and con-
cealed in the deserts. When compelled to
visit a city, he never failed to return to the
deserts as soon as he had accomplished the
work he had undertaken ; for, he said, that as
fishes are nourished in the water, so the desert
is the world prepared for monks ; and as fishes
die when thrown upon dry land, so monastics
lose their gravity when they go into cities. He
carried himself obediently and graciously to-
wards all who saw him, and he was careful not
to have, nor seem to have, a supercilious nature.
I have given this concise account of the man-
ners of Antony, in order that an idea of his
philosophy may be formed, by analogy, from the
description of his conduct in the desert.

He had many renowned disciples, of whom
some flourished in Egypt and Libya, others in
Palestine, Syria, and Arabia ; not less than their
master, did each disciple pass his life with those
among whom he dwelt, and regulate his con-
duct, and instruct many, and wed them unto
kindred virtues and philosophy. But it would
be difficult for any one to find the companions
of Antony or their successors by going carefully
through cities and villages to discover them, for
they sought concealment more earnestly than
many ambitious men, by means of pomp and
show, now seek popularity and renown.

We must relate, in chronological order, the


2 so


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[ I- 13-


history of the most celebrated disciples of An-
tony, and particularly that of Paul, surnamed
the Simple.' It is said that he dwelt in the
country, and was married to a beautiful womati,
and that having surprised her in the act of adul-
tery, he laughed placidly and affirmed with an
oath, that he would live with her no longer ;
that he left her with the adulterer, and went im-
mediately to join Antony in the desert. It is
further related that he was exceedingly meek
and patient : and that, being aged and unac-
customed to monastic severity, Antony put his
strength to the proof by various trials, for he
was newly come, and detected nothing ignoble ;
and that, having given evidence of perfect phil-
osophy, he was sent to live alone, as no longer
requiring a teacher. And God himself con-
firmed the testimony of Antony; and demon-
strated the man to be most illustrious through
his deeds, and as greater than even his teacher
in vexing and expeUing demons.

CHAP. XIV. — ACCOUNT OF ST. AMMON AND EUTV-
CHIUS OF OLYMPUS.

It was about this period that Ammon,^ the
Egyptian, embraced philosophy. It is said that
he was compelled to marry by his family, but
that his wife never knew him carnally ; for on
the day of their marriage, when they were alone,
and when he as the bridegroom was leading her
as the bride to his bed, he said to her, " Oh,
woman ! our marriage has indeed taken place,
but it is not consummated " ; and then he
showed her from the Holy Scriptures that it
was her chief good to remain a virgin, and en-
treated that they might live apart. She was
convinced by his arguments concerning virginity,
but was much distressed by the thought of being
separated from him ; and therefore, though oc-
cupying a separate bed, he hved with her for
eighteen years, during which time he did not
neglect the monastic exercises. At the end of
this period, the woman whose emulation had
been strongly excited by the virtue of her hus-
band, became convinced that it was not just that
such a man should, on her account, live in the
domestic sphere ; and she considered that it
was necessary that each should, for the sake of
philosophy, live apart from the other ; and she
entreated this of her husband. He therefore
took his departure, after having thanked God
for the counsel of his wife, and said to her, " Do
thou retain this house, and I will make another
for myself." He retired to a desert place, south
of the Mareotic lake between Scitis and the
nountain called Nitria ; and here, during two


1 Ruf. H.M. 31; Pall.//. Z.. 27.

« Ruf. //. M. 30; Pall. //. L. 12: Soc. iv. 23.


and twenty years, he devoted himself to philoso-
phy and visited his wife twice every year. This
divine man was the founder of the monasteries
there, and gathered round him many disciples
of note, as the registers of succession show.
Many extraordinary events happened to him,
which have been accurately fixed by the Egyp-
tian monks, who did very much to commemorate
carefully the virtues of the more ancient ascetics,
preserved in a succession of unwritten tradition.
I will relate such of them as have come to our
knowledge.

Ammon and his disciple Theodore, had once
occasion to take a journey somewhere, and on
the road found it requisite to cross a canal
called Lycus. Ammon ordered Theodore to
pass over backwards, lest they should witness
each other's nudity, and as he was likewise
ashamed to see himself naked, he was suddenly,
and by a Divine impulse, seized and carried
over, and landed on the opposite bank. When
Theodore had crossed the water, he perceived
that the clothes and feet of the elder were not
wet, and inquired the reason ; not receiving a
reply, he expostulated strongly on the subject,
and at length Ammon, after stipulating that it
should not be mentioned during his lifetime,
confessed the fact.

Here follows another miracle of the same
nature. Some wicked fathers, having brought to
him a son, who had been bitten by a mad dog,
and was nigh unto death, besought him in their
lamentations to heal him. He said to them,
"Your son does not require my healing, but if
you are willing to restore to your masters the ox
you have stolen, he will be healed immediately."
And the result was even as had been predicted ;
for the ox was restored and the malady of the
child removed. It is said that, when Ammon
died, Antony saw his spirit ascending into
heaven, since the heavenly powers conducted
him with the singing of psalms, and on being
questioned by his companions as to the cause of
his evident astonishment, he did not conceal the
matter from them ; for he was seen to survey
the sky intently, because of his amazement at
the sight of the marvelous spectacle. A short
time after, certain persons came from Scitis, and,
announcing the hour of Ammon's death, the
truth of Antony's prediction was manifested.
Thus, as is testified by all good men, each of
these holy persons was blessed in a special man-
ner ; the one, by being released from this life ;
the other, by being accounted worthy of wit-
nessing so miraculous a spectacle as that which
God showed him ; for Antony and Ammon lived
at a distance of many days' journey from each
other, and the above incident is corroborated by
those who were personally acquainted with them
both.


1. 15.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


251


I am convinced that it was likewise during
this reign that Eutychianus^ embraced philoso-
phy. He fixed his residence in Bithynia, near
Olympus. He belonged to the sect of the
Novatians,^ and was a partaker of Divine grace ;
he healed diseases and wrought miracles, and
the fame of his virtuous life induced Constantine
to keep his intimacy and friendship. It so hap-
pened, that about this period, one of the royal
body-guard, who was suspected of plotting
against the sovereign, fled, and after search, was
apprehended near Olympus. Eutychianus was
besought by relatives of the man to intercede
on his behalf with the emperor, and in the
meantime, to direct that the prisoner's chains
might be loosened, lest he should perish be-
neath their weight. It is related that Eutychi-
anus accordingly sent to the officers who held
the man in custody, desiring them to loosen the
chains ; and that, on their refusal, he went him-
self to the prison, when the doors, though fas-
tened, opened of their own accord, and the
bonds of the prisoner fell off. Eutychianus
afterwards repaired to the emperor who was
then residing at Byzanfium, and easily obtained
a pardon, for Constantine was not wont to re-
fuse his requests, because he held the man in
very great honor.

I have now given in few words the history of
the most illustrious professors of the monastic
philosophy. If any one desires more exact in-
formation about these men he will find it in the
biographies which have been written of very
many of them.


CHAP, XV. THE ARIAN HERESY, ITS ORIGIN, ITS

PROGRESS, AND THE CONTENTION WHICH IT
OCCASIONED AMONG THE BISHOPS.

Although, as we have shown, religion was in
a flourishing condition at this period, yet the
churches were disturbed by sore contentions ;
for under the pretext of piety and of seeking the
more perfect discovery of God, certain questions
were agitated, which had not, till then, been ex-
amined. Arius ^ was the originator of these dis-
putations. He was a presbyter of the church at
Alexandria in Egypt, and was at first a zealous
thinker about doctrine, and upheld the innova-
tions of Melitius. Eventually, however, he
abandoned this latter opinion,* and was ordained
deacon by Peter, bishop of Alexandria, who
afterwards cast him out of the church, because"
when Peter anathematized the zealots of Meli-
tius and rejected their baptism, Arius assailed

^ Soc. i. 13, who gives his authority as Auxanon, a Novatian.

' Eus. //. E. vii. 8; Soc. i. 10; iv. 28, &c.

3 Eus. r. C. parts of ii. & iii.; Ruf. f/. E. i. 1-6; Soc. i.
S-13; Philost. H. E. i. 3-9.

* No one else suggests an early connection of Arius with the
Melitians.


him for these acts and could not be restrained
in quietness. After the martyrdom of Peter,
Arius asked forgiveness of Achilla.s, and was
restored to his office as deacon, and afterwards
elevated to the presbytery. Afterwards Alex-
ander, also, held him in high repute, since he
was a most expert logician ; for it was said that
he was not lacking in such knowledge. He fell
into absurd discourses, so that he had the au-
dacity to preach in the church what no one
before him had ever suggested; namely, that
the Son of God was made out of that which had
no prior existence, that there was a period of
time in which he existed not ; that, as possessing
free will, he was capable of vice and virtue,
and that he was created and made : to these,
many other similar assertions were added as he
went forward into the arguments and the details
of inquiry. Those who heard these doctrines
advanced, blamed Alexander for not opposing
the innovations at variance with doctrine. But
this bishop deemed it more advisable to leave
each party to the free discussion of doubtful
topics, so that by persuasion rather than by
force, they might cease from contention ; hence
he sat down as a judge with some of his clergy,
and led both sides into a discussion. But it
happened on this occasion, as is generally the
case in a strife of words, that each party claimed
the victory. Arius defended his assertions, but
the others contended that the Son is consub-
stantial and co-eternal with the Father. The
council was convened a second time, and the
same points contested, but they came to no
agreement amongst themselves. During the
debate, Alexander seemed to incHne first to one
party and then to the other ^; finally, however, he
declared himself in favor of those who affirmed
that the Son was consubstantial and co- eternal
with the Father, and he commanded Arius to
receive this doctrine, and to reject his former
opinions. Arius, however, would not be per-
suaded to compliance, and many of the bishops
and clergy considered his statement of doctrine
to be correct. Alexander, therefore, ejected
him and the clergy who concurred with him
in sentiment from the church. Those of the
parish of Alexandria, who had embraced his
opinions, were the presbyters Aithalas, Achillas,
Carpones, Sarmates, and Arius,* and the deacons
Euzoius, Macarius, Julius, Menas, and Helladius.
Many of the people, likewise, sided with them :
some, because they imagined their doctrines to
be of God ; others, as frequently happens in sim-
ilar cases, because they believed them to have


^ A doubtful and unsupported assertion. All other testimony
makes Alexander steadfast and exact in his definition.

* There are variations in names, offices, numbers in attendance,
and course of debate in the early as well as later accounts of the
controversy.


252


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[1- 15-


been ill-treated and unjustly excommunicated.
Such being the state of affairs at Alexandria, the
partisans of Arius, deeming it pnident to seek
the favor of the bishops of other cities, sent
legations to them ; they sent a written statement
of their doctrines to them, requesting them that,
if they considered such sentiments to be of God,
they would signify to Alexander that he ought
not to molest them ; but that if they disapproved
of the doctrines, they should teach them what
opinions were necessary to be held. This pre-
caution was of no litde advantage to them ; for
their tenets became thus universally dissemi-
nated, and the questions they had started be-
came matters of debate among all the bishops.
Some wrote to Alexander, entreating him not
to receive the partisans of Arius into communion
unless they repudiated their opinions, while
others wrote to urge a contrary line of conduct.
When Alexander perceived that many who were
revered by the appearance of good conduct, and
weighty by the persuasiveness of eloquence, held
with the party of Arius, and particularly Eusebius,
president of the church of Nicomedia, a man of
considerable learning and held in high repute
at the palace ; he wrote to the bishops of every
church desiring them not to hold communion
with them. This measure kindled the zeal of
each party the more, and as might have been
expected, the contest was increasingly agitated.
Eusebius and his partisans had often petitioned
Alexander, but could not persuade him ; so that
considering themselves insulted, they became
indignant and came to a stronger determination
to support the doctrine of Arius. A synod
having been convened in Bithynia, they wrote
to all the bishops, desiring them to hold com-
munion with the Arians, as with those making a
true confession, and to recjuire Alexander to
hold communion with them likewise. As com-
pliance could not be extorted from Alexander,
Arius sent messengers to Paulinas, bishop of
Tyre, to Eusebius Pamphilus, who presided
over the church of Caesarea in Palestine, and
to Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis, soliciting
permission for himself and for his adherents, as
they had previously attained the rank of pres-
byters, to form the people who were with them
into a church. For it was the custom in
Alexandria, as it still is in the present day, that
all the churches should be under one bishop,
but that each presbyter should have his own
church, in which to assemble the people.
These three bishops, in concurrence with others
who were assembled in Palestine, granted the
petition of Arius, and permitted him to assemble
the people as before ; but enjoined submission
to Alexander, and commanded Arius to strive
incessantly to be restored to peace and com-
munion with him.


CHAP. XVI. CONSTAN'TIXE, HAVING HEARD OF

THE STRIFE OF THE BISHOPS, AND THE DIFFER-
ENCE OF OPINION CONCERNING THE PASSOVER,
IS GREATLY TROUBLED AND SENDS HOSIUS, A
SPANIARD, BISHOP OF CORDOVA, TO ALEXAN-
DRIA, TO ABOLISH THE DISSENSION AMONG THE
BISHOPS, AND TO SETTLE THE DISPUTE ABOUT
THE PASSOVER. '

Apier there had been many synods held in
Egypt, and the contest had still continued to
increase in violence, the report of the dissen-
sion reached the palace, and Constantine was
thereby greatly troubled ; for just at this period,
when religion was beginning to be more gen-
erally propagated, many were deterred by the
difference in doctrines from embracing Chris-
tianity. The emperor^ openly charged Arius
and Alexander with having originated this dis-
turbance, and wrote to rebuke them for having
made a controversy public which it was in their
power to have concealed, and for having con-
tentiously agitated a question which ought never
to have been mooted, or upon which, at least,
their opinion ought to have been given quietly.
He told them that they ought not to have sepa-
rated from others on account of difference of
sentiment concerning certain points of doctrine.

For concerning the Divine Providence men
ought, necessarily to hold one and the same
belief; but the minute researches in this prov-
ince, especially if they do not bring them to the
one opinion, must be retained in secret accord-
ing to all reason. He exhorted them to put
away all loose talk about such points, and to be
of one mind ; for he had been not a little
grieved, and on this account he had renounced
his intention of visiting the cities of the East.
It was in this strain that he wrote to Alexander
and to Arius, reproving and exhorting them
both.

Constantine was also deeply grieved at the
diversity of opinion which prevailed concerning
the celebration of the Passover ; - for some of
the cities in the East differed on this point, al-
though they did not withhold from communion
with one another ; they kept the festival more
according to the manner of the Jews,' and as
was natural by this divergence, detracted from
the splendor of the festal sacrifice. The em-
peror zealously endeavored to remove both
these causes of dissension from the church ; and
thinking to be able to remove the evil before it
advanced to greater proportions, he sent one
who was honored for his faith, his virtuous life,
and most approved in those former times for his


' Soz. only outlines the letter, given completely in Eus. I'. C.
ii. 64-72; of which Soc. quotes the greater part. i. 7.
' Eus. /'. C. iii. 5: .Soc. i. 8.
' They were called Quartodecitnanians. Euseb. H. E. v. 24;

Soc. V. 22.


I. i8.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


253


confessions about this doctrine, to reconcile
those who were divided on account of doctrine
in Egypt, and 4hose who in the East differed
about the Passover. This man was Hosius,
bishop of Cordova.

CHAP. XVII. OF THE COUNCIL CONVENED AT

NIC.«A ON ACCOUNT OF ARIUS.

When it was found that Jthe event did not
answer the expectations of the emperor, but that
on the contrary, the contention was too great
for reconciliation, so that he who had been sent
to make peace returned without having accom-
plished his mission, Constantine convened a
synod at Nicaea, in Bithynia, and wrote ^ to the
most eminent men of the churches in every
country, directing them to be there on an
appointed day.^ Of those who occupied the
apostolic sees, the following participated in this
conference : Macarius of Jerusalem, Eusta-
thius, who already presided over the church of
Antioch on the Orontes ; 3.nd Alexander of
Alexandria near Lake Mareotis. Julius,^ bishop
of Rome, was unable to attend on account of
extreme old age ; but his place was supplied by
Vito and Vicentius, presbyters of his church.
Many other excellent and good men from differ-
ent nations were congregated together, of whom
some were celebrated for their learning, their
eloquence, and their knowledge of the sacred
books, and other discipline ; some for the vir-
tuous tenor of their Hfe, and others for the com-
bination of all these qualifications. About three
hundred and twenty bishops were present, ac-
companied by a multitude of presbyters and
deacons. There were, likewise, men present
who were skilled in dialectics, and ready to
assist in the discussions. And as was usually
the case on such occasions, many priests re-
sorted to the council for the purpose of transact-
ing their own private affairs ; * for they considered
this a favorable opportunity for rectifying their
grievances, and in what points each found fault
with the rest, he presented a document to the
emperor, wherein he noted the offenses com-
mitted against himself. As this course was
pursued day after day, the emperor set apart
one certain d^y on which all complaints were to
be brought before him. When the appointed
time arrived, he took the memorials which had
been presented to him, and said, " All these
accusations will be brought forward in their own
season at the great day of judgment, and will
there be judged by the Great Judge of all men ;

1 Eus. F. C. iii. 6.

2 Ens. y- C- iii. 7-11; Soc. i. 8; Ruf. H. E. i. 2. The varia-
tions and additions of Theodoret are very noteworthy, f/. E. i. 7.

' Mistake for Silvester. Cf. ii. 20.

* Ruf. H. E. i. 2; Soc. i. 8. Soz. here makes, as usual, a free
use of the speech as reported by Rufinus.


as to me, I am but a man, and it would be evil
in me to take cognizance of such matters, seeing
that the accuser and the accused are priests ;
and the priests ought so to act as never to
become amenable to the judgment of others.
Imitate, therefore, the divine love and mercy of
God, and be ye reconciled to one another ;
withdraw your accusations against each other ;
let us be persuaded, and let us devote our
attention to those subjects connected with the
faith on account of which we are assembled."
After this address, in order to make the docu-
ment of each man nugatory, the emperor com-
manded the memorials to be burnt, and then
appointed a day for solving the doubtful points.
But before the appointed time arrived, the
bishops assembled together, and having sum-
moned Arius to attend, began to examine the
disputed topics, each one amongst them ad-
vancing his own opinion. As might have been
expected, however, many different questions
started out of the investigation : some of the
bishops spoke against the introduction of novel-
ties contrary to the faith which had been de-
Uvered to them from the beginning. And those
especially who had adhered to simplicity of
doctrine argued that the faith of God ought to
be received without curious inquiries ; others,
however, contended that ancient opinions ought
not to be followed without examination. Many
of the bishops who were then assembled, and of
the clergy who accompanied them, being re-
markable for their dialectic skill, and practiced
in such rhetorical methods, became conspicuous,
and attracted the notice of the emperor and the
court. Of that number Athanasius, who was
then a deacon of Alexandria, and had accom-
panied his bishop Alexander, seemed to have
the largest share in the counsel concerning these
subjects.

CHAP. XVIII. TWO PHILOSOPHERS ARE CONVERTED

TO THE FAITH BY THE SIMPLICITY OF TWO OLD
MEN WITH WHOM THEY HOLD A DISPUTATION.

While these disputations were being carried
on, certain of the pagan philosophers became
desirous of taking part in them ; some, because
they wished for information as to the doctrine
that was inculcated ; and others, because, feeling
incensed against the Christians on account of
the recent suppression of the pagan religion, they
wished to convert the inquiry about doctrine into
a strife about words, so as to introduce dissensions
among them, and to make them appear as hold-
ing contradictory opinions. It is related that
one of these philosophers, priding himself on his
acknowledged superiority of eloquence, began
to ridicule the priests, and thereby roused the
indignation of a simple old man, highly esteemed


254


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[I. i8.


as a confessor, who, although unskilled in logical
refinements and wordjness, undertook to oppose
him. The less serious of those who knew the
confessor, raised a laugh ^ at his expense for
engaging in such an undertaking ; but the more
thoughtful felt anxious lest, in opposing so
eloquent a man, he should only render himself
ridiculous ; yet his influence was so great, and
his reputation so high among them, that they
could not forbid his engaging in the debate ;
and he accordingly delivered himself in the
following terms : " In the name of Jesus Christ,
O philosopher, hearken to me. There is one
God, the maker of heaven and earth, and of all
things visible and invisible. He made all things
by the power of the Word, and established them
by the holiness of His Spirit. The Word, whom
we call the Son of God, seeing that man was
sunk in error and living like unto the beasts,
pitied him, and vouchsafed to be born of woman,
to hold intei-course with men, and to die for
them. And He will come again to judge each
of us as to the deeds of this present life. We
believe these things to be true with all simplicity.
Do not, therefore, expend your labor in vain by
striving to disprove facts which can only be
understood by faith or by scrutinizing the manner
in w^hich these things did or did not come to
pass. Answer me, dost thou believe ? " The
philosopher, astonished at what had occurred,
replied, " I believe " ; and having thanked the
old man for having overcome him in argument,
he began to teach the same doctrines to others.
He exhorted those who still held his former
sentiments to adopt the views he had embraced,
assuring them on oath, that he had been impelled
to embrace Christianity by a certain inexplicable
impulse.

It is said that a similar miracle was performed
by Alexander, who governed the church of
Constantinople. When Constantine returned to
Byzantium, certain philosophers came to him
to complain of the innovations in religion, and
particularly of his having introduced a new form
of worship into the state, contrary to that fol-
lowed by his forefathers, and by all who were
formerly in power, whether among the Greeks
or the Romans. They likewise desired to hold
a disputation on the doctrine with Alexander
the bishop ; and he, although unskilled in such
argumentative contests, and perhaps persuaded
by his life, seeing that he was an excellent
and good man, accepted the struggle at the
command of the emperor. When the philoso-
phers were assembled, since every one wished
to engage in the discussion, he requested that
one whom they esteemed worthy might be
chosen as spokesman, while the others were to

* Ruf. H. E. i. 3; Soc. i. 8. Soz. gives a free rendering of
Ruf.


remain silent. When one of the philosophers
began to open the debate, Alexander said to him,
" I command thee in the nam« of Jesus Christ
not to speak." The man was instantaneously
silenced. It is then right to consider whether
it is a greater miracle that a man, and he a
philosopher, should so easily be silenced by a
word, or that a stone-wall should be cleft by
the power of a word, which miracle I have
heard some attribute to Julian, surnamed the
Chaldean.^ I have understood that these events
happened in the way above narrated.

CHAP. XIX. — WHEN THE COUNCIL WAS ASSEMBLED,
THE EMPEROR DELIVERED A PUBLIC ADDRESS.

The bishops held long consultations ; and
after summoning Arius before them, they made
an accurate test of his propositions ; they were
intently on their guard, not to come to a vote
on either side. When at length the appointed
day arrived on which it had been decided to
settle the doubtful points, they assembled to-
gether^ in the palace, because the emperor had
signified his intention of taking part in the de-
liberations. When he was in the same place with
the priests, he passed through to the head of
the conference, and seated himself on the throne
which had been prepared for him, and the synod
was then commanded to be seated ; for seats
had been arranged on either side along the walls
of the palatial rooms, for it was the largest, and
excelled the other chambers.

After they were seated, Eusebius Pamphilus
arose and delivered an oration ■• in honor of the
emperor, returning thanks to God on his ac-
count. When he had ceased speaking, and si-
lence was restored, the emperor delivered him-
self in the following words : " I give thanks to God
for all things, but particularly, O friends, for be-
ing permitted to see your conference. And the
event has exceeded my prayer, in that so many
priests of Christ have been conducted into the
same place ; now, it is my desire that you should
be of one mind and be partakers of a consentient
judgment, for I deem dissension in the Church
of God as more dangerous than any other evil.
Therefore when it was announced, and I under-
stood you were in discord, an unwholesome thing
to hear, I was deeply pained in soul ; and least
of all does it profit you, since you are the con-
ductors of divine worship and arbiters of peace.

» Suidas sayshe was a philosopher, and the father of Julian, called
the Theurgist. He was the author of a work concerning demons,
in four boolcs. The son, who flourished under Marcns Aurelius,
was so skilled in the magic art, that he called down rain from
heaven, when the Roman soldiers were perishing from thirst, .^nui-
phis, an Egyptian philosopher, was said to have wrought a similar
miracle. Suidas, s. v. ' Eus. V. C. iii. 10-12.

* Theodoret, H. E. i. 7, places this oration in the mouth of
Eustathius, bishop of Antioch. The variations in the speech as
recorded by Sozomen, show his classic view of reporting. Theodo-
ret's report of Constantine's address is equally divergent.


I. 21.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


255


On this account it is, that I have called you to-
gether in a holy Synod, and being both your
emperor and your fellow-physician, I seek for
you a favor which is acceptable to our common
Lord, and as honorable for me to receive, as for
you to grant. The favor which I seek is, that
you examine the causes of the strife, and put a
consentient and peaceful end thereto ; so that I
may triumph with you over the envious demon,
who excited this internal revolt because he was
provoked to see our external enemies and ty-
rants under our feet, and envied our good estate."
The emperor pronounced this discourse in Latin,
and the interpretation was supplied by one at
his side.


CHAP. XX. — AFTER HAVING GIVEN AUDIENCE TO
BOTH PARTIES, THE EMPEROR CONDEMNED THE
FOLLOWERS OF ARIUS AND BANISHED THEM.

The next debate by the priests turned upon
doctrine.' The emperor gave patient attention
to the speeches of both parties ; he applauded
those who spoke well, rebuked those who dis-
played a tendency to altercation, and according
to his apprehension of what he heard, for he was
not wholly unpracticed in the Greek tongue, he
addressed himself with kindness to each one.
Finally all the priests agreed with one another
and conceded that the Son is consubstantial with
the Father. At the commencement of the con-
ference there were but seventeen who praised
the opinion of Arius, but eventually the majority
of these yielded assent to the general view. To
this judgment the emperor likewise deferred, for
he regarded the unanimitv of the conference to
be a divine approbation ; and he ordained that
any one who should be rebellious thereto, should
forthwith be sent into banishment, as guilty
of endeavoring to overthrow the Divine defini-
tions. I had thought it necessary to reproduce
the very document concerning the matter, as an
example of the truth, in order that posterity might
possess in a fixed and clear form the symbol of
the faith which proved pacificatory at the time ;
but since some pious friends, who understood
such matters, recommended that these truths
ought to be spoken of and heard by the initiated
and their initiators- only, I agreed with their
council ; for it is not unlikely that some of the
uninitiated may read this book. While I have
concealed such of the prohibited material as I
ought to keep silent about, I have not altogether
left the reader ignorant of the opinions held by
the synod.


1 Eus. V. C. iii. 13, 14; Soc. i. 8.

2 fj-voTixL Kal ixvcrrayuiyoi.^ as applied to the Christian mysteries.
The principle here adduced is different from that which ruled with
Ruf. //. £. i. 6; Soc. i. 8.


CHAP. XXI. WHAT THE COUNCIL DETERMINED

ABOUT ARIUS ; THE CONDEMN.\TION OF HIS
FOLLOWERS ; HIS WRITINGS ARE TO BK BURNT ;
CERTAIN OF THE HIGH PRIE.STS DIFFER FROM
THE council; the SEITLEMENT OF THE PASS-
OVER.

It ought to be known, that they affirmed the
Son to be consubstantial with the Father ; and
that those are to be excommunicated and voted
aliens to the Catholic Church, who assort that
there was a time in which the Son existed not,
and before He was begotten He was not, and
that He was made from what had no existence,
and that He is of another hypostasis or substance
from the Father, and that He is subject to change
or mutation. This decision was sanctioned by
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia ; by Theognis,
bishop of Nicaea ; by Maris, bishop of Chalce-
don ; by Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis ; and
by Secundus, bishop of Ptolemais in Libya.*
Eusebius Pamphilus, however, withheld his
assent for a little while, but on further exami-
nation assented.* The council excommunicated
Arius and his adherents, and prohibited his
entering Alexandria. The words in which his
opinions were couched were likewise con-
demned, as also a work entitled " Thalia,"
which he had written on the subject. I have
not read this book, but I understand that it is
of a loose character, resembling in license
Sotadus.^ It ought to be known that although
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis,
bishop of Niccea, assented to the document of
this faith set forth by the council, they neither
agreed nor subscribed to the deposition of
Arius. The emperor punished Arius with exile,
and dispatched edicts to the bishops and peo-
ple of every country, denouncing him and his
adherents as ungodly, and commanding that
their books should be destroyed, in order that
no remembrance of him or of the doctrine
which he had broached might remain. Who-
ever should be found secreting his writings and
who should not burn them immediately on the
accusation, should undergo the penalty of death,
and suffer capital punishment. The emperor
wrote letters to every city against Arius and
those who had received his doctrines, and
commanded Eusebius and Theognis to quit the
cities whereof they were bishops ; he addressed
himself in particular to the church of Nicome-
dia, urging it to adhere to the faith which
had been set forth by the council, to elect
orthodox bishops, to obey them, and to let the


3 There are variations in the earlier writers as to the number and
names of the excommunicated and banished.

* Eusebius' attempt at straddling amounts to prevarication here,
and later; Soc. i. 8 copied by the later historians.

5 Cf. Soc. i. 9; both borrowed their criticism from Athan. Or.
cont. Arian. i. 4, etc.


256


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[I. 21.


past fall into oblivion ; and he threatened with
punishment those who should venture to speak
well of the exiled bishops, or to adopt their
sentiments. In these and in other letters, he
manifested resentment against Eusebius, because
he had previously adopted the opinions of the
tyrant, and had engaged in his plots. In ac-
cordance with the imperial edicts, Eusebius and
Theognis were ejected from the churches which
they held, and Amphion received that of Nico-
media, and Chrestus that of Nicnea. On the
termination of this doctrinal controversy, the
council decided that the Paschal feast should be
celebrated at the same time in every place.'

CHAP. XXII. ACESIUS, BISHOP OF THE NOVA-

TIANS, IS SUMMONED BY THE EMPEROR TO BE
PRESENT AT THE FIRST COUNCIL.

It is related, that the emperor, under the
impulse of an ardent desire to see harmony
re-established among Christians, summoned Ace-
sius, bishop of the church of the Novatians,' to
the council, placed before him the definition of
the faith and of the feast, which had already
been confirmed by the signatures of the bishops,
and asked whether he could agree thereto.
Acesius answered that their exposition defined
no new doctrine, and that he accorded in opin-
ion with the Synod, and that he had from the
beginning held these sentiments with respect
both to the faith and to the feast. "Why,
then," said the emperor, " do you keep aloof
from communion with others, if you are of one
mind with them?" He replied that the dissen-
sion first broke out under Decius, between
Novatius and Cornelius,'' and that he considered
such persons unworthy of communion who, after
baptism, had fallen into those sins which the
Scriptures declare to be unto death;* for that
the remission of those sins, he thought, depended
on the authority of God only, and not on the
priests. The emperor replied, by saying, " O
Acesius, take a ladder and ascend alone to
heaven." By this speech I do not imagine the
emperor intended to praise Acesius, but rather
to blame him, because, being but a man, he
fancied himself exempt from sin.''

CHAP. XXIII. CANONS APPOINTED BY THE COU.V-

CIL; PAPHNUTIUS, a certain confessor, RE-
STRAINS THE COUNCIL FRO.VI FORMING A CANON
ENJOINING CELIBACY TO ALL WHO WERE ABOUT
TO BE HONORED WITH THE PRIESIHOOD.

Zealous of reforming the life of those who
were engaged about the churches, the Synod

• Eus. F. C. iii. 14-24: Soc. i. 8, q.

' Soc. i. 10, who derived il from Aiixanon, a presbyter, who
accompanied Acesius to Nice. Cf. i. 13.

' Eus. //. E. vi. 43-46. * I John v. 16.

* Socrates' statement of the source of his information is passed


enacted laws which were called canons.* While
they were deliberating about this, some thought
that a law ought to be passed enacting that
bishops and presbyters, deacons and sub-dea-
cons, should hold no intercourse with the wife
they had espoused before they entered the
priesthood ; but Paphnutius/ the confessor,
stood up and testified against this proposition ;
he said that marriage was honorable and chaste,
and that cohabitation with their own wives was
chastity, and advised the Synod not to frame
such a law, for it would be difficult to bear,
and might serve as an occasion of inconti-
nence to them and their wives ; and he reminded
them, that according to the ancient tradition of
the church, those who were unmarried when
they took part in the communion of sacred
orders, were required to remain so, but that
those who were married, were not to put away
their wives. Such was the advice of Paphnutius,
although he was himself unmarried, and in ac-
cordance with it, the Synod concurred in his
counsel, enacted no law about it, but left the
matter to the decision of individual judgment,
and not to compulsion. The Synod, however,
enacted other laws regulating the government
of the Church ; and these laws may easily be
found, as they are in the possession of many
individuals.

CHAP. XXIV. CONCERNING MELITIUS ; THE EXCEL-
LENT DIRECTIONS MADE BY THE HOLY COUNCIL IN
HIS COMPLICATIONS.

After an investigation had been made into the
conduct of Melitius when in Egypt, the Synod
sentenced him to reside in Lycus,^ and to retain
only the name of bishop ; and prohibited him
from ordaining any one either in a city or a
village. Those who had previously been or-
dained by him, were permitted by this law, to
remain in communion and in the ministry, but
were to be accounted secondary in point of
dignity to the clergy in church and pari<^.'
When by death an appointment became vacant,
they were allowed to succeed to it, if deemed
worthy, by the vote of the multitude, but in this
case, were to be ordained by the bishop of the
Church of Alexandria, for they were interdicted
from exercising any power or influence in elec-
tions. This regulation appeared just to the Synod,


over, as well as his criticism of prejudiced historians. The comment
substituted by Soz. is, nevertheless, a partially correct interpretation.

'' Soc. i. II. Cf. the perverted text of the Canoites Nicerni, in
Ruf. //. E. i. 6.

' Soc. i. 11.

' Lycus (Lycopolis) is not named in the letter of the Synod, which
says simply that he should reside in his own city. Soz. took the
fact from Athan. Afirl, coiil. A nan. 71, where Melitius, in the brief
to Alexander, calls himself bishop of Lycus. This is a proof of our
historian's use of the same documents to amplify the statements of
Socrates.

" Soc. i. 9, for text of the letter.


1. 25.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


257


for Melitius^ and his followers had manifested
great rashness and temerity in administering ordi-
nation ; so that it also deprived the ordinations
which differed from those of Peter of all consid-
eration. He, when he conducted the Alexan-
drian Church, fled on account of the persecution
then raging, but afterwards suffered martyrdom.

CHAP. XXV. THE EMPEROR PREPARED A PUBLIC

TABLE FOR THE SYNOD, AFTER INVITING HS
MEMBERS TO CONSTANTINOPLE, AND HONORING
THEM WITH GIFTS. HE EXHORTED ALL TO BE OF
ONE MIND, AND FORWARDED TO ALEXANDRIA AND
EVERY OTHER PLACE THE DECREES OF THE HOLY
SYNOD.

At the very time that these decrees were
passed by the council, the twentieth anniversary^
of the reign of Constantine was celebrated ; for
it was a Roman custom to have a feast on the
tenth year of every reign. The emperor, there-

1 The best text reads Melitius, not Meletius, so Athanas. and
Soc; usually the books write Meletius and Meletians. We follow
the reading.

* This feast, called Vicennalia, is mentioned in Eus. y. C. iii.
15, 16.


fore, thought it to be opportune, and invited the
Synod to the festival, and presented suitable
gifts to them ; and when they prepared to return
home, he called them all together, and exhorted
them to be of one mind about the faith and at
peace among themselves, so that no dissensions
might henceforth creep in among them. After
many other similar exhortations, he concluded
by commanding them to be diligent in prayer,
and always to supplicate God for himself, his
children, and the empire, and after he had thus
addressed those who had come to Nicsea, he
bade them farewell. He wrote to the churches
in every city, in order that he might make plain
to those who had not been present, what had
been rectified by the Synod ; and especially to
the Church of Alexandria he wrote more than
this ; urging them to lay aside all dissent, and
to be harmonious in the faith issued by the
Synod ; for this could be nothing else than the
judgment of God, since it was estabhshed by the
Holy Spirit from the concurrence of so many
and such illustrious high priests, and approved
after accurate inquiry and test of all the doubt-
ful points.


BOOK II.


CHAP. I. — THE DISCOVERY OF THE LIFE-BRINGING
CROSS AND OF THE HOLY NAILS.

When the business at Nicsea had been trans-
acted as above related, the priests returned
home. The emperor rejoiced exceedingly at the
restoration of unity of opinion in the Catholic
Church, and desirous of expressing in behalf of
himself, his children, and the empire, the grati-
tude towards God which the unanimity of the
bishops inspired, he directed that a house of
prayer should be erected to God at Jerusalem '
near the place called Calvary. At the same time
his mother Helena repaired to the city for the
purpose of offering up prayer, and of visiting the
sacred places. Her zeal for Christianity made
her anxious to find the wood which had formed
the adorable cross. But it was no easy matter
to discover either this relic or the Lord's sepul-
chre ; for the Pagans, who in former times had
persecuted the Church,^ and who, at the first
promulgation of Christianity, had had recourse
to every artifice to exterminate it, had concealed
that spot under much heaped up earth, and
elevated what before was quite depressed, as it
looks now, and the more effectually to conceal
them, had enclosed the entire place of the res-
urrection and Mount Calvary within a wall, and
had, moreover, ornamented the whole locality,
and paved it with stone. They also erected a
temple to .\phrodite, and set up a little image,
so that those who repaired thither to worship
Christ would appear to bow the knee to Aphro-
dite, and that thus the true cause of offering wor-
ship in that place would, in course of time, be
forgotten ; and that as Christians would not
dare fearlessly to frequent the place or to point
it out to others, the temple and statue would
come to be regarded as exclusively appertaining
to the Pagans. At length, however, the place
was discovered, and the fraud about it so zeal-
ously maintained was detected ; some say that
the facts were first disclosed by a Hebrew who
dwelt in the East, and who derived his informa-


' Eus. y. C. iii. 25-40; Soc. i. 9, Letter to Macarius, bishop of

Jerusalem. _ ^ . „ ., ^ .-

J Ruf. H. E. i. 7, 8: Soc. H. E. I. 17; Sulp. Scv. H. 5. 11. 33,
34, another story of the identification. Soz. furnishes an additional
story about the discovery, which he, however, confutes.


tion from some documents which had come to
him by paternal inheritance ; but it seems more
accordant with truth to suppose that God re-
vealed the fact by means of signs and dreams ;
for I do not think that human information is
requisite when God thinks it best to make mani-
fest the same. \Vhen by command of the em-
peror the place was excavated deeply, the cave
whence our Lord arose from the dead was dis-
covered ; and at no great distance, three
crosses were found and another separate piece
of wood, on which were inscribed in white letters
in Hebrew, in (ireek, and in Latin, the follow-
ing words : " Jesus of Nazareth, the king of the
Jews." These words, as the sacred book of
the gospels relates, were placed by command
of Pilate, governor of Judaea, over the head of
Christ. There yet, however, remained a diffi-
culty in distinguishing the Divine cross from the
others ; for the inscription had been wrenched
from it and thrown aside, and the cross itself
had been cast aside with the others, without any
distinction, when the bodies of the crucified
were taken down. For according to history,
the soldiers found Jesus dead upon the cross,
and they took him down, and gave him up to
be buried ; while, in order to accelerate the
death of the two thieves, who were crucified on
either hand, they broke their legs, and then took
down the crosses, and flung them out of the way.
It was no concern of theirs to deposit the
crosses in theii- first order ; for it was growing
late, and as the men were dead, they did not
think it worth while to remain to attend to the
crosses. A more Divine information than could be
furnished by man was therefore necessary in order
to distinguish the Divine cross from the others,
and this revelation was given in the following man-
ner : There was a certain lady of rank in Jerusa-
lem who was afflicted with a most grievous and
incurable disease ; Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem,
accompanied by the mother of the emperor and
her attendants, repaired to her bedside. After
engaging in prayer, Macarius signified by signs
to the spectators that the Divine cross would be
the one which, on being brought in contact with
the invalid, should remove the disease. He
approached her in turn with each of the crosses ;


n. 3]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


259


but when two of the crosses were laid on her, it
seemed but folly and mockery to her for she
was at the gates of death. VVlien, however, the
third cross was in like manner brought to her,
she suddenly opened her eyes, regained her
strength, and immediately sprang from her bed,
well. It is said that a dead person was, in the
same way, restored to life. The venerated wood
having been thus identified, the greater portion
of it was deposited in a silver case, in which it
is still preserved in Jerusalem : but the empress
sent part of it to her son Constantine, together
with the nails by which the body of Christ had
been fastened. Of these, it is related, the em-
peror had a head-piece and bit made for his
horse, according to the prophecy of Zechariah,
who referred to this period when he said, " that
which shall be upon the bit of the horse shall be
holy to the Lord Almighty."^ These things,
indeed, were formerly known to the sacred
prophets, and predicted by them, and at length,
when it seemed to God that they should be
manifested, were confirmed by wonderful works.
Nor does this appear so marvelous when it is
remembered that, even among the Pagans, it was
confessed that the Sibyl had predicted that thus
it should be, —

" Oh most blessed tree, on which our Lord was hung." ■^

Our most zealous adversaries cannot deny the
truth of this fact, and it is hence evident that a
pre-manifestation was made of the wood of the
cross, and of the adoration (o-e'^as) it received.

The above incidents we have related precisely
as they were delivered to us by men of great
accuracy, by whom the information was derived
by succession from father to son ; and others
have recorded the same events in writing for the
benefit of posterity.


CHAP. 11. CONCERNING HELENA, THE MOTHER

OF THE EMPEROR ; SHE VISITED JERUSALEM,
BUILT TEMPLES IN THAT CITY, AND PER-
FORMED OTHER GODLY WORKS : HER DEATH.

About this period, the emperor, having deter-
mined upon erecting a temple in honor of God,
charged the governors to see that the work was
executed in the most magnificent and costly
manner possible. His mother Helena also
erected two temples,^ the one at Bethlehem
near the cave where Christ was born, the other
on ridges of the Mount of Olives, whence He
was taken up to heaven. Many other acts show
her piety and religiousness, among which the
following is not the least remarkable : During
her residence at Jerusalem, it is related that she
assembled the sacred virgins at a feast, minis-

1 Zech. xiv. 20. (LXX.) « Sib. Or. vi. 26.

' Eus. V. C. iii. 41, 47; Soc. i. 17.


tered to them at supper, presented them with
food, poured water on their hands, and per-
formed other similar services customary to those
who wait upon guests. When she visited the
cities of the East, she bestowed befitting gifts on
the churches in every town, enriched those in-
dividuals who had been deprived of their posses-
sions, supplied ungrudgingly the necessities of
the poor, and restored to liberty those who had
been long imprisoned, or condemned to exile or
the mines. It seems to me that so many holy
actions demanded a recompense ; and indeed,
even in this life, she was raised to the summit of
magnificence and splendor ; she was proclaimed
Augusta ; her image was stamped on golden
coins, and she was invested by her son with
authority over the imperial treasury to give it
according to her judgment. Her death, too, was
glorious ; for when, at the age of eighty, she
quitted this life, she left her son and her de-
scendants (like her of the race of Caesar), mas-
ters of the Roman world. And if there be any
advantage in such fame — forgetfulness did not
conceal her though she was dead — the coming
age has the pledge of her perpetual memory ; for
two cities are named after her, the one in Bi-
thynia, and the other in Palestine.* Such is the
history of Helena.

CHAP. III. TEMPLES BUILT BY CONSTANTINE THE

GRE.'^T ; THE CITY CALLED BY HIS NAME ; FTS
FOUNDING ; THE BUILDINGS WITHIN IT ; THE
TEMPLE OF MICHAEL THE ARCHSOLDIER, IN THE
SOSTHENIUM, AND THE MIRACLES WHICH HAVE
OCCURRED THERE.

The emperor,^ always intent on the advance-
ment of religion, erected the most beautiful
temples to God in every place, particularly in
metropolises, such as Nicomedia in Bithynia,
Antioch on the river Orontes, and Byzantium.
He greatly improved this latter city, and consti-
tuted it the equal of Rome in power, and par-
ticipation in the government ; for, when he had
settled the affairs of the empire according to his
own mind, and had rectified foreign affairs by
wars and treaties, he resolved upon founding a
city which should be called by his own name,
and should be equal in celebrity to Rome.
With this intention, he repaired to a plain at
the foot of Troy, near the Hellespont, above the
tomb of Ajax, where, it is said, the Achaians
had their naval stations and tents while be-
sieging Troy ; and here he laid the plan of a
large and beautiful city, and built the gates on

* Helenopolis in Palestine not mentioned by Soc. i. 17, 18. Was
the site of this city at the convent of Mt. Carmel or at St. Helena's
towers, near the Scala Ty riorum? For the Bithynian city, cf.
Procopius, de .■Edificiis v. 2; cf. also Philost. ii. 12; Eus. Chron-
icon (Ilieron.), under a.d. J31.

^ Eus. V. C. iii. 50-58; IV. 58; Soc. i. 18; Zos. ii. 30-32.


26o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[11. 3.


an elevated spot of ground, whence they are
still visible from the sea to those sailing by.
But when he had advanced thus far, God ap-
peared to him by night, and commanded him
to seek another spot. Led by the hand of God,
he arrived at Byzantium in Thrace, beyond
Chalcedon in Bithynia, and here he was desired
to build his city and to render it -worthy of the
name of Constantine. In obedience to the
words of God, he therefore enlarged the city
formerly called Byzantium, and surrounded it
Avith high walls. He also erected magnificent
dwelling houses southward through the regions.
Since he was aware that the former population
was insufficient for so great a city, he peopled
it with men of rank and their households, whom
he summoned hither from the elder Rome and
from other countries. He imposed taxes to
•cover the expenses of building and adorning
the city, and of supplying its inhabitants with
food, and providing the city with all the other
requisites. He adorned it sumptuously with
a hippodrome, fountains, porticos, and other
structures. He named it New Rome and Con-
stantinople, and constituted it the imperial cap-
ital for all the inhabitants of the North, the
South, the East, and the shores of the Mediter-
ranean, from the cities on the Ister and from
Epidamnus and the Ionian gulf, to Cyrene and
that part of Libya called Borium.

He constructed another council house which
they call senate ; he ordered the same honors
and festal days as those customary to the other
Romans, and he did not fail studiously to make
the city which bore his name equal in every re-
spect to that of Rome in Italy ; nor were his
wishes thwarted ; for by the assistance of God,
it had to be confessed as great in population
and wealth. I know of no cause to account for
this extraordinary aggrandizement, unless it be
the piety of the builder and of the inhabitants,
and their compassion and liberality towards the
poor. The zeal they manifested for the Chris-
tian faith was so great that many of the Jewish
inhabitants and most of the Greeks were con-
verted. As this city became the capital of the
empire during the period of religious prosperity,
it was not polluted by altars, Grecian temples,
nor sacrifices; and although Julian authorized
the introduction of idolatry for a short space
of time, it soon afterwards became extinct.
Constantine further honored this newly com-
pacted city of Christ, named after himself, by
adorning it with numerous and magnificent
houses of prayer. And the Deity also co-ope-
rated with the spirit of the emperor, and by
Divine manifestations persuaded men that these
prayer houses in the city were holy and salva-
tory. According to the general opinion of
foreigners and citizens, the most remarkable


church was that built in a place formerly called
Hestiae. This place, which is now called Mi-
chaelium, lies to the right of those who sail from
Pontus to Constantinople, and is about thirty-
five stadia distant from the latter city by water,
but if you make the circuit of the bay, the
journey between them is seventy stadia and
upwards. This place obtained the name which
now prevails, because it is believed that Michael,
the Divine archangel, once appeared there. And
I also affirm that this is true, because I myself
received the greatest benefits, and the experi-
ence of really helpful deeds on the part of many
others proves this to be so. For some who had
fallen into fearful reverses or unavoidable dan-
gers, others with disease and unknown sufferings,
there prayed to God, and met with a change in
their misfortunes. I should be prolix were I to
give details of circumstance and person. But I
cannot omit mentioning the case of Aquilinus,
who is even at the present time residing with
us, and who is an advocate in the same court of
justice as that to which we belong.^ I shall
relate what I heard from him concerning this
occurrence and what I saw. Being attacked
with a severe fever, arising from a yellowish
bile, the physicians gave him some foreign drug
to drink. This he vomited, and, by the effort
of vomiting, diffused the bile, which tinged his
countenance with a yellow color. Hence he
had to vomit all his food and drink. For a
long time he remained in this state ; and since
his nourishment would not be quiet in him, the
skill of the physicians was at a loss for the
suffering. Finding that he was already half
dead, he commanded his servant to carry him
to the house of prayer ; for he affirmed earnestly
that there he would either die or be freed from
his disease. While he was lying there, a Divine
Power appeared to him by night, and com-
manded him to dip his foot in a confection
made of honey, wine, and pepper. The man
did so, and was freed from his complaint, al-
though the prescription was contrary to the
professional rules of the physicians, a confection
of so very hot a nature being considered adverse
to a bilious disorder. I have also heard that
Probianus, one of the physicians of the palace,
who was suffering greatly from a disease in the
feet, likewise met with deliverance from sickness
at this place, and was accounted worthy of be-
ing visited with a wonderful and Divine vision.
He had formerly been attached to the Pagan
superstitions, but afterwards became a Chris-
tian ; yet, while he admitted in one way or
another the probability of the rest of our doc-
trines, he could not understand how, by the


I ayoptvovTi. This shows that Sozomen was an advocate in the
law courts at the very time of his writing this history.


n. 5-3


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


261


Divine cross, the salvation of all is effected.
While his mind vv^as in doubt on this subject,
the symbol of the cross, which lay on the altar
of this church, was pointed out to him in the
Divine vision, and he heard a voice openly
declaring, that, as Christ had been crucified on
the cross, the necessities of the human race or
of individuals, whatsoever they might be, could
not be met by the ministration of Divine angels
or of pious and good men ; for that there was
no power to rectify apart from the venerated
cross. I have only recorded a few of the inci-
dents which I know to have taken place in this
temple, because there is not time to recount
them all.

CHAP. rV. WHAT CONSTANTINE THE GREAT EF-
FECTED ABOUT THE OAK IN MAMRE ; HE ALSO
BUILT A TEMPLE.

I CONSIDER it necessary to detail the proceed-
ings of Constantine in relation to what is called
the oak of Mamre.^ This place is now called
Terebinthus, and is about fifteen stadia distant
from Hebron, which lies to the south, but is
two hundred and fifty stadia distant from Jeru-
salem. It is recorded that here the Son of
God appeared to Abraham, with two angels,
who had been sent against Sodom, and foretold
the birth of his son. Here the inhabitants of
the country and of the regions round Palestine,
the Phoenicians, and the Arabians, assemble
annually during the summer season to keep a
brilliant feast ; and many others, both buyers
and sellers, resort thither on account of the
fair. Indeed, this feast is diligently frequented
by all nations : by the Jews, because they boast
of their descent from the patriarch Abraham ;
by the Pagans, because angels there appeared
to men ; and by Christians, because He who for
the salvation of mankind was born of a virgin,
afterwards manifested Himself there to a godly
man. This place was moreover honored fit-
tingly with religious exercises. Here some
prayed to the God of all; some called upon the
angels, poured out wine, burnt incense, or
offered an ox, or he-goat, a sheep, or a cock.
Each one made some beautiful product of his
labor, and after carefully husbanding it through
the entire year, he offered it according to prom-
ise as provision for that feast, both for himself
and his dependents. And either from honor to
the place, or from fear of Divine wrath, they
all abstained from coming near their wives,
although during the feast these were more than
ordinarily studious of their beauty and adorn-
ment. Nor, if they chanced to appear and to
take part in the public processions, did they act


I Eus. J'. C. iii . 51-53 ; Soc. i. 18. As a native of Palestine,
Soz. here adds local details.


at all licentiously. Nor did they behave im-
prudently in any other respect, although the
tents were contiguous to each other, and they
all lay promiscuously together. The place is
open country, and arable, and without houses,
with the exception of the buildings around
Abraham's old oak and the well he prepared.
No one during the time of the feast drew water
from that well ; for according to Pagan usage,
some placed burning lamps near it ; some poured
out wine, or cast in cakes ; and others, coins,
myrrh, or incense. Hence, as I suppose, the
water was rendered useless by commixture with
the things cast into it. Once whilst these cus-
toms were being celebrated by the Pagans,
after the aforesaid manner, and as was the
established usage with hilarity, the mother-in-
law ^ of Constantine was present for prayer, and
apprised the emperor of what was being done.
On receiving this information, he rebuked the
bishops of Palestine in no measured terms,
because they had neglected their duty, and had
permitted a holy place to be defiled by impure
libations and sacrifices ; and he expressed his
godly censure in an epistle which he wrote on
the subject to Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, to
Eusebius Pamphilus, and to the bishops of Pal-
estine. He commanded these bishops to hold
a conference on this subject with the Phoenician
bishops, and issue directions for the demolition,
from the foundations, of the altar formerly erected
there, the destruction of the carved images by
fire, and the erection of a church worthy of so
ancient and so holy a place. The emperor
finally enjoined, that no libations or sacrifices
should be offered on the spot, but that it should
be exclusively devoted to the worship of God
according to the law of the Church ; and that if
any attempt should be made to restore the
former rites, the bishops were to inform against
the delinquent, in order that he might be sub-
jected to the greatest punishment. The gov-
ernors and priests of Christ stricdy enforced the
injunctions contained in the emperor's letter.

CHAP. V. CONSTANTINE DESTROYED THE PLACES

DEDICATED TO THE IDOLS, AND PERSUADED THE
PEOPLE TO PREFER CHRISTUNFTV.

As many nations and cities throughout the
whole realm of his subjects retained a feeling of
fear and veneration towards their vain idols,
which led them to disregard the doctrines of the
Christians, and to have a care for their ancient
customs, and the manners and feasts of their
fathers, it appeared necessary to the emperor
to teach the governors to suppress their super-
stitious rites of worship. He thought that this
would be easily accomplished if he could get

' Eutropia, the mother of Fausta.


262


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 5.


them to despise their temples and the images
contained therein.' To carry this project into
execution he did not require miUtary aid ; for
Christian men belonging to the palace went from
city to city bearing imperial letters. The peo-
ple were induced to remain passive from the
fear that, if they resisted these edicts, they, their
children, and their wives, would be exposed to
evil. The vergers and the priests, being unsup-
ported by the multitude, brought out their most
precious treasures, and the idols called Siottct^,'
and through these servitors, the gifts were drawn
forth from the shrines and the hidden recesses in
the temples. The spots previously inaccessible,
and known only to the priests, were made accessi-
ble to all who desired to enter. Such of the images
as were constructed of precious material, and
whatever else was valuable, were purified by fire,
and became public property. The brazen images
which were skillfully wrought were carried to the
city, named after the emperor, and placed there
as objects of embellishment, where they may
still be seen in public places, as in the streets,
the hippodrome, and the palaces. Amongst
them was the statue of Apollo which was in the
seat of the oracle of the Pythoness, and like-
wise the statues of the Muses from Helicon, the
tripods from Delphos, and the much extolled
Pan, which Pausanias the Lacedaemonian and
the Grecian cities had devoted, — after the war
against the Medes.

As to the temples, some were stripped
of their doors, others of their roofs, and
others were neglected, allowed to fall into ruin,
or destroyed. The temple of .^^^sculapius in
.^gis, a city of Cilicia, and that of Venus at
Aphaca, near Mount Lebanon and the River
Adonis, were then undermined and entirely
destroyed. Both of these temples were most
highly honored and reverenced by the ancients ;
as the yKgeatae were wont to say, that those
among them who were weakened in body were
delivered from diseases because the demon
manifested himself by night, and healed them.
And at Aphaca, it was believed that on a certain
prayer being uttered on a given day, a fire like
a star descended from the top of Lebanon and
sunk into the neighboring river ; they affirmed
that this was Urania, for they call Aphrodite by
this name. The efforts of the emperor suc-
ceeded to the utmost of his anticipations ; for
on beholding the objects of their former rev-
erence and fear boldly cast down and stuffed
with straw and hay, the people were led to de-
spise what they had previously venerated, and
to blame the erroneous opinion of their ances-


' Eus. I'. C. iii. 54-58; iv. 38: Soc. i. i8; Zos. ii. 31.

* i.e. " sent down from Jupiter." Such were the Palladium of
Troy, the Ancile at Rome, and " the image " of Diana, " which
fell down from Jupiter," mentioned in Acts xix. 35.


tors. Others, envious at the honor in which
Christians were held by the emperor, deemed
it necessary to imitate the acts of the ruler ;
others devoted themselves to an examination of
Christianity, and by means of signs, of dreams,
or of conferences with bishops and monks, were
convinced that it was better to become Christians.
From this period, nations and citizens sponta-
neously renounced their former opinion. At
that time a port of Gaza, called Majuma, wherein
superstition and ancient ceremonies had been
hitherto admired, turned unitedly with all its
inhabitants to Christianity. The emperoi*, in
order to reward their piety, deemed them
worthy of the greatest honor, and distinguished
the place as a city, a status it had not pre-
viously enjoyed, and named it Constantia : thus
honoring the spot on account of its piety, by
bestowing on it the nam^ of the dearest of his
children. On the same account, also, Constan-
tine in Phoenicia is known to have received its
name from the emperor. But it would not be
convenient to record every instance of this
kind, for many other cities about this time went
over to religion, and spontaneously, without
any command of the emperor, destroyed the
adjacent temples and statues, and erected houses
of prayer.

CHAP. VI. — THE REASON WHY UNDER CONSTAN-
TINE, THE NAME OF CHRIST WAS SPREAD
THROUGHOirr THE WHOLE WORLD.

The church having been in this manner spread
throughout the whole Roman world, religion was
introduced even among the barbarians them-
selves.^ The tribes on both sides of the Rhine
were Christianized, as likewise the Celts and the
Gauls who dwelt upon the most distant shores
of the ocean ; the Goths, too, and such tribes as
were contiguous to them, who formerly dwelt on
either of the high shores of the Danube, had
long shared in the Christian faith, and had
changed into a gentler and more rational obser-
vance. Almost all the barbarians had professed
to hold the Christian doctrine in honor, from
the time of the wars between the Romans and
foreign tribes, under the government of Gal-
lienus and the emperors who succeeded him.
For when an unspeakable multitude of mixed
nations passed over from Thrace into Asia and
overran it, and when other barbarians from the
various regions did the same things to the adja-
cent Romans, many priests of Christ who had
been taken captive, dwelt among these tribes ;
and during their residence among them, healed
the sick, and cleansed those who were possessed
of demons, by the name of Christ only, and by

» Irenzus aJv. Hteres i. 3 (ed. Harvey) ; Philost. ii. 5, 6.


II. 7.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


263


calling on the Son of God ; moreover they led ' a
blameless life, and excited envy by their virtues.
The barbarians, amazed at the conduct and
wonderful works of these men, thought that it
would be prudent on their part, and pleasing to
the Deity, if they should imitate those whom
they saw were better ; and, like them, would
render homage to God. When teachers as to
what should be done, had been proposed to
them, the people were taught and baptized, and
subsequently were gathered into churches.


CHAP. VII. — HOW THE IBERIANS RECEIVED THE
FAITH OF CHRIST.

It is said that during this reign the Iberians,^
a large and warlike barbarian nation, confessed
Christ.''' They dwelt to the north beyond Arme-
nia. A Christian woman, who had been taken
captive, induced them to renounce the religion
of their fathers. She was very faithful and
godly, and did not, amongst foreigners, remit
her accustomed routine of religious duty. To
fast, to pray night and day, and to praise God,
constituted her delight. The barbarians in-
quired as to the motives of her endurance : she
simply answered, that it was necessary in this
way to worship the Son of God ; but the name
of Him who was to be worshiped, and the man-
ner of worshiping, appeared strange to them.
It happened that a boy of the country was taken
ill, and his mother, according to the custom of
the Iberians, took him around from house to
house, in hope that some one might be found
capable of curing the disease, and the change
from the suffering might be easy for the afflicted.
As no one capable of healing him could be
found, the boy was brought to the captive, and
she said, "as to medicines, I have neither ex-
perience nor knowledge, nor am I acquainted
with the mode of applying ointments or plas-
ters ; but, O woman, I believe that Christ whom
I worship, the true and great God, will be-
come the Saviour of thy child." Then she
prayed for him immediately and freed him from
the disease, although just before it was believed
that he was about to die. A little while after,
the wife of the governor of the nation was, by
an incurable disease, brought nigh unto death ;
yet she too was saved in the same manner.
And thus did this captive teach the knowledge
of Christ, by introducing Him as the dispenser
of health, and as the Lord of life, of empire,
and of all things. The governor's wife, con-

1 jToXtTfiai' dne^TTToi" i(j>iKo<T6<t)ovi'. The Christian life, and
•especially the monastic, was regarded as the true philosophy.

'■' By the Iberians we are to understand, not the people of Spain
(for they had a church among them as early as the time of Irena;us;
see flrt'7'. Hieres. i. 3, ed. Harvey), but the people of that name in
Asia. Cf. Soc. i. 20, who says these Iberians migrated from Spain.

^ Ruf. H. E. i. 10; Soc. i. 20; Soz. takes directly from Ruf.


vinced by her own personal experience, believed
the words of the captive, embraced the Chris-
tian religion, and held the woman in much
honor. The king, astonished at the celerity of
the cure, and the miraculousness and healing of
faith, learned the cause from his wife, and com-
manded that the captive should be rewarded
with gifts. " Of gifts," said the queen, " her es-
timate is very low, whatever may be their value ;
she makes much of the service she renders to
her God only. Therefore if we wish to gratify
her, or desire to do what is safe and right, let
us also worship God, who is mighty and a
Saviour, and who, at His will, gives continuance
unto kings, casts down the high, renders the
illustrious abject, and saves those in terrible
straits." The queen continued to argue in this
excellent manner, but the sovereign of Iberia
remained in doubt and unconvinced, as he
reflected on the novelty of the matters, and
also respected the religion of his fathers. A
little while after, he went into the woods with
his attendants, on a hunting excursion : all of a
sudden thick clouds arose, and a heavy air was
everywhere diffused by them, so as to conceal
the heavens and the sun ; profound night and
great darkness pervaded the wood. Since each
of the hunters was alarmed for his own safety,
they scattered in different directions. The king,
while thus wandering alone, thought of Christ,
as men are wont to do in times of danger. He
determined that if he should be delivered from
his present emergency, he would walk before
God and worship Him. At the very instant that
these thoughts were upon his mind, the dark-
ness was dissipated, the air became serene, the
rays of the sun penetrated into the wood, and
the king went out in safety. He informed his
wife of the event that had befallen him, sent for
the captive, and commanded her to teach him
in what way he ought to worship Christ. When
she had given as much instruction as it was right
for a woman to say and do, he called together
his subjects and declared to them plainly the
Divine mercies which had been vouchsafed to
himself and to his wife, and although uninitiated,
he declared to his people the doctrines of Christ.
The whole nation was persuaded to embrace
Christianity, the men being convinced by the
representations of the king, and the women by
those of the queen and the captive. And speed-
ily with the general consent of the entire na-
tion, they prepared most zealously to build a
church. When the external walls were com-
pleted, machines were brought to raise up the
columns, and fix them upon their pedestals. It
is related, that when the first and second col-
umns had been righted by these means, great
difficulty was found in fixing the third column,
neither art nor physical strength being of any


264


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 7.


avail, ^although many were present to assist in
the gulling. When evening came on, the female
captive remained alone on the spot, and she
continued there throughout the night, interced-
ing with God that the erection of the columns
might be easily accomplished, especially as all
the rest had taken their departure distressed at
the failure ; for the column was only half raised,
and remained standing, and one end of it was
so embedded in its foundations that it was im-
possible to move it downward. It was God's
will that by this, as well as by the preceding
miracle, the Iberians should be still further con-
firmed about the Deity. Early in the morning,
when they were present at the church, they be-
held a wonderful spectacle, which seemed to
them as a dream. The column, which on the day
before had been immovable, now appeared erect,
and elevated a small space above its proper
base. All present were struck with admiration,
and confessed, with one consent, that Christ
alone is the true God. Whilst they were all
looking on, the column slipped quietly and
spontaneously, and was adjusted as by machinery
on its base. The other columns were then
erected with ease, and the Iberians completed
the structure with greater alacrity. The church
having been thus speedily built, the Iberians,
at the recommendation of the captive, sent am-
bassadors to the Emperor Constantine, bearing
proposals for alliance and treaties, and request-
ing that priests might be sent to their nation.
On their arrival, the ambassadors related the
events that had occurred, and how the whole
nation with much care worshiped Christ. The
emperor of the Romans was delighted with the
embassy, and after acceding to every request
that was proffered, dismissed the ambassadors.
Thus did the Iberians receive the knowledge of
Christ, and until this day they worship him
carefully.

CHAP. VIII. — HOW THE ARMENIANS AND PER-
SIANS EMBRACED CHRISTIANITY.

Subsequently the Christian religion became
known to the neighboring tribes and was very
greatly disseminated.' The Armenians, I have
understood, were the first to embrace Christi-
anity."'^ It is said that Tiridates, then the sover-
eign of that nation, became a Christian by means
of a marvelous Divine sign which was wrought
in his own house ; and that he issued commands
to all the subjects, by a herald, to adopt the

' This paragraph is regarded by Valesius as spurious.

' The source of this chapter certainly is not Moses Chorenensis.
Tiridates III. reigned a.d. 286-342. At first a persecutor, through
Gregory the Illuminator he became a Christian. Yet parts of
Armeni.t were Christianized much e.irlier. Dionysius bishop of
Alexandria wrote a letter on Repentam e to the Armenians in the
reign of Callus. Eus. H. E. vi. 46. Cf. Agathangelas, History of
Tiridates the Great, and the preaching of Gregory the Illuminator.


same religion.'' I think that the beginning of
the conversion of the Persians^ was owing to their
intercourse with the Osroenians and Armenians ;
for it is likely that they would converse with
such Divine men and make experience of their
virtue.


CHAP. IX. — SAPOR KING OF PERSIA IS EXCITED
AGAINST THE CHRISTI.^NS. SYMEON, BISHOP OF
PERSIA, AND USTHAZANES, A EUNUCH, SUFFER
THE AGONY OF MARTYRDOM.

When, in course of time, the Christians in-
creased in number, and began to form churches,
and appointed priests and deacons, the Magi,
who "as a priestly tribe had from the beginning
in successive generations acted as the guardians
of the Persian religion, became deeply incensed
against them.^ The Jews, who through envy are
in some way naturally opposed to the Christian
religion, were likewise offended. They there-
fore brought accusations before Sapor, the reign-
ing sovereign, against Symeon, who was then
archbishop of Seleucia and Ctesiphon, royal
cities of Persia, and charged him with being a
friend of the Caesar of the Romans, and with
communicating the affairs of the Persians to
him. Sapor believed these accusations, and at
first, ground the Christians with excessive taxes,
although he knew that the generality of them
had voluntarily embraced poverty. He entrusted
the exaction to cruel men, hoping that, by the
want of necessaries, and the atrocity of the ex-
actors, they might be compelled to abjure their
religion ; for this was his aim. Afterwards, how-
ever, he commanded that the priests and con-
ductors of the worship of God should be slain
with the sword. The churches were demolished,
their vessels were deposited in the treasury, and
Symeon was arrested as a traitor to the kingdom
and the religion of the Persians. Thus the
Magi, with the co-operation of the Jews, quickly
destroyed the houses of prayer. Symeon, on
his apprehension, was bound with chains, and
brought before the king. There the man
evinced his excellence and courage ; for when
Sapor commanded that he should be led away
to the torture, he did not fear, and would not
prostrate himself. The king, greatly exasper-
ated, demanded why he did not prostrate him-
self as he had done formerly. Symeon replied,
" Formerly I was not led away bound in order
that I might abjure the truth of God, and there-


' Here follows in the Greek text a repetition, word for word, of
the first two lines of this chapter, which seem to be superfluous, if
we do not reject the paragraph above.

* Soz. is wrong in attributing the conversion of Persia to
Armenia.

" The source for chaps, g-14 must be some early translation of
Ada Persnrum, which the Syrians, especially those of Edessa,
made; cf. chap. 14. Soz. is independent. The persecution began
under Shapur II. a.d. 343.


II. lO.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


265


fore I did not then object to pay the customary
respect to royalty ; but now it would not be
proper for me to do so ; for I stand here in de-
fense of godliness and of our opinion." When
he ceased speaking, the king commanded him
to worship the sun, promising, as an inducement,
to bestow gifts upon him, and to hold him in
honor ; but on the other hand, threatening, in
case of non-compliance, to visit him and the
whole body of Christians with destruction.
When the king found that he neither frightened
him by menaces, nor caused him to relax by
promises, and that Symeon remained firm and
refused to worship the sun, or to betray his
religion, he commanded him to be put in bonds
for a while, probably imagining that he would
change his mind.

When Symeon was being conducted to prison,
Usthazanes, an aged eunuch, the foster-father of
Sapor and superintendent of the palace, who
happened to be sitting at the gates of the palace,
arose to do him reverence. Symeon reproach-
fully forbade him in a loud and haughty voice,
averted his countenance, and passed by ; for the
eunuch had been formerly a Christian, but had
recently yielded to authority, and had worshiped
the sun. This conduct so affected the eunuch that
he wept aloud, laid aside the white garment with
which he was robed, and clothed himself, as a
mourner, in black. He then seated himself in
front of the palace, crying and groaning, and
saying, " Woe is me ! What must not await me
since I have denied God • and on this account
Symeon, formerly my familiar friend, does not
think me worthy of being spoken to, but turns
away and hastens from me." When Sapor heard
of what had occurred, he called the eunuch to
him, and inquired into the cause of his grief,
and asked him whether any calamity had befallen
his family. Usthazanes replied and said, " O
king, nothing has occurred to my family ; but I
would rather have suffered any other affliction
whatsoever than that which has befallen me, and
it would have been easy to bear. Now I mourn
because T am alive, and ought to have been dead
long ago ; yet I still see the sun which, not vol-
untarily, but to please thee, I professed to wor-
ship. Therefore, on both accounts, it is just
that I should die, for I have been a betrayer of
Christ, and a deceiver of thee." He then swore
by the Maker of heaven and earth, that he would
never swerve from his convictions. Sapor, aston-
ished at the wonderful conversion of the eunuch,
was still more enraged against the Christians, as
if they had effected it by enchantments. Still,
he spared the old man, and strove with all his
strength, by alternate gentleness and harshness,
to bring him over to his own sentiments. But
finding that his efforts were useless, and that
Usthazanes persisted in declaring that he would


never be so foolish as to worship the creature in-
stead of the creator, he became inflamed with
passion, and commajided that the eunuch's head
should be struck off with a sword. When the
executioners came forward to perform their office,
Usthazanes requested them to wait a little, that
he might communicate something to the king.
He then called one of the most faithful eunuchs,,
and bade him say to Sapor, " From my youth
until now I have been well affected, O king, to
your house, and have ministered with fitting dili-
gence to your father and yourself. I need no
witnesses to corroborate my statements ; these
facts are well established. For all the matters
wherein at divers times I have gladly served you,
grant me this reward ; let it not be imagined by
those who are ignorant of the circumstances, that
I have incurred this punishment by acts of un-
faithfulness against the kingdom, or by the com-
mission of any other crime ; but let it be pub-
lished and proclaimed abroad by a herald, that
Usthazanes loses his head for no knavery that
he has ever committed in the palaces, but for
being a Christian, and for refusing to obey the
king in denying his own God." The eunuch
delivered this message, and Sapor, according to
the request of Usthazanes, commanded a herald
to make the desired proclamation ; for the king
imagined that others would be easily deterred
from embracing Christianity, by reflecting that
he who sacrificed his aged foster-father and
esteemed household servant, would assuredly
spare no other Christian. Usthazanes, however,
believed that as by his timidity in consenting to
worship the sun, he had caused many Christians
to fear, so now, by the diligent proclamation of
the cause of his sufferings, many might be edified
by learning that he died for the sake of religion,
and so became imitators of his fortitude.

CHAP. X. CHRISTIANS SLAIN BY SAPOR IN

PERSIA.

In this manner the honorable life of Ustha-
zanes was terminated, and when the intelligence
was brought to Symeon in the prison, he offered
thanksgiving to God on his account. The fol-
lowing day, which happened to be the sixth day
of the week, and likewise the day on which, as
immediately preceding the festival of the resur-
rection, the annual memorial of the passion of the
Saviour is celebrated, the king issued orders for
the decapitation of Symeon ; for he had again
been conducted to the palace from the ])rison,
had reasoned most nobly with Sapor on points of
doctrine, and had expressed a determination never
to worship either the king or the sun. On the
same day a hundred other prisoners were ordered
to be slain. Symeon beheld their execution,
and last of all he was put to death. Amongst


2 66


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. lO.


these victims were bishops, presbyters, and other
clergy of different grades. As they were being
led out to execution, the chief of the Magi ap-
proached them, and asked them whether they
would preser\'e their lives by conforming to the
religion of the king and by worshiping the sun.
As none of them would comply with this condi-
tion, they were conducted to the place of execu-
tion, and the executioners applied themselves to
the task of slaying these martyrs. Symeon,
standing by those who were to be slain, exhorted
them to constancy, and reasoned concerning
death, and the resurrection, and piety, and
showed them from the sacred Scriptures that a
death like theirs is true life ; whereas to live,
and through fear to deny God, is as truly death.
He told them, too, that even if no one were to
slay them, death would inevitably overtake them ;
for our death is a natural consequence of our
birth. The things after those of this life are
perpetual, and do not happen alike to all men ;
but as if measured by some rule, they must give
an accurate account of the course of life here.
Each one who did well, will receive immortal
rewards and will escape the punishments of those
who did the opposite. He likewise told them
that the greatest and happiest of all good ac-
tions is to die for the cause of God. While
Symeon was pursuing such themes, and like a
household attendant, was exhorting them about
the manner in which they were to go into the
conflicts, each one listened and spiritedly went
to the slaughter. After the executioner had
despatched a hundred, Symeon himself was
slain ; and Abedechalaas and Anannias, two
aged presbyters of his own church, who had
been his fellow-prisoners, suffered with him.^


CHAP. XI. — PUSICES, SUPERINTENDENT
ARTISANS OF SAPOR.


OF THE


PusiCES, the superintendent of the king's ar-
tisans, was present at the execution ; perceiving
that Anannias trembled as the necessary prep-
arations for his death were being made, he said
to him, " O old man, close your eyes for a
little while and be of good courage, for you will
soon behold the light of Christ." No sooner
had he uttered these words than he was arrested
and conducted before the king ; and as he
frankly avowed himself a Christian, and spoke
with great freedom to the king concerning his
opinion and the martyrs, he was condemned to
an extraordinary and most cruel death, because
it was not lawful to address the king with such
boldness. The executioners pierced the muscles
of his neck in such a manner as to extract his
tongue. On the charge of some persons, his


> The attempt to fix the date as Pagi, Ap. 2t, 349, has no histori-
cal warrant ; see Pagi, under 343 iii.


daughter, who had devoted herself to a life of
holy virginity, was arraigned and executed at the
same time. The following year, on the day on
which the passion of Christ was commemorated,
and when preparations were being made for the
celebration of the festival commemorative of
his resurrection from the dead. Sapor issued a
most cruel edict throughout Persia, condemning
to death all those who should confess themselves
to be Christians. It is said that a greater num-
ber of Christians suffered by the sword ; for the
Magi sought diligently in the cities and villages
for those who had concealed themselves ; and
many voluntarily surrendered themselves, lest
they should appear, by their silence, to deny
Christ. Of the Christians who were thus un-
sparingly sacrificed, many who were attached to
the palace were slain, and amongst these was
Azades,^ a eunuch, who was especially beloved
by the king. On hearing of his death. Sapor
was overwhelmed with grief, and put a stop to
the general slaughter of the Christians ; and he
directed that the teachers of religion should
alone be slain.


CHAP. XII. TARBULA, THE SISTER OF SYMEON,

AND HER MARTYRDOM.

About the same period, the queen was at-
tacked with a disease, and Tarbula, the sister of
Symeon the bishop, a holy virgin, was arrested
with her servant, who shared in the same mode
of life, as likewise a sister of Tarbula, who, after
the death of her husband, abjured marriage, and
led a similar career. The cause of their arrest
was the charge of the Jews, who reported that
they had injured the queen by their enchant-
ments, on account of their rage at the death of
Symeon. As invalids easily give credit to the
most repulsive representations, the queen be-
lieved the charge, and especially because it
emanated from the Jews, since she had em-
braced their sentiments, and lived in the observ-
ance of the Jewish, rites, for she bad great
confidence in their veracity and in their attach-
ment to herself. The Magi having seized
Tarbula and her companions, condemned them
to death ; and after having sawn them asunder,
they fastened them up to poles and made the
queen pass through the midst of the poles as a
medium for turning away the disease. It is
said that this Tarbula was beautiful and very
stately in form, and that one of the Magi, hav-
ing become deeply enamored with her, secretly
sent a proposal for intercourse, and promised as
a reward to save her and her companions if she
would consent. But she would give no ear to


* Assemanus, Bibl. Orient, t. i. 189, speaks of Azades as the
eunuch of Artascirus, niler of Adiabene, who was a cousin of Sapor.


II. 14.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


267


his licentiousness, and treated the Magi with
scorn, and rebuked his lust. She would rather
prefer courageously to die than to betray her
virginity.

As it was ordained by the edict of Sapor,
which we mentioned above, that the Christians
should not be slaughtered indiscriminately, but
that the priests and teachers of the opinions
should be slain, the Magi and Arch-Magi trav-
ersed the whole country of Persia, studiously
maltreating the bishops and presbyters. They
sought them especially in the country of Adia-
bene, a part of the Persian dominions, because
it was wholly Christianized.


CHAP. XIII. MARTYRDOM OF ST. ACEPSIMAS AND

OF HIS COAfPANIONS.

About this period they arrested Acepsimas the
bishop, and many of his clergy. After having
taken counsel together, they satisfied themselves
with the hunt after the leader only ; they dismissed
the rest after they had taken away their property.
James, however, who was one of the presbyters,
voluntarily followed Acepsimas, obtained per-
mission from the Magi to share his prison, and
spiritedly ministered to the old man, lightened
his misfortunes as far as he was able, and dressed
his wounds ; for not long after his apprehension,
the Magi had injuriously tortured him with raw
thongs in forcing him to worship the sun ; and
on his refusal to do so had retained him again
in bonds. Two presbyters named Aithalas and
James, and two deacons, by name Azadanes and
Abdiesus, after being scourged most injuriously
by the Magi, were compelled to live in prison, on
account of their opinions. After a long time
had elapsed, the great Arch-Magi communicated
to the king the facts about them to be punished ;
and having received permission to deal with
them as he pleased, unless they would consent
to worship the sun, he made known this de-
cision of Sapor's to the prisoners. They replied
openly, that they would never betray the cause
of Christ nor worship the sun ; he tortured them
unsparingly. Acepsimas persevered in the manly
confession of his faith, till death put an end to
his torments. Certain Armenians, whom the
Persians retained as hostages, secretly carried
away his body and buried it. The other pris-
oners, although not less scourged, lived as by a
miracle, and as they would not change their
judgment, were again put in bonds. Among
these was Aithalas, who was stretched out while
thus beaten, and his arms were torn out of his
shoulders by the very great wrench ; and he
carried his hands about as dead and swinging
loosely, so that others had to convey food to
his mouth. Under this rule, an innumerable


multitude of presbyters, deacons, monks, holy
virgins, and others who served the churches and
were set apart for its dogma, terminated their
lives by martyrdom. The following are the
names of the bishops, so far as I have been able
to ascertain : Barbasymes, Paulus, Gaddiabes, Sa-
binus, Mareas, Mocius, John, Hormisdas, Papas,
James, Romas, Maares, Agas, Bochres, Abdas,
Abdiesus, John, Abramins, Agdelas, Sapores,
Isaac, and Dausas. The latter had been made
prisoner by the Persians, and brought from a
place named Zabdaeus.' He died about this
time in defense of the dogma ; and Mareabdes,
a chorepiscopus, and about two hundred and
fifty of his clergy, who had also been captured
by the Persians, suffered with him.

CHAP. XIV. THE MARTYRDOM OF BISHOP MILLES

AND HIS CONDUCT. SIXTEEN THOUSAND DISTIN-
GUISHED MEN IN PERSIA SUFFER MARTYRDOM
UNDER SAPOR, BESIDES OBSCURE INDIVIDUALS.

About this period Milles suffered martyrdom.
He originally served the Persians in a military
capacity, but afterwards abandoned that voca-
tion, in order to embrace the apostolical mode
of life. It is related that he was ordained bishop
over a Persian city, and he underwent a variety
of sufferings, and endured wounds and drawings ;
and that, failing in his efforts to convert the in-
habitants to Christianity, he uttered imprecations
against the city, and departed. Not long after,
some of the principal citizens offended the king,
and an army with three hundred elephants was
sent against them ; the city was utterly demolished
and its land was ploughed and sown. Milles,
taking with him only his wallet, in which was
the holy Book of the Gospels, repaired to Jeru-
salem in prayer ; thence he proceeded to Egypt
in order to see the monks. The extraordinary
and admirable works which we have heard that
he accomplished, are attested by the Syrians,
who have written an account of his actions and
life. For my own part, I think that I have said
enough of him and of the other martyrs who
suffered in Persia during the reign of Sapor ; for
it would be difficult to relate in detail every cir-
cumstance respecting them, such as their names,
their country, the mode of completing their mar-
tyrdom, and the species of torture to which they
were subjected ; for they are innumerable, since
such methods are jealously affected by the Per-
sians, even to the extreme of cruelty. I shall
briefly state that the number of men and women
whose names have been ascertained, and who
were martyred at this period, have been com-
puted to be sixteen thousand ; while the multi-
tude outside of these is beyond enumeration, and

1 Am. Marcell. 20. 7, i, Zabdiceni; 25. 7, 9, Zabdicena.


268


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 14.


on this account to reckon off their names ap-
peared difficult to the Persians and Syrians and
to the inhabitants of Edessa, who have devoted
much care to this matter.


CHAP. XV. — CONSTANTINE WRITES TO SAPOR TO
STAY THE PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS.

CoNSTANTiNE the Roman emperor was angry,
and bore it ill when he heard of the sufferings
to which the Christians were exposed in Persia.
He desired most anxiously to render them as-
sistance, yet knew not in what way to effect this
object. About this time some ambassadors from
the Persian king arrived at his court, and after
granting their requests and dismissing them, he
thought it would be a favorable opportunity to
address Sapor in behalf of the Christians in
Persia, and wrote to him,' confessing that it
would be a very great and forever indescribable
favor, if he would be humane to those who ad-
mired the teaching of the Christians under him.
"There is nothing in their religion," said he,
" of a reprehensible nature ; by bloodless prayers
alone do they offer supplication to God, for he
delighteth not in the outpouring of blood, but
taketh pleasure only in a pure soul devoted to
virtue and to religion ; so that they who believe
these things are worthy of commendation." The
emperor then assured Sapor that God would be
propitious to him if he treated the Christians
with lenity, and adduced the example of Vale-
rian and of himself in proof thereof. He had
himself, by faith in Christ, and by the aid of
Divine inclination, come forth from the shores
of the Western ocean, and reduced to obedience
the whole of the Roman world, and had termi-
nated many wars against foreigners and usurp-
ers ; and yet had never had recourse to sacrifices
or divinations, but had for victory used only the
symbol of the Cross at the head of his own ar-
mies, and prayer pure from blood and defile-
ment. The reign of Valerian was prosperous
so long as he refrained from persecuting the
Church ; but he afterwards commenced a perse-
cution against the Christians, and was delivered
by Divine vengeance into the hands of the Per-
sians, who took him prisoner and put him to a
cruel death."

It was in this strain that Constantine wrote to
Sapor, urging him to be well-disposed to this
religion ; for the emperor extended his watchful
care over all the Christians of every region,
whether Roman or foreign.


1 The Embassy is spoken of in Eus. K. C. iv. 8; the letter of
Constantine to Shapur, iv. 9-13. But Soz. is mistaken about its
date; for it was written before Sapor had commenced his persecution
of the Christians. As usual, Soz. quotes briefly, and with no regard
to the language and little to the thought. Theodoret, //. E. i. 25
(34). is accurate. For further relations of Constantine with Persia,
cf. Eus. K. C. iv. 56, 57.


CHAP. XVI. EUSEBIUS AND THEOGNIS WHO AT

THE COUNCIL OF NICE HAD ASSENTED TO THE
WRrriNGS OF ARIUS RESTORED TO THEIR OWN
SEES.

Not long after the council of Nice, Arius was
recalled from exile ; but the prohibition to enter
Alexandria was unrevoked. It shall be related
in the proper place how he strove to obtain per-
mission to return to Egypt. Not long after,
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis,
bishop of Nicaea, regained possession of their
churches after expelling Amphion and Chrestos
who had been ordained in their stead."'' They
owed their restoration to a document which
they had presented to the bishops, containing
a retractation : " Although we have been con-
demned without a trial by your piety, we deemed
it right to remain silent concerning the judgment
passed by your piety. But as it would be
absurd to remain longer silent, when silence is
regarded as a proof of the truth of the calumni-
ators, we now declare to you that we too agree
in this faith, and after a diligent examination of
the thought in the word ' consubstantial,' we are
wholly intent upon preserving peace, and that
we never pursued any heresy. Having proposed
for the safety of the churches such argument^ as
occurred to us, and having been fully convinced,
and fully convincing those who ought to have
been persuaded by us, we undersigned the
creed ; but we did not subscribe to the anath-
ema, not because we impugned the creed, but
because we did not believe the accused to be
what he was represented to us ; the letters we
had received from him, and the arguments he
had delivered in our presence, fully satisfying us
that he was not such an one. Would that the
holy Synod were convinced that we are not bent
on opposing, but are accordant with the points ac-
curately defined by you, and by this document,
we do attest our assent thereto : and this is not
because we are wearied of exile, but because we
wish to avert all suspicion of heresy ; for if you
will condescend to admit us now into your pres-
ence, you will find us in all points of the same
sentiments as yourselves, and obedient to your
decisions, and then it shall seem good to your
piety to be merciful to him who was accused on
these points and to have "him recalled. If the
party amenable to justice has been recalled and
has defended himself from the charge made, it
would be absurd, were we by our silence to con-

* Cf. Soc. i. 14. The variations of text are slight. Is the original
from Sabinus' r\ avvayuiyr) Tutv <jvvo&iku>v^

' The facts (as we learn from the Epistle of Eusebius of\Czsarea,
which is given by Soc. i. 8, and Theodoret, H. E. i. 12) are as fol-
lows: The bishops, who demurred to the term 6/ioou<rioi', as defined
in the Nicene symbol, proposed another alleged older Antiochan
form to the Synod. But the Nicene Fathers rejected it, and refused
to depart from their own definition. Eusebius Pamphilus and his
party then signed the Catholic and Orthodox creed, for fear of the
emperor and other motives.


II. 17.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


269


firm the reports that calumny had spread'against
us. We beseech you then, as befits your piety,
dear to Christ, that you memoriahze our em-
peror, most beloved of God, and that you hand
over our petition, and that you counsel quickly,
what is agreeable to you concerning us." It
was by these means that Eusebius and Theognis,
after their change of sentiment, were reinstated
in their churches.


CHAP. XVII. ON THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER,

BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, AT HIS SUGGESTION,
ATHANASIUS RECEIVES THE THRONE ; AND AN
ACCOUNT OF HIS YOUTH ; HOW HE WAS A SELF-
TAUGHT PRIEST, AND BELOVED BY ANTONY THE
GREAT.

About this period ^ Alexander, bishop of Alex-
andria, when about to depart this life, left Atha-
nasius as his successor, in accordance, I am
convinced, with the Divine will directing the
vote upon him. It is said that Athanasius at
first sought to avoid the honor by flight, but that
he, although unwilling, was afterwards constrained
by Alexander to accept the bishopric. -This is
testified by Apolinarius, the Syrian,' in the fol-
lowing terms : " In all these matters much dis-
turbance was excited by impiety, but its first
effects were felt by the blessed teacher of this
man, who was at hand as an assistant, and be-
haved as a son would to his father. Afterwards
this holy man himself underwent the same expe-
rience, for when appointed to the episcopal suc-
cession he fled to escape the honor ; but he was
discovered in his place of concealment by the
help of God, who had forecast by Divine mani-
festations to his blessed predecessor, that the
succession was to devolve upon him. For when
Alexander was on the point of death, he called
upon Athanasius, who was then absent. One
who bore the same name, and who happened to
be present, on hearing him call this way, an-
swered him ; but to him Alexander was silent,
since he was not summoning this man. Again
he called, and as it often happens, the one present
4cept still, and so the absent one was disclosed.
Moreover, the blessed Alexander prophetically
exclaimed, 'O Athanasius, thou thinkest to
escape, but thou wilt not escape ' ; meaning that
Athanasius would be called to the conflict."
Such is the account given by Apolinarius re-
specting Athanasius.

The Arians assert that after the death of Alex-
ander, the respective followers of that bishop
and of Melitius held communion together, ami
fifty-four bishops from Thebes, and other parts
of Egypt, assembled together, and agreed by

' About five months after the council of Nicaea, according to a
statement of Athan. Apol. cent. A nan. 59.

^ This quotation is first made by Soz., and is found nowhere else.


oath to choose by a common vote, the man who
could advantageously administer the Church of
Alexandria ; but that seven'' of the bishops, in
violation of their oath, and contrary to the opin-
ion of all, secretly ordained Athanasius ; and
that on this account many of the people and of
the Egyptian clergy seceded from communion
with him. For my part, I am convinced that it
was by Divine appointment that Athanasius suc-
ceeded to the high-priesthood ; for he was elo-
quent and intelligent, and capable of opposing
plots, and of such a man the times had the
greatest need. He displayed great aptitude in
the exercise of the ecclesiastical functions and
fitness for the priesthood, and was, so to speak,
from his earliest years, self-taught. It is said
that the following incident occurred to him in his
youth.* It was the custom of the Alexandrians
to celebrate with great pomp an annual festival
in honor of one of their bishops named Peter,
who had suffered martyrdom. Alexander, who
then conducted the church, engaged in the cele-
bration of this festival, and after having completed
the worship, he remained on the spot, awaiting
the arrival of some guests whom he expected to
breakfast. In the meantime he chanced to cast
his eyes towards the sea, and perceived some
children playing on the shore, and amusing them-
selves by imitating the bishop and the ceremonies
of the Church. At first he considered the mim-
icry as innocent, and took pleasure in witnessing
it ; but when they touched upon the unutterable,
he was troubled, and communicated the matter
to the chief of the clergy. The children were
called together and questioned as to the game
at which they were playing, and as to what they
did and said when engaged in this amusement.
At first they through fear denied ; but when
Alexander threatened them with torture, they
confessed that Athanasius was their bishop and
leader, and that many children who had not
been initiated had been baptized by him. Alex-
ander carefully inquired what the priest of their
play was in the habit of saying or doing, and
what they answered or were taught. On finding
that the exact routine of the Church had been
accurately observed by them, he consulted the
priests around him on the subject, and decided
that it would be unnecessary to rebaptize those
who, in their simplicity, had been judged worthy
of the Divine grace. He therefore merely per-
formed for them such offices as it is lawful only
for those who are consecrated to initiating the
mysteries. He then took Athanasius and the
other children, who had playfully acted as pres-


•'' See the refutation of the calumny in Athan. Afiol. cont. Arian.
6, where the acts of the vindicatory synod arc given, 3 sqq. Cf.
Philost. ii. II, gives a different account from the Arian point of
view; probably the whole story is from S.ibinus.

♦ Ruf. H. E. i. 14. Cf. Soc. i. 15, who credits Ruf. with the
story.


270


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 17.


byters and deacons, to their own relations under
God as a witness that they might be brought up
for the Church, and for leadership in what they
had imitated. Not long after, he took Athana-
sius as his table companion and secretary. He
had been well educated, was versed in grammar
and rhetoric, and already when he came to man's
estate, and before he attained the bishopric, he
gave proof to those conversing with him of his
being a man of wisdom and intellectuality. But
when,' on the death of Alexander, the succession
devolved upon him, his reputation was greatly
increased, and was sustained by his own private
virtues and by the testimony of the monk,
Antony the Great. This monk repaired to
him when he requested his presence, visited the
cities, accompanied him to the churches, and
agreed with him in opinion concerning the God-
head. He evinced unlimited friendship towards
him, and avoided the society of his enemies and
opponents.

CHAP. XVIII. THE ARIANS AND MELITIANS CON-
FER CELEBRITY ON ATHANASIUS ; CONCERNING
EUSEBIUS, AND HIS REQUF-ST OF ATHANASIUS TO
ADMIT ARIUS TO COMMUNION ; CONCERNING THE


TERM " CONSUBSTANTIAL "


EUSEBIUS PAMPHILUS


AND EUSTATHIUS, BISHOP OF ANTIOCH, CREATE
TUMULTS ABOVE ALL THE REST.

The reputation of Athanasius was, however,
especially increased by the Arians and Meli-
tians ; " although always plotting, they never ap-
peared rightly to catch and make him a prisoner.
In the first place, Eusebius wrote to urge him to
receive the Arians into communion, and threat-
ened, without writing it, to ill-treat him should
he refuse to do so. But as .Athanasius would
not yield to his representation, but maintained
that those who had devised a heresy in innovat-
ing upon the truth, and who had been con-
demned by the council of Nice, ought not to
be received into the Church, Eusebius contrived
to interest the emperor in favor of Arius, and
so procured his return. I shall state a little fur-
ther on how all these evepts came to pass."*

.\t this period, the bishops had another tu-
multuous dispute among themselves, concerning
the precise meaning of the term " consubstan-
tial." * Some thought that this term could not
be admitted without blasphemy ; that it implied
the non-existence of the Son of God ; and that
it involved the error of Montanus and Sabellius.
Those, on the other hand, who defended the


' From the Lt/ie 0/ Antony, attributed to Athanasius, which
Evagrius, a presbyter of Aniioch, translated into Latin. RuC H. E.
i. 8, Hieron. He vir. illust. 87, 88, 125.

' Source here is Soc. i. 23, but abridged. ' See chap. 22.

* Soc. again the source, but abridged; the matter is entirely the
fruit of his own research, as Soc. states in this chapter (chap. i. 23).
Cf. Eus. V. C. iii. 23.


term, regarded their opponents as Greeks (or
pagans), and considered that their sentiments
led to polytheism. Eusebius, surnamed Pam-
philus, and Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, took
the lead in this dispute. They both confessed
the Son of God to exist hypostatically, and yet
they contended together as if they had misunder-
stood each other. Eustathius accused Eusebius
of altering the doctrines ratified by the council
of Nicaea, while the latter declared that he ap-
proved of all the Nicaean doctrines, and re-
proached Eustathius for cleaving to the heresy
of Sabellius.


chap. XIX. S\'NOD OF ANTIOCH; UNJUST DEPO-
SITION OF EUSTATHIUS ; EUPHRONIUS RECEIVES
THE THRONE ; CONSTANTINE THE GREAT WRITER
TO THE SYNOD AND TO EUSEBIUS PAMPHILUS,
WHO REFUSES THE BISHOPRIC OF ANTIOCH.

A Synod having been convened at Antioch,
Eustathius was deprived of the church of that
city.'' It was most generally believed that he
was deposed merely on account of his adherence
to the faith of the council of Nicaea, and on ac-
count of his having accused Eusebius, Paulinus,
bishop of Tyre, and Patrophilus, bishop of
Scythopolis (whose sentiments were adopted by
the Eastern priests), of favoring the heresy of
Arius. The pretext resorted to for his deposi-
tion, however, was, that he had defiled the priest-
hood by unholy deeds. His deposition excited
so great a seditfon at Antioch, that the people
were on the point of taking up arms, and the
whole city was in a state of commotion. This
greatly injured him in the opinion of the em-
peror ; for when he understood what had hap-
pened, and that the people of that church were
divided into two parties, he was much enraged,
and regarded him with suspicion as the author
of the tumult. The emperor, however, sent an
illustrious oflicer of his palace, invested with full
authority, to calm the populace, and put an end
to the disturbance, without having recourse to
violence or injury.

Those who had deposed Eustathius, and who
on this account were assembled in Antioch,
imagining that their sentiments would be uni-
versally received, if they could succeed in plac-
ing over the Church of Antioch one of their own
opinion, who was known to the emperor, and
held in repute for learning and eloquence, and
that they could obtain the obedience of the rest,
fixed their thoughts upon Eusebius Pamphilus
for that see. They wrote to the emperor upon
this subject, and stated that this course would
be highly acceptable to the people. He had,

" Eus. V. C. iii. 59-62; Soc. i. 34: Philost. ii. 7. Soz. has
ad^'.iiinnal details, especially of names. Very likely, therefore, Soc.
and .Soz. have drawn from the same source.


II. 21.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


271


in fact, been sought by all the clergy and laity
who were inimical to Eustathius. Eusebius,
however, wrote to the emperor refusing the
dignity. The emperor approved of his refusal
with praise ; for there was an ecclesiastical law
prohibiting the removal of a bishop from one
bishopric to another. He wrote to the people
and to Eusebius, adopting his judgment and
calling him happy, because he was worthy to
hold the bishopric not only of one single city,
but of the world. The emperor also wrote to
the people of the Church of Antioch concerning
like-mindedness, and told them that they ought
not to desire the bishops of other regions, even
as they ought not to covet the possessions of
others. In addition to these, he despatched
another epistle to the Synod, in private session,
and similarly commended Eusebius as in the
letter to him for having refused the bishopric ;
and being convinced that Euphronius, a presby-
ter of Cappadocia, and George of Arethusa were
men approved in creed, he commanded the
bishops to decide for one or other of them, or
for whomsoever might appear worthy of the
honor, and to ordain a president for the Church
of Antioch. On the receipt of these letters
from the emperor, Euphronius was ordained ;
and I have heard that Eustathius bore this
unjust calumny calmly, judging it to be better,
as he was a man who, besides his virtues and
excellent qualities, was justly admired on account
of his fine eloquence, as is evidenced by his
transmitted works, which are highly approved
for their choice of words, flavor of expression,
temperateness of sentiments, elegance and grace
of narration.


CHAP. XX. CONCERNING MAXIMUS, WHO SUC-
CEEDED MACARIUS IN THE SEE OF JERUSALEM.

About this time Mark,^ who had succeeded
Silvester, and who had held the episcopal sway
during a short period, died, and Julius was
raised to the see of Rome. Maximus succeeded
Macarius in the bishopric of Jerusalem.^ It is
said that Macarius had ordained him bishop
over the church of Diospolis, but that the mem-
bers of the church of Jerusalem insisted upon
his remaining among them. For since he was
a confessor, and otherwise excellent, he was
secretly chosen beforehand in the approbation
of the people for their bishopric, after that
Macarius should die. The dread of offending
the people and exciting an insurrection led to
the election of another bishop over Diospolis,


1 Marcus is not mentioned by Soc. or Theodoret, only by the
Latins. The order is correct, whereas in i. 17 Julius is mistakenly
made to do duty for Silvester.

2 This whole chapter is from an unknown source, and shows
familiarity with Palestinian history.


and Maximus remained in Jerusalem, and exer-
cised the priestly functions conjointly with
Macarius ; and after the death of this latter,
he governed that church. It is, however, well
known to those who are accurately acquainted
with these circumstances, that Macarius con-
curred with the people in their desire to retain
Maximus ; for it is said that he regretted the
ordination of Maximus, and thought that he
ought necessarily to have been reserved for his
own succession on account of his holding right
views concerning God and his confession, which
had so endeared him to the people. He like-
wise feared that, at his death, the adherents of
Eusebius and Patrophilus, who had embraced
Arianism, would take that opportunity to place
one of their own views in his see ; for even while
Macarius was living, they had attempted to in-
troduce some innovations, but since they were
to be separated from him, they on this account
kept quiet.


CHAP. XXI. — THE MELITIANS AND THE ARUNS
AGREE IN SENTIMENT; EUSEBIUS AND THEOGNIS
ENDEAVOR TO INFLAME ANEW THE DISEASE OF
ARIUS.

In the meantime the contention which had
been stirred in the beginning among the Egyp-
tians, could not be quelled.^ The Arian heresy
had been positively condemned by the council
of Nice, while the followers of Melitius had
been admitted into communion under the stipu-
lations above stated. When Alexander returned
to Egypt, Melitius delivered up to him the
churches whose government he had unlawfully
usurped, and returned to Lycus. Not long
after, finding his end approaching, he nominated
John, one of his most intimate friends, as his
successor, contrary to the decree of the Nicaean
Council, and thus fresh cause of discord in the
churches was produced. When the Arians per-
ceived that the Melitians were introducing inno-
vations, they also harassed the churches. For,
as frequently occurs in similar disturbances, some
applauded the opinion of Arius, while others
contended that those who had been ordained by
Mehtius ought to govern the churches. These
two bodies of sectarians had hitherto been op-
posed to each other, but on perceiving that the
priests of the Catholic Church were followed by
the multitude, they became jealous and formed
an alliance together, and manifested a common
enmity to the clergy of Alexandria. Their
measures of attack and defense were so long
carried on in concert, that in process of time
the Melitians were generally called Arians in


' This chapter is also unique with Soz., both as to the Melitians
and Eusebius. The Melitian opposition is evident from Soc. i. 27.


272


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 22.


Egypt, although they only dissent on questions
of the presidency of the churches, while the
Arians hold the same opinions concerning God
as Arius. Although they individually denied
one another's tenets, yet they dissimulated in
contradiction of their own view, in order to at-
tain an underhanded agreement in the fellow-
ship of their enmity ; at the same time each
one expected to prevail easily in what he de-
sired. From this period, however, the Melitians
after the discussion on those topics, received the
Arian doctrines, and held the same opinion as
Arius concerning (iod. This revived the origi-
nal controversy concerning Arius, and some of
the laity and clergy seceded from communion
with the others. The dispute concerning the
doctrines of Arius was rekindled once more in
other cities, and particularly in IJithynia and
Hellespontus, and in the city of Constantinople.
In short, it is said that Eusebius, bishop of Nico-
media, and Theognis, bishop of Nicsea, bribed
the notary to whom the emperor had intrusted
the custody of the documents of the Nicaean
Council, effaced their signatures, and attempted
openly to teach that the Son is not to be con-
sidered consubstantial with the Father. Euse-
bius was accused of these irregularities before
the emperor, and he replied with great boldness
as he showed part of his clothing. " If this
robe," said he, " had been cut asunder in my
presence, I could not affirm the fragments to be
all of the same substance." The emperor was
much grieved at these disputes, for he had be-
lieved that questions of this nature had been
finally decided by the council of Nicaea, but con-
trary to his hopes he saw them again agitated.
He more especially regretted that Eusebius and
Theognis had received certain Alexandrians into
<;ommunion,' although the Synod had recom-
mended them to repent on account of their
heterodox opinions, and although he had him-
self condemned them to banishment from their
native land, as being the exciters of sedition.^
It is asserted by some, that it was for the above
reasons that the emperor in anger exiled Euse-
bius and Theognis ; but as I have already stated,
I have derived my information from those who
are intimately acquainted with these matters.


CHAP. XXII. THE VAIN MACHINATIONS OF THE

ARUNS AND MELITIANS AGAINST ST. ATHANASIUS.

The various calamities which befell Athana-
sius were primarily occasioned by Eusebius and


' Soz.has taken this from the Epistle of Constantine to the Nico-
ntedians against Eusebius and Theognis. This is preserved by
Theod'iret, H. E. i. 20. Theodoret gives the full text: he and Soz.
both obtained it from some such collection as that of Sabinus.

' Cf. Athan. Apol. conl. Arian. 7 (in the letter of the Alexan-
drian Synod).


Theognis.'' As they possessed great freedom
of speech and influence with the emperor, they
strove for the recall of Arius, with whom they
were on terms of concord and friendship, to
Alexandria, and at the same time the expulsion
from the Church of him who was opposed to
them. They accused him before Constantine
of being the author of all the seditions and
troubles that agitated the Church, and of ex-
cluding those who were desirous of joining the
Church ; and alleged that unanimity would be
restored were he alone to be removed. The
accusations against him were substantiated by
many bishops and clergy who were with John,
and who sedulously obtained access to the em-
peror ; they pretended to great orthodoxy, and
imputed to Athanasius and the bishops of his
party all the bloodshed, bonds, unjust blows,
wounds, and conflagrations of churches. But
when Athanasius demonstrated to the emperor
the illegality of the ordination of John's adher-
ents, their innovations of the decrees of the Ni-
caean Council, and the unsoundness of their faith,
and the insults offered to those who held right
opinions about God, Constantine was at a loss to
know whom to believe. Since there were such
mutual allegations, and many accusations were
frequently stirred up by each party, and since
he was earnestly anxious to restore the like-
mindedness of the people, he wrote to Athana-
sius that no one should be shut out. If this
should be betrayed to the last, he would send re-
gardless of consequences, one who should expel
him from the city of Alexandria. If any one
should desire to see this letter of the emperor's,
he will here find the portion of it relating to
this affair : " As you are now acquainted with
my will, which is, that to all who desire to enter
the Church you should offer an unhindered
entrance. For should I hear that any who are
willing to join the Church, have been debarred
or hindered therefrom by you, I shall send at
once an officer who shall remove you, according
to my command, and shall transfer you to some
other place." Athanasius, however, wrote to
the emperor and convinced him that the Arians
ought not to be received into communion by
the Catholic Church ; and Eusebius, perceiv-
ing that his schemes could never be carried into
execution while Athanasius strove in opposition,
determined to resort to any means in order to
get rid of him. But as he could not find a
sufficient pretext for effecting this design, he
promised the Melitians to interest the emperor
and those in power in their favor, if they would
bring an accusation against Athanasius. Ac-
cordingly, came the first indictment that he had
imposed upon the Egyptians a tax on linen

' Athan. Af>ol. conl. Arian. 6; Soc. i. 27; Theod. H. E. i. 26,
27. Soz. works independently from the same sources.


II. 23.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


273


tunics, and that such a tribute had been exacted
from the accusers. Apis ' and Macarius, pres-
byters of the Church of Athanasius, who then
happened to be at court, clearly proved the per-
sistent accusation to be false. On being sum-
moned to answer for the offense, Athanasius was
further accused of having conspired against the
•emperor, and of having sent, for this purpose,
a casket of gold to one Philumen. The em-
peror detected the calumny of his accusers, sent
Athanasius home, and wrote to the people of
Alexandria to testify that their bishop possessed
great moderation and a correct faith ; that he
had gladly met him, and recognized him to be
a man of God ; and that, as envy had been
the sole cause of his indictment, he had appeared
to better advantage than his accusers ; and hav-
ing heard that the Arian and Melitian sectarians
had excited dissensions in Egypt, the emperor,
in the same epistle, exhorted the multitude to
look to God, to take heed unto his judgments, to
be well disposed toward one another, to prose-
cute with all their might those who plotted
against their like-mindedness ; thus the emperor
wrote to the people, exhorting them all to like-
mindedness, and striving to prevent divisions in
the Church.

CHAP. XXIir. CALUMNY RESPECTING ST. ATHANA-
SIUS AND THE HAND OF" ARSENIUS.

The Melitians, on the failure of their first
attempt, secretly concocted other indictments
against Athanasius.^ On the one hand they
charged him with breaking a sacred chalice, and
on the other with having slain one Arsenius, and
with having cut off his arm and retained it for
magical purposes. It is said that this Arsenius
was one of the clergy,^ but that, having com-
mitted some crime, he fled to a place of con-
cealment for fear of being convicted and pun-
ished by his bishop. The enemies of Athanasius
devised the most serious attack for this occur-
rence. They sought Arsenius with great dili-
gence, and found him; they showed him great
kindness, promisedito secure for him every good-
will and safety, and conducted him secretly to
Patrines,* a presbyter of a monastery, who was
one of their confederates, and of the same inter-
est as themselves. After having thus carefully
concealed him, they diligently spread the report
in the market-places and public assemblies that
he had been slain by Athanasius. They also

' Soc. i. 27, Alypius; Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 60, where a
part of the Epistle of the emperor Constantine is given, and in this
Apis and Macarius are mentioned; here is an instance how Soz.
corrects Soc.

2 Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 63; Ruf. H. E. i. 15-17; Soc.
1. 27. Independent workers of the same and other material.

3 He was bishop of the city of Hypselita;, according to the
caption of his letter to Athan. See Apol. cont. Arian. 69.

♦ Athan. calls him Pinnes, presbyter of a mansio (not rnonastery)
of Ptemencyrceus. See his letter to John in the Apol. cont. Arian.
^7. How did Soz. change this name to Patrines?


bribed John, a monk, to corroborate the accusa-
tion. As this evil report was universally circu-
lated, and had even reached the ears of the
emperor, Athanasius, being apprehensive that it
would be difficult to defend his cause before
judges whose minds were prejudiced by such
false rumors, resorted to stratagems akin to
those of his adversaries. He did everything in
his power to prevent truth from being obscured
by their attacks ; but the multitude could not
be convinced, on account of the non-appearance
of Arsenius. Reflecting, therefore, that the sus-
picion which rested upon him could not be re-
moved except by proving that Arsenius, who was
said to be dead, was still alive, he sent a most
trustworthy deacon in quest of him. The deacon
went to Thebes, and ascertained from the decla-
ration of some monks where he was living. And
when he came to Patrines, with whom he had
been concealed, he found that Arsenius was not
there ; for on the first intelligence of the arrival
of the deacon he had been conveyed to Lower
Egypt. The deacon arrested Patrines, and con-
ducted him to Alexandria, as also Elias, one of
his associates, who was said to have been the
person who conveyed Arsenius elsewhere. He
delivered them both to the commander of the
Egyptian forces, and they confessed that Arsenius
was still alive, that he had been secretly con-
cealed in their house, and that he was now living
in Egypt. Athanasius took care that all these
facts should be reported to Constantine. The
emperor wrote back to him, desiring him to
attend to the due performance of the priestly
functions, and the maintenance of order and
piety among the people, and not to be disquieted
by the machinations of the Melitians, it being
evident that envy alone was the cause of the
false indictments which were circulated against
him and the disturbance in the churches. 'I'he
emperor added that, for the future, he should
not give place to such reports ; and that, unless
the calumniators preserved the peace, he should
certainly subject them to the rigor of the state
laws, and let justice have its course, as they had
not only unjustly plotted against the innocent,
but had also shamefully abused the good order
and piety of the Church. Such was the strain
of the emperor's letter to Athanasius ; and he
further commanded that it should be read aloud
before the public, in order that they might all
be made acquainted with his intentions. The
Melitians were alnrmed at these menaces, and
became more quiet for a while, because they
viewed with anxiety the threat of the ruler. The
churches throughout Egypt enjoyed profound
peace, and, directed by the presidency of this
great priest, it daily increased in numbers by
the conversion of multitudes of pagans and other
heretics.


2 74


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN. [ii. 24.


CHAP. XXIV. — SOME INDIAN NATIONS RECEIVED
CHRISTIANITY AT THAT TIME THROUGH THE
INSTRUMENTALITY OF TWO CAPTIVES, FRUMEN-
TIUS AND EDESIUS.

We have heard that about this period some of
the most distant of the nations that we call In-
dians, to whom the preaching of Bartholomew
was unknown, shared in our doctrine, through
Frumentius,* who became a priest and teacher of
the sacred learning among them. But in order
that we may know, even by the marvel of what
happened in India, that the doctrine of the
Christians ought to be received as a system not
from man, as it seems a tissue of miracles to
some, it is necessary to relate the reason for the
ordination of Frumentius. It was as follows :
The most celebrated philosophers among the
Greeks explored unknown cities and regions.
Plato, the friend of Socrates, dwelt for a time
among the Egyptians, in order to acquaint him-
self with their manners and customs. He like-
wise sailed to Sicily for the sight of its craters,
whence, as from a fountain, spontaneously issued
streams of fire, which frequently overflowing,
rushed like a river and consumed the neighbor-
ing regions, so that even yet many fields appear
burnt and cannot be sown or planted with trees,
just as they narrate about the land of Sodom.
These craters were likewise explored by Empe-
docles, a man highly celebrated for philosophy
among the Greeks, and who has expounded his
knowledge in heroic verse. He set out to inves-
tigate this fiery eruption, when either because he
thought such a mode of death preferable to any
other, or because, to speak more truthfully, he
perhaps knew not wherefore he should seek to
terminate his life in this manner, he leaped into
the fire and perished. Democritus of Coos ex-
plored many cities and climates and nations, and
he says concerning himself that eighty years of
his life were spent in traveling through foreign
lands. Besides these philosophers, thousands
of wise men among the Greeks, ancient and
modern, devoted themselves to this travel. In
emulation, Meropius, a philosopher of Tyre in
Phoenicia, journeyed as far as India. They say
he was accompanied by two youths, named Fru-
mentius and Edesius ; they were his relatives ;
he conducted their rhetorical training, and edu-
cated them liberally. After exploring India as
much as possible, he set out for home, and em-
barked in a vessel which was on the point of
sailing for Egypt. It happened that, from want
of water or some other necessary, the vessel was
obliged to stop at some port, and the Indians
rushed upon it and murdered all, Meropius in-

1 Ruf. i. 9, who gathered the facts from Edesius himself. Cf. Soc.
i. 19. Sor. substitutes the scientific order of Plato, Empedocles, and
Democritus for that of Metrodorus. The story is briefly reported
by Theodoret, H. E. \. 23.


eluded. These Indians had just thrown off
their alliance with the Romans ; they took the
boys as living captives, because they pitied their
youth, and conducted them to their king. He
appointed the younger one his cup-bearer ; the
older, Frumentius, he put over his house and
made him administrator of his treasures ; for he
perceived that he was intelligent and very capable
in business. These youths served the king use-
fully and faithfully during a long course of years,
and when he felt his end approaching, his son
and wife surviving, he rewarded the good-will of
the servants with liberty, and permitted them to
go where they pleased. They were anxious to
return to Tyre, where their relatives resided ;
but the king's son being a minor, his mother
besought them to remain for a little while and
take charge of public affairs, until her son
reached the years of manhood. They yielded
to her entreaties, and directed the affairs of the
kingdom and of the government of the Indies.
Fmmentius, by some Divine impulse, perhaps
because God moved him spontaneously, inquired
whether there were any Christians in India, or
Romajis among the merchants, who had sailed
thither. Having succeeded in finding the objects
of his inquiry, he summoned them into his pres-
ence, treated them with love and friendliness,
and convened them for prayer, and the assembly
was conducted after the Roman usage ; and
when he had built houses of prayer, he encour-
aged them to honor God continually.

When the king's son attained the age of man-
hood, Frumentius and Edesius besought him
and the queen, and not without difficulty per-
suaded the rulers to be separated from them-
selves, and having parted as friends, they went
back as Roman subjects. Edesius went to Tyre
to see his relatives, and was soon after advanced
to the dignity of presbyter. Frumentius, how-
ever, instead of returning to Phoenicia, repaired
to Alexandria ; for with him patriotism and filial
piety were subordinate to religious zeal. He
conferred with Athanasius, the head of the Alex-
andrian Church, described to him the state of
affairs in India, and the necessity of appointing
a bishop over the Christians located in that
country. Athanasius assembled the endemic
priests, and consulted with them on the subject ;
and he ordained Frumentius bishop of India,
since he was peculiarly qualified and apt to do
much service among those among whom he was
the first to manifest the name of Christian, and
the seed of the participation in the doctrine was
sown.'^ Frumentius, therefore, returned to India,
and, it is said, discharged the priestly functions
so admirably that he became an object of uni-

5 Athan. Apol. ad Const. 29-31. Frumentius was called the-
Abba Salama of Avfou>xi? (Axum). Cf. Historia Ethiopica,
Ludolf; Nic. Call, repeats this story of Rufinus in his//. E. 1. 37,
with wiiich compare the narrative in xvii. 32.


II. 250


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


275


versal admiration, and was revered as no less
than an apostle. Ood highly honored him, en-
abling him to perform many wonderful cures,
and to work signs and wonders. Such was the
origin of the Indian priesthood.

CHAP. XXV. — COUNCIL OF TYRE ; ILLEGAL DEPO-
SITION OF ST. ATHANASIUS.

The plots of the enemies of Athanasius in-
volved him in fresh troubles, excited the hatred
of the emperor against him, and stirred up a
multitude of accusers. Wearied by their im-
portunity, the emperor convened a council at
Cassarea in Palestine. Athanasius was sum-
moned thither ; but fearing the artifices of
Eusebius, bishop of the city, of Eusebius, bishop
of Nicomedia, and of their party, he refused to
attend, and for thirty months, although pressed
to attend, persisted in his refusal. At the end
of that period, however, he was forced more
urgently and repaired to Tyre, where a great
number of the bishops of the East were assem-
bled,' who commanded him to undergo the
charges of those who accused him. Of John's
party, Callinicus, a bishop, and a certain Ischurias,
accused him of breaking a mystical chalice and
of throwing down an episcopal chair ; and of
often causing Ischurias, although he was a pres-
byter, to be loaded with chains ; and by falsely
informing Hyginus, governor of Egypt, that he
had cast stones at the statues of the emperor ;
of occasioning his being thrown into prison ; of
deposing Callinicus, bishop of the Cathohc
Church at Pelusium, and of saying that he would
debar him from fellowship unless he could re-
move certain suspicions concerning his having
broken a mystical chalice ; of committing the
Church of Pelusium to Mark, a deposed presby-
ter ; and of placing Callinicus under a military
guard, and of putting him under judicial tortures.
Euplus, Pachomius, Isaac, Achillas,'^ and Her-
maeon, bishops of John's party, accused him of
inflicting blows. They all concurred in main-
taining that he obtained the episcopal dignity by
means of the perjury of certain individuals, it
having been decreed that no one should receive
ordination, who could not clear himself of any
crime laid to his charge. They further alleged,
that having been deceived by him, they had
separated themselves from communion with him,
and that, so far from satisfying their scruples, he
had treated them with violence and thrown them
into prison.

Further, the affair of Arsenius was again agi-

1 Eus. V. C. iv. 41, 42; the letter in 42 has a late addition in
Theodoret, H. E. i. 29 (27): Athan. Apol. coitt. Arian. 8-12,
71-83; Ruf. H. E. i. 16, 17; Soc. i. 27-32.

2 In the brief by Melitiiis, Achilles and Hermaeon are given as
bishops respectively of Cusae and Cynus (Cynopolis) Athan. Apoi.
cont. Arian. 71.


tated ; and as generally happens in such a stu-
diously concocted plot, many even of those con-
sidered his friends loomed up unexpectedly as
accusers. A document was then read, contain-
ing popular complaints that the people of Alex-
andria could not continue their attendance at
church on his account. Athanasius, having been
urged to justify himself, presented himself re-
peatedly before the tribunal ; successfully repelled
some of the allegations, and requested delay for
investigation as to the others. He was exceed-
ingly perplexed when he reflected on the favor
in which his accusers were held by his judges, on
the number of witnesses belonging to the sects
of Arius and Melitius who appeared against
him, and on the indulgence that was manifested
towards the informers, whose allegations had
been overcome. And especially in the indict-
ment concerning Arsenius, whose arm he was
charged with having cut off for purposes of
magic, and in the indictment concerning a cer-
tain woman to whom he was charged with hav-
ing given gifts for uncleanness, and with having
corrupted her by night, although she was unwill-
ing. Both these indictments were proved to be
ridiculous and full of false espionage. When
this female made the deposition before the
bishops, Timothy, a presbyter of Alex..ndria,
who stood by Athanasius, approached her ac-
cording to a plan he had secretly concerted, and
said to her, " Did I then, O woman, violate your
chastity? " ^ She replied, " But didst thou not? "
and mentioned the place and the attendant cir-
cumstances, in which she had been forced. He
likewise led Arsenius into the midst of them,
showed both his hands to the judges, and re-
quested them to make the accusers account for
the arm which they had exhibited. For it hap-
pened that Arsenius, either driven by a Divine
influence, or, as it is said, having been concealed
by the plans of Athanasius, when the danger to
that bishop on his account was announced,
escaped by night, and arrived at Tyre the day
before the trial. But these allegations having
been thus summarily dismissed, so that no de-
fense was necessary, no mention of ihe first was
made in the transactions ; most probably, I think,
because the whole affair was considered too in-
decorous and absurd for insertion. As to the
second, the accusers strove to justify themselves
by saying that a bishop under the jurisdiction of
Athanasius, named Plusian,* had, at the command
of his chief, burnt the house of Arsenius, fas-
tened him to a column, and maltreated him with
thongs, and then chained him in a cell. They
further stated that Arsenius escaped from the


3 Ruf. H. E. i. 17.

* Mention is made of a bishop of this name in the Epistle of
Arsenius to Athanasius, which is preserved in the Apol. cont.
Arian. 69.


276


THE FXCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 25.


cell through a window, and while he was sought
for remained a while in concealment ; that as he
did not appear, they naturally supposed him to
be dead ; that the reputation he had acquired as
a man and confessor, had endeared him to the
bishops of John's party ; and that they sought
for him, and applied on his behalf to the magis-
trates.

Athanasius was filled with apprehension when
he reflected on these subjects, and began to
suspect that his enemies were secretly schem-
ing to effect his ruin. After several sessions,
when the Synod was filled with tumult and con-
fusion, and the accusers and a multitude of per-
sons around the tribunal were crying aloud that
Athanasius ought to be deposed as a sorcerer
and a ruffian, and as being utterly unworthy the
priesthood, the officers, who had been appointed
by the emperor to be present at the Synod for
the maintenance of order, compelled the accused
to quit the judgment hall secretly ; for they
feared lest they might become his murderers, as
is apt to be the case in the rush of a tumult. On
finding that he could not remain in Tyre without
peril of his life, and that there was no hope of
obtaining justice against his numerous accusers,
from judges who were inimical to him, he fled
to Constantinople. The Synod condemned him
during his absence, deposed him from the
bishopric, and prohibited his residing at Alex-
andria, lest, said they, he should excite disturb-
ances and seditio'ns. John and all his adher-
ents were restored to communion, as if they had
been unjustly suffering wrongs, and each was
reinstateil in his own clerical rank. The bishops
then gave an account of their proceedings to the
emperor, and wrote to the bishops of all regions,
enjoining them not to receive Athanasius into
fellowship, and not to write to him or receive
letters from him, as one who had been convicted
of the crimes which they had investigated,
and on account of his flight, as also guilty in
those indictments which had not been tried.
They likewise declared, in this epistle, that they
had been obliged to pass such condemnation
upon him, because, when commanded by the
emperor the preceding year to repair to the
bishops of the East, who were assembled at
Caesarea, he disobeyed the injunction, kept the
bishops waiting for him, and set at naught the
commands of the ruler. They also deposed
that when the bishops had assembled at Tyre,
he went to that city, attended by a large retinue,
for the purpose of exciting disturbances and
tumults in the Synod ; that when there, he
sometimes refused to reply to the charges
preferred against him ; sometimes insulted the
bishops individually ; when summoned by them,
sometimes not obeying, at others not deigning
to be judged. They specified in the same


letter, that he was manifestly guilty of having
broken a mystical chalice, and that this fact
was attested by Theognis, bishop of Nicaea ; by
Maris, bishop of Chalcedonia ; by Theodore,
bishop of Heraclea ; by Valentinus and Ursa-
cius ; and by Macedonius, who had been sent
to the village in Egypt, where the chalice was
said to have been broken, in order to ascertain
the truth. Thus did the bishops detail succes-
sively each of the allegations against Athana-
sius, with the same art to which sophists resort
when they desire to heighten the effect of their
calumnies. Many of the priests, however, who
were present at the trial, perceived the injustice
of the accusation. It is related that Paphnutius,
the confessor,' who was present at the Synod,
arose, and took the hand of Maximus, the
bishop of Jerusalem, to lead him away, as if
those who were confessors, and had their eyes
dug out for the sake of piety, ought not to par-
ticipate in an assembly of wicked men.


CHAP. XXVI. — ERECTION OF A TEMPLE BY CON-
STANTINE THE GREAT AT GOLGOTHA, IN JERU-
SALEM ; ITS DEDICATION.

The temple,^ called the " Great Martyrium,"
which was built in the place of the skull at Jeru-
salem, was completed about the thirtieth year^ of
the reign of Constantine ; and Marianus, an offi-
cial, who was a short-hand writer of the emperor,
came to Tyre and delivered a letter from the
emperor to the council, commanding them to
repair quickly to Jerusalem, in order to conse-
crate the temple. Although this had been
previously determined upon, yet the emperor
deemed it necessary that the disputes which
prevailed among the bishops who had been
convened at Tyre should be first adjusted, and
that they should be purged of all discord and
grief before going to the consecration of the
temple. For it is fitting to such a festival for
the priests to be like-minded. When the
bishops arrived at Jerusalem, the temple was
therefore consecrated, as likewise numerous
ornaments and gifts, which were sent by the
emperor and are still presented in the sacred
edifice ; their costliness and magnificence is
such that they cannot be looked upon without
exciting wonder. Since that period the anniver-
sary of the consecration has been celebrated
with great pomp by the church of Jerusalem ; *
the festival continues eight days, initiation by
baptism is administered, and people from every

' This is in Ruf. //. £. i. 17. He also signs the first letter of
the Eg>'ptian bishops at Tyre to Dionysius: Athan. A^t>/. cont.
AriaN.7i): he presumably subscribed to the second. /iiW.

- Eus. /'. C. iv. 43-47: Athan. A^o/. cont. Arian. 84: See.
i. 33. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. i. 3: (29). So/.'s account is better
than that of either Soc. or Theodoret.

' A.D. 335. < Sept. 13.


II. 27.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


277


region under the sun resort to Jerusalem during
this festival, and visit the sacred places.


CHAP. XXVII. CONCERNING THE PRESBYTER BY

WHOM CONSTANTINE WAS PERSUADED TO RE-
CALL ARIUS AND EUZOIUS FROM EXILE ; THE
TRACTATE CONCERNING HIS POSSIBLY PIOUS
FAITH, AND HOW ARIUS WAS AGAIN RECEIVED
BY THE SYNOD ASSEMBLED AT JERUSALEM.

The bishops who had embraced the senti-
ments of Arius found a favorable opportunity of
restoring him and Euzoius to communion, by
zealously striving to have a council in the city
of Jerusalem. They effected their design in
the following manner ' : —

A certain presbyter who was a great admirer
of the Arian doctrines, was on terms of intimacy
with the emperor's sister. At first he concealed
his sentiments ; but as he frequently visited and
became by degrees more familiar with Con-
stantia, for such was the name of the sister of
Constantine, he took courage to represent to
her that Arius was unjustly exiled from his coun-
try, and cast out from the Church, through the
jealousy and personal enmity of Alexander,
bishop of the Alexandrian Church. He said
that his jealousy had been excited by the esteem
which the people manifested towards Arius.

Constantia believed these representations to be
true, yet took no steps in her lifetime to inno-
vate upon the decrees of Nicaea. Being attacked
with a disease which threatened to terminate in
death, she besought her brother, who went to
visit her, to grant what she was about to ask, as
a last favor ; this request was, to receive the
above mentioned presbyter on terms of intimacy,
and to rely upon him as a man who had correct
opinions about the Divinity. " For my part,"
she added, " I am drawing nigh to death, and
am no longer interested in the concerns of this
life ; the only apprehension I now feel, arises
from dread lest you should incur the wrath of
God and suffer any calamity, or the loss of your
empire, since you have been induced to con-
demn just and good men wrongfully to perpetual
banishment." From that period the emperor
received the presbyter into favor, and after per-
mitting him to speak freely with him and to
commune on the same topics concerning which
his sister had given her command, deemed it
necessary to subject the case of Arius to a fresh
examination ; it is probable that, in forming this
decision, the emperor was either influenced by
a belief in the credibility of the attacks, or by the
desire of gratifying his sister. It was not long be-
fore he recalled Arius from exile,^ and demanded


' Ruf. H. E. i. II ; Soc. i. 25, 26, 33.

2 This letter of the emperor is in Soc. i. 25.


of him a written exposition of his faith concern-
ing the Godhead. Arius avoided making use of
the new terms which he had previously devised,
and constructed another exposition by using
simple terms, and such as were recognized by
the sacred Scriptures ; he declared upon oath,
that he held the doctrines set forth in this ex-
position, that he both felt these statements ex
animo and had no other thought than these. It
was as follows:^ "Arius and Euzoius, presby-
ters, to Constantine, our most pious emperor and
most beloved of God.

" According as your piety, beloved of God,
commanded, O sovereign emperor, we here fur-
nish a written statement of our own faith, and
we protest before God that we, and all those
who are with us, believe what is here set forth.

" We believe in one God, the Father Almighty,
and in His Son the Lord Jesus Christ, who was
begotten from Him before all ages, God the
Word, by whom all things were made, whether
things in heaven or things on earth ; He came
and took upon Him flesh, suffered and rose
again, and ascended into heaven, whence He
will again come to judge the quick and the
dead.

" We believe in the Holy Ghost, in the resur-
rection of the body, in the life to come, in the
kingdom of heaven, and in one Catholic Church
of God, established throughout the earth. We
have received this faith from the Holy Gospels,
in which the Lord says to His disciples, ' Go
forth and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.' If we do not so believe this,
and if we do not truly receive the doctrines con-
cerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, as they are taught by the whole Catholic
Church and by the sacred Scriptures, as we be-
lieve in every point, let God be our judge, both
now and in the day which is to come. VVhere-
fore we appeal to your piety, O our emperor
most beloved of God, that, as we are enrolled
among the members of the clergy, and as we
hold the faith and thought of the Church and of
the sacred Scriptures, we may be openly recon-
ciled to our mother, the Church, through your
peacemaking and pious piety ; so that useless
questions and disputes may be cast aside, and
that we and the Church may dwell together in
peace, and we all in common may offer the
customary prayer for your peaceful and pious
empire and for your entire family."

Many considered this declaration of faith as
an artful compilation, and as bearing the ap-
pearance of difference in expression, while, in
reality, it supported the doctrine of Arius ; the
terms in which it was couched being so vague

•'' Soc. i. 26, verbal variations. Both probably from Sabinus.


278


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 27.


that it was susceptible of diverse interpretations.
The emperor imagined that Arius and Euzoius
were of the same sentiments as the bishops of
the council of Nicaea, and was delighted over
the affair. He did not, however, attempt to re-
store them to communion without the judgment
and approval of those who are, by the law of the
Church, masters in these matters. He, therefore,
sends them to the bishops who were then assem-
bled at Jerusalem, and wrote, desiring them to
examine the declaration of faith submitted by
Arius and Euzoius, and so to influence the Synod
that, whether they found that their doctrine was
orthodox, and that the jealousy of their ene-
mies had been the sole cause of their condem-
nation, or that, without having reason to blame
those who had condemned them, they had
changed their minds, a humane decision might,
in either case, be accorded them. Those who
had long been zealous for this, seized the oppor-
tunity under cover of the emperor's letter, and
received him into fellowship. They wrote imme-
diately to the emperor himself, to the Church of
Alexandria, and to the bishops and clergy of
Egypt, of Thebes, and of Libya, earnestly ex-
horting them to receive Arius and Euzoius into
communion, since the emperor bore witness to
the correctness of their faith, in one of his own
epistles, and since the judgment of the emperor
had been confirmed by the vote of the Synod.^

These were the subjects which were zealously
discussed by the Synod of Jerusalem.


CHAP. XXVIII. — LETTER FROM THE EMPEROR CON-
STANTINE TO THE SYNOD OF TYRE, AND EXILE
OF ST. ATHANASIUS THROUGH THE MACHINATION
OF THE ARIAN FACTION.

Athanasius, after having fled from Tyre, re-
paired ^ to Constantinople, and on coming to the
emperor Constantine, complained of what he
had suffered, in presence of the bishops who
had condemned him, and besought him to per-
mit the decrees of the council of Tyre to be sub-
mitted for examination before the emperor.
Constantine regarded this request as reasonable,
and wrote in the following terms to the bishops
assembled at Tyre : —

" I know not what has been enacted in con-
fusion and vehemence by your Synod ; but it
appears that, from some disturbing disorder,
decrees which are not in conformity with truth
have been enacted, and that your constant irri-
tation of one another evidently prevented you
from considering what is pleasing to God. But
it will be the work of Divine Providence to scat-

> Ruf. //. E, i. 11; Soc. i. 33. For the letter of the Synod, cf.
Athan. Je Synodt's, 21 ; a part is also eiven in Apo/. co>it. A riaii. 8^.

» This letter is given in Athan. Apol. cont. A nan. 86; Soc. i.
33-35-


ter the evils which have been drawn out of this
contentiousness, and to manifest to us clearly
whether you have not been misled in your
judgment by motives of private friendship or
aversion. I therefore command that you all
come here to my piety without delay, in order
that we may receive an exact account of your
transactions. I will explain to you the cause of
my writing to you in this strain, and you will
know from what follows, why I summon you be-
fore myself through this document. As I was
returning on horseback to that city which bears
my name, and which I regard as my much pros-
pered country, Athanasius, the bishop, presented
himself so unexpectedly in the middle of the
highway, with certain individuals who accompa-
nied him, that I felt exceedingly surprised at
beholding him. God, who sees all things, is ray
witness, that at first I did not know who he was,
but that some of my attendants having ascer-
tained this point, and the injustice which he had
suffered, gave me the necessary information. I
did not on this occasion grant him an interview.
He, however, persevered in requesting an audi-
ence ; and although I refused him, and was on
the point of commanding that he should be re-
moved from my presence, he told me with more
boldness, that he sought no other favor of me
than that I should summon you hither, in order
that he might in your presence complain of what
he had suffered unnecessarily. As this request
appears reasonable and timely, I deemed it right
to address you in this strain, and to command
all of you who were convened at the Synod of
Tyre to hasten to the court of our clemency, so
that you may demonstrate by your works, the
purity and inflexibility of your decisions before
me, whom you cannot refuse to acknowledge as
a genuine servant of God. By my zeal rn His
service, peace has been established throughout
the world, and the name of God is genuinely
praised among the barbarians, who till now were
in ignorance of the truth ; and it is evident that
whoever is ignorant of the truth knows not God.
Notwithstanding, as is above stated, the barba-
rians have, through my instrumentality, learnt
to know genuinely and to worship God ; for they
perceived that everywhere, and on all occasions,
his protection rested on me ; and they reverence
God the more deeply because they fear my
power. But we who have to announce the mys-
teries of forbearance (for I will not say that we
keep them), we, I say, ought not to do anything
that can tend to dissension or hatred, or, to
speak plainly, to the destruction of the human
race. Come, then, to us, as I have said, with
all diligence, and be assured that I shall do
everything in my power to preserve all the par-
ticularly infallible parts of the lawf of God in a
way that no fault or heterodoxy can be fabri-


II. 30-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


279


cated ; while those enemies of the law who,
under the guise of the Holy Name, endeavor
to introduce variant and differing blasphemies,
have been openly scattered, utterly crushed, and
wholly suppressed."

This letter of the emperor so excited the
fears of some of the bishops that they set off on
their journey homewards. But Eusebius, bishop
of Nicomedia, and his partisans, went to the
emperor, and represented that the Synod of
Tyre had enacted no decrees against Athana-
sius but what were founded on justice. They
brought forward as witnesses Theognis, Maris,
Theodore, Valens, and Ursacius, and deposed
that he had broken the mystical cup, and after
uttering many other calumnies, they prevailed
with their accusations. The emperor, either
believing their statements to be true, or imagin-
ing that unanimity would be restored among the
bishops if Athanasius were removed, exiled him
to Treves, in Western Gaul ; and thither, there-
fore, he was conducted.


CHAP. XXrX. ALEXANDER, BISHOP OF CONSTAN-
TINOPLE ; HIS REFUSAL TO RECEIVE ARIUS INTO
COMMUNION ; ARIUS IS BURST ASUNDER WHILE
SEEKING N.\TURAL RELIEF.

After the Synod of Jerusalem, Arius went to
Egypt,' but as he could not obtain permission to
hold communion with the Church of Alexandria,
he returned to Constantinople. As all those
who had embraced his sentiments, and those
who were attached to Eusebius, bishop of Nico-
media, had assembled cunningly in that city for
the purpose of holding a council, Alexander,
who was then ordering the see of Constanti-
nople, used every effort to dissolve the council.
But as his endeavors were frustrated, he openly
refused all covenant with Arius, affirming that it
was neither just nor according to ecclesiastical
canons, to make powerless their own vote, and
that of those bishops who had been assembled
at Nicaea, from nearly every region under the
sun. When the partisans of Eusebius perceived
that their arguments produced no effect on
Alexander, they had recourse to contumely,
and threatened that unless he would receive
Arius into communion on a stated day, he
should be expelled from the church, and that
another should be elected in his place who
would be willing to hold communion with Arius.
They then separated, the partisans of Eusebius,
to await the time they had fixed for carrying
their menaces into execution, and Alexander to
pray that the words of Eusebius might be pre-


1 Ruf. H. E. i. 12, 13; Soc. i. 37, 38; Athan. Ep. ad Serapioti,
and ad Episcop. /Egypt, et Lib. ig. Soz. follows Athan. and
Ruf. Athan. say^ he derived his statements from Macariiis, a pres-
byter, an eye-witness of some of the events narrated in this chapter
and the next.


vented from being carried into deed. His chief
source of fear arose from the fact that the em-
peror had been persuaded to give way. On the
day before the appointed day he prostrated
himself before the altar, and continued all the
night in prayer to God, that his enemies might
be prevented from carrying their schemes into
execution against him. Late in the afternoon,
Arius, being seized suddenly with pain in the
stomach, was compelled to repair to the public
place set apart for emergencies of this nature.
As some time passed away without his coming
out, some persons, who were waiting for him
outside, entered, and found him dead and still
sitting upon the seat. When his death became
known, all people did not view the occurrence
under the same aspect. Some believed that he
died at that very hour, seized by a sudden
disease of the heart, or suffering weakness from
his joy over the fact that his matters were falling
out according to his mind ; others imagined
that this mode of death was inflicted on him in
judgment, on account of his impiety. Those
who held his sentiments were of opinion that
his death was brought about by magical arts.
It will not be out of place to quote what Atha-
nasius, bishop of Alexandria, stated on the sub-
ject. The following is his narrative : —


CHAP. XXX. ACCOUNT GIVEN BY THE GREAT

ATHANASIUS OF THE DEATH OF ARIUS.

"Arius,^ the author of the heresy and the
associate of Eusebius, having been summoned
before the most blessed Constantine Augustus,
at the solicitation of the partisans of Eusebius,
was desired to give in writing an exposition of
his faith. He drew up this document with great
artfulness, and like the devil, concealed his
impious assertions beneath the simple words of
Scripture. The most blessed Constantine said
to him, * If you have no other points in mind
than these, render testimony to the truth ; for
if you perjure yourself, the Lord will punish
you ' ; and the wretched man swore that he
neither held nor conceived any sentiments
except those now specified in the document,
even if he had ever affirmed otherwise ; soon
after he went out, and judgment was visited
upon him ; for he bent for\vards and burst in
the middle. With all men the common end of
life is death. We must not blame a man, even
if he be an enemy, merely because he died, for
it is uncertain whether we shall live to the
evening. But the end of Arius was so singular
that it seems worthy of some remark. The
partisans of Eusebius threatened to reinstate

= Cf. Athan. Ep. ad Eptsc. /Egypt, ft Lib. 18, 19; cf. Athan.
Ep. ad Serapion, which treats of the death of Arius.


28o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[II. 30.


him in the church, and Alexander, bishop of
Constantinople, opposed their intention ; Arius
placed his confidence in the power and menaces
of Kusebius ; for it was the Sabbath, and he
expected the next day to be readmitted. The
dispute ran high ; the partisans of Eusebius
were loud in their menaces, while Alexander
had recourse to prayer. The Lord was the
judge, and declared himself against the unjust.
A little before sunset Arius was compelled by a
want of nature to enter the place appointed for
such emergencies, and here he lost at once both
restoration to communion and his life. The
most blessed Constantine was amazed when he
heard of this occurrence, and regarded it as the
proof of perjury. It then became evident to
every one that the menaces of Eusebius were
absolutely futile, and that the expectations of
Arius were vain. It also became manifest that
the Arian madness could not be fellowshipped
by the Saviour both here and in the church of the
Firstborn. Is it not then astonishing that some
are still found who seek to exculpate him whom
the Lord condemned, and to defend that heresy
which the Lord proved to be unworthy of fel-
lowship, by not permitting its author to enter
the church ? We have been duly informed that
this was the mode of the death of Arius." It is
said that for a long period subsequently no one
would make use of the seat on which he died.
Those who were compelled by necessities of
nature, as is wont to be the case in a crowd, to
visit the public place, when they entered, spoke
to one another to avoid the seat, and the place
was shunned afterwards, because Arius had there
received the punishment of his impiety. At a
later time a certain rich and powerful man, who
had embraced the Arian tenets, bought the place
of the public, and built a house on the spot, in
order that the occurrence might fall into obliv-
ion, and that there might be no perpetual me-
morial of the death of Arius.


CHAP. XXXI. EVENTS WHICH OCCURRED IN ALEX-
ANDRIA ArrKR THE DEATH OF ARIUS. LETTER
OF CONSTANTINE THE GRPIAT TO THE CHURCH
THERE.

The death of Arius did not terminate the
doctrinal dispute which he had originated.'
Those who adhered to his sentiments did not
cease from plotting against those who main-
tained opposite opinions. The people of Alex-
andria loudly complained of the. exile of Atha-
nasius, and offered up supplications for his
return ; and Antony, the celebrated monk, wrote
frequently to the emperor to entreat him to
attach no credit to the insinuations of the Meli-


' This chapter has no parallel in the present sources.


tians, but to reject their accusations as calum-
nies ; yet the emperor was not convinced by
these arguments, and wrote to the Alexandrians,
accusing them of folly and of disorderly conduct.
He commanded the clergy and the holy virgins
to remain quiet, and declared that he would not
change his mind nor recall Athanasius, whom,
he said, he regarded as an exciter of sedition,
justly condemned by the judgment of the
Church. He replied to Antony, by stating that
he ought not to overlook the decree of the
Synod ; for even if some few of the bishops, he
said, were actuated by ill-will or the desire to
oblige others, it scarcely seems credible that so
many prudent and excellent bishops could have
been impelled by such motives ; and, he added,
that Athanasius was contumelious and arrogant,
and the cause of dissension and sedition. The
enemies of Athanasius accused him the more
especially of these crimes, because they knew
that the emperor regarded them with peculiar
aversion. When he heard that the Church was
split into two factions, of which one supported
Athanasius and the other John, he was trans-
ported with indignation, and exiled John him-
self. This John had succeeded Melitius, and
had, with those who held the same sentiments as
himself, been restored to communion and re-
established in the clerical functions by the Synod
of Tyre. His banishment was contrary to the
wishes of the enemies of Athanasius, yet it was
done, and the decrees of the Synod of Tyre did
not benefit John, for the emperor was beyond
supplication or petition of any kind with respect
to any one who was suspected of stirring up
Christian people to sedition or dissension.


CHAP. XXXII. — CONST.ANTINE ENACTS A L.AW
AGAINST ALL HERESIES, AND PROHIBITS THE
PEOPLE FROM HOLDING CHURCH IN ANY PLACE
BUT THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, AND THUS THE
GREATER NUMBER OF HERESIES DISAPPEAR. THE
ARIANS WHO SIDED WITH EUSEBIUS OF NICOMEDIA,
ARTFULLY A'lTEMPl ED TO OBLITERATE THE TERM
" CONSUBSTANTIAL."

Although the doctrine of Arius was zealously
supported by many persons in disputations," a
party had not as yet been formed to whom the
name of .Arians could be applied as a distinctive
appellation ; for all assembled together as a
church and held communion with each other,
with the exception of the Novatians, those
called Phrygians, the Valentinians, the Marcion-
ites, the Paulianians, and some few others who
adhered to already invented heresies. The em-
peror, however, enacted a law that their own

* This chapter, outside of the law of Constantine against the
heretics (Eus. {'. C. iii. 64), consists of Soz.'s reflections on the
state of the heresies.


n. 33-:\


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


281


houses of prayer should be abolished ; and that
they should meet in the churches, and not hold
church in private houses, or in public places.
He deemed it better to hold fellowshii) in the
Catholic Church, and he advised them to as-
semble in her walls. By means of this law,
almost all the heresies, I believe, disapi)eared.
During the reign of preceding emperors, all
who worshiped Christ, however they might
have differed from each other in opinion, re-
ceived the same treatment from the pagans, and
were persecuted with equal cruelty. These
common calamities, to which they were all equally
liable, prevented them from prosecuting any
close inquiries as to the differences of opinion
which existed among themselves ; it was there-
fore easy for the members of each party to hold
church by themselves, and by continually con-
ferring with one another, however few they
might have been in number, they were not dis-
rupted. But after this law was passed they
could not assemble in public, because it was
forbidden ; nor could they hold their assem-
blies in secret, for they were watched by the
bishops and clergy of their city. Hence the
greater number of these sectarians were led, by
fear of consequences, to join themselves to the
Cathohc Church. Those who adhered to their
original sentiments did not, at their death, leave
any disciples to propagate their heresy, for they
could neither come together into the same
place, nor were they able to teach in security
those of the same opinions. On account either
of the absurdity of the heretical dogmas, or of
the utter ignorance of those who devised and
taught them, the respective followers of each
heresy were, from the beginning, very few in
number. The Novatians alone, ^ who had ob-
tained good leaders, and who entertained the
same opinions respecting the Divinity as the
Catholic Church, were numerous, from the
beginning, and remained so, not being much in-
jured by this law ; the emperor, I believe, will-
ingly relaxed in their favor the rigor of the
enactment, for he only desired to strike terror
into the minds of his subjects, and had no in-
tention of persecuting them. Acesius, who was
then the bishop of this heresy in Constantinople,
was much esteemed by the emperor on account
of his virtuous life ; and it is probable that it
was for his sake that the church which he gov-
erned met with protection. The Phrygians
suffered the same treatment as the other heretics
in all the Roman provinces except Phrygia and
the neighboring regions, for here they had, since
the time of Montanus, existed in great numbers,
and do so to the present day.


1 Sozomen speaks with favor of the Novatians, though not with
the earnestness of Socrates.


About this time the partisans of Eusebius,
bishop of Nicomedia, and of Theognis, bishop
of Nicaea, began to make innovations in writing
upon the confession set forth by the Nicaean
Council. They did not venture to reject openly
the assertion that the Son is consubstantial with
the Father, because this assertion was main-
tained by the emperer ; but they propounded
another document, and signified to the Eastern
bishops that they received the terms of the
Nicaean doctrine with verbal interpretations.
From this declaration and reflection, the former
dispute lapsed into fresh discussion, and what
seemed to have been put at rest was again set
in motion.


CHAP. XXXIII. — MARCELLUS BISHOP OF ANCYRA ;
HIS HERESY AND DEPOSITION.

At the same period, Marcellus, bishop of
Ancyra,^ in Galatia, was deposed and cast out of
the Church by the bishops assembled at Con-
stantinople, because he had introduced some
new doctrines, whereby he taught that the exist-
ence of the Son of God commenced when He
was born of Mary, and that His kingdom would
have an end ; he had, moreover, drawn up a
written document wherein these views were pro-
pounded. Basil, a man of great eloquence and
learning, was invested with the bishopric of the
parish of Galatia. They also wrote to the
churches in the neighboring regions, to desire
them to search for the copies of the book*
written by Marcellus, and to destroy them, and
to lead back any whom they might find to have
embraced his sentiments. They stated that the
work was too voluminous to admit of their tran-
scribing the whole in their episde, but that they
inserted quotations of certain passages in order
to prove that the doctrines wliich they had con-
demned were there advocated. Some persons,
however, maintained that Marcellus had merely
propounded a few questions which had been
misconstrued by the adherents of Eusebius, and
represented to the emperor as actual confes-
sions. Eusebius and his partisans were much
irritated against Marcellus, because he had not
consented to the definitions propounded by the
Synod in Phoenicia, nor to the regulations
which had been made in favor of Arius at Jeru-
salem ; and had likewise refused to attend at
the consecration of the Great Martyrium, in
order to avoid communion with them. In their
letter to the emperor, they dwelt largely upon
this latter circumstance, and brought it forward

' Soc. i. 36. Soz. has more detail as to Asterius, and better
order; both probably took from the same source. Compare the
attitude of Athan. toward Marcellus.

3 Hil. Fragni. ii. 22, gives the title of this work as de Stib-
jectione Domini Christi. Eus. Pamp. wrote a refutation of this
book.


282


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[n- 33'


as a charge, alleging that it was a personal in-
sult to him to refuse attendance at the conse-
cration of the temple which he had constnicted
at Jerusalem. The motive by which Marcellus
was induced to write this work was that Asterius,
who was a sophist and a native of Caj^ipadocia,
had written a treatise in defense of the Arian
doctrines, and had read it in various cities, and
to the bishops, and likewise at several Synods
where he had attended. Marcellus undertook
to refute his arguments, and while thus engaged,
he, either deliberately or unintentionally, fell
into the opinions of Paul of Samosata. He was
afterwards, however, reinstated in his bishopric
by the Synod of Sardis, after having proved
that he did not hold such sentiments.


CHAP. XXXIV. — DE.\TH OF CONSTANTINE THE
GRVAT ; HE DIED AFTER BAPTISM AND WAS
BURIED IN THE TEMPLE OF THE HOLY AI'OSTLES.

The emperor had already divided the empire
among his sons, who were styled Caesars.' To
Constantine and Constans he awarded the west-
ern regions ; and to Constantius, the eastern ;
and as he was indisposed, and required to have
recourse to bathing, he repaired for that purpose
to Helenopolis, a city of Bithynia. His malady,
however, increased, and he went to Nicomedia,
and was initiated into holy baptism in one of
the suburbs of that city. After the ceremony
he was filled with joy. and returned thanks to
God. He then confirmed the division of the
empire among his sons, according to his former
allotment, and bestowed certain privileges on
old Rome and on the city named after himself
He placed his testament in the hands of the
presbyter who constantly extolled Arius, and
who had been recommended to him as a man

• Eus. /'. C. iv. 61-75: Ruf. f/. E. i. 11: Soc. i. 38-40: cf.
Philost. ii. 16, 17. Cr. Eutrop. Brev. hist. Rom. x. 7, 8.


of virtuous life by his sister Constantia in her
last moments, and commanded him with an
added oath to deliver it to Constantius on his
return, for neither Constantius nor the other
Caesars were with their dying fiither. After
making these arrangements, Constantine sur-
vived but a few days ; he died in the sixty-fifth
year of his age, and the thirty-first of his reign.
He was a powerful protector of the Christian
religion, and was the first of the emperors who
began to be zealous for the Church, and to be-
stow upon her high benefactions. He was more
successful than any other sovereign in all his
undertakings ; for he formed no design, I am
convinced, without God. He was victorious in
his wars against the Goths and Sarmatians, and,
indeed, in all his military enterprises ; and he
changed the form of government according to
his own mind with so much ease, that he created
another senate and another imperial city, to
which he gave his own name. He assailed the
pagan religion, and in a little while subverted
it, although it had prevailed for ages among the
princes and the people.

After the death of Constantine, his body was
placed in a golden coffin, conveyed to Constan-
tinople, and deposited on a certain platform in
the palace ; the same honor and ceremonial
were observed, by those who were in the palace,
as were accorded to him while living. On hear-
ing of his father's death, Constantius, who was
then in the East, hastened to Constantinople, and
interred the royal remains with the utmost mag-
nificence, and deposited them in the tomb which
had been constructed by order of the deceased
in the Church of the Apostles. From this period
it became the custom to deposit the remains of
subsequent Christian emperors in the same
place of interment ; and here bishops, likewise,
were buried, for the hierarchical dignity is not
only equal in honor to imperial power, but, in
sacred places, even takes the ascendancy.


BOOK III.


CHAP. I. — AFTER THE DEATH OF CONSTANTINE
THE GREAT, THE ADHERENTS OF EUSEBIUS AND
THEOGNIS ATTACK THE NICENE FAITH.

We have now seen what events transpired in
the churches during the reign of Constantine.'
On his death the doctrine which had been set
forth at Nicasa, was subjected to renewed exami-
nation. Although this doctrine was not uni-
versally approved, no one, during the life of
Constantine, had dared to reject it openly. At
his death, however, many renounced this opinion,
especially those who had previously been sus-
pected of treachery. Of all these Eusebius and
Theognis, bishops of the province of Bithynia,
did everything in their power to give predomi-
nance to the tenets of Arius. They believed
that this object would be easily accomplished,
if the return of Athanasius from exile could
be prevented, and by giving the government
of the Egyptian churches to a bishop of like
opinion with them. They found an efficient
coadjutor in the presbyter who had obtained
from Constantine the recall of Arius. He was
held in high esteem by the emperor Constantius,
on account of the service he bad rendered in
delivering to him the testament of his father;
since he was trusted, he boldly seized the oppor-
tunities, until he became an intimate of the em-
peror's wife, and of the powerful eunuchs of
the women's sleeping apartments. At this
period F^usebius ^ was appointed to superintend
the concerns of the royal household, and being
zealously attached to Arianism, he induced the
empress and many of the persons belonging to
the court to adopt the same sentiments. Hence
disputations concerning doctrines again became
prevalent, both in private and in public, and
revilings and animosities were renewed. This
state of things was in accordance with the views
of Theognis and his partisans.


CHAP. n. — RETURN OF ATHANASIUS THE GREAT
FROM ROME ; LETTER OF CONSTANTINE CAESAR,
SON OF CONSTANTINE THE GREAT ; RENEWED
MACHINATIONS OF THE ARIANS AGAINST ATHA-
NASIUS ; ACACIUS OF BERRCKA ; WAR BETWEEN
CONSTANS AND CONSTANTINE.

At this period Athanasius returned from Gaul

* This section is manifestly an abridgment of Soc. ii. 2.

* This Eusebius was a eunuch, who was now made chief cham-
berlain, and became a disciple of the alleged presbyter.


to Alexandria.^ It is said that Constantine in-
tended to have recalled him, and that in his
testament he even gave orders to that effect.
But as he was prevented by death from per-
forming his intention, his son who bore his
name, and who was then commanding in West-
ern Gaul, recalled Athanasius, and wrote a letter
on the subject to the people of Alexandria.
Having met with a copy of this letter translated
from the Latin into Greek, I shall insert it pre-
cisely as I found it. It is as follows : —

" Constantine Caesar, to the people of the
Catholic Church in the city of Alexandria.'*

" You cannot, I believe, be unacquainted with
the fact that Athanasius, the interpreter of the
venerated law, since the cruelty of his blood-
thirsty and hostile enemies continued, to the
danger of his sacred person, was sent for a time
into Gaul in order that he might not incur irre-
trievable extremities through the perversity of
these worthless opponents ; in order then to
make this danger futile, he was taken out of the
jaws of the men, who pressed upon him, and
was commanded to live near me, so that in the
city where he dwelt, he might be amply fur-
nished with all necessaries ; but his virtue is
so famous and extraordinary, because he is
confident of Divine aid, that he sets at naught
all the rougher burdens of fortune. Our lord
and my father, Constantine Augustus, of blessed
memory, intended to have reinstated this bishop
in his own place, and thus especially to have
restored him to your much beloved piety ; but,
since he was anticipated by the human lot, and
died before fulfilling his intention, I, as his succes-
sor, purpose to carry into execution the design
of the emperor of Divine memory. Athanasius
will inform you, when he shall see your face, in
how great reverence he was held by me. Nor
is it surprising that I should have acted as I
have done towards him, for the image of your
own desire and the appearance of so noble a
man, moved and impelled me to this step. May
Divine Providence watch over you, my beloved
brethren."

In consequence of this letter from the emper-
or Athanasius went home, and resumed the gov-
ernment of the Egyptian churches. Those who
were attached to the Arian doctrines were thrown

' This chapter follows the order of Soc. ii. 2-5. Cf. Philost.
ii. 18.

* This letter is translated in Athan. Apo!. cottt. Arian. 87; the
original was in Latin, and Athan. probably translated it.


284


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 2.


into consternation and could not keep the peace ;
they excited continuous seditions, and had re-
course to other machinations against him. The
partisans of Eusebius accused him before the
emperor of being a seditious person, and of
having reversed the decree of exile, contrary
to the laws of the church, and without the con-
sent of the bishops. I shall presently relate in
the proper place, how, by their intrigues, Athana-
sius was again expelled from Alexandria.

Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, died ' about
this period, and Acacius succeeded to the bish-
opric of Ca^sarea in Palestine. He was a zeal-
ous imitator of Eusebius because he had been
instructed by him in the Sacred Word ; he pos-
sessed a capable mind and was polished in ex-
pression, so that he left many writings worthy
of commendation. Not long after,- the emperor
Constantine declared war against his brother
Constans at Aquileia,'' and was slain by his own
generals. The Roman Empire was divided be-
tween the surviving brothers ; the West fell to
the lot of Constans and the East to Constan-
tius.


CHAP. III. — PAUL, BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE, AND
MACEDONIUS, THE PNEUMATOMACHIAN.

Alexander died* about this time, and Paul
succeeded to the high priesthood of Constanti-
nople. The followers of Arius and Macedonius
assert that he took possession at his own motion,
and against the advice of Eusebius, bishop of
Nicomedia, or of Theodore, bishop of Heraclea,
in Thrace ; upon whom, as being the nearest
bishops, the right of conferring ordination de-
volved. Many, however, maintain, on the testi-
mony of Alexander, whom he succeeded, that
he was ordained by the bishops who were then
assembled at Constantinople."^ For when Alex-
ander, who was ninety-eight years of age, and
who had conducted the episcopal office vigor-
ously for twenty-three years, was at the point of
death, his clergy asked him to whom he wished
to turn over his church. " If," replied he, "you
seek a man good in Divine matters and one
who is apt to teach you, have Paul. But if you
desire one who is conversant with public affairs,
and with the councils of rulers, Macedonius is
better." The Macedonians themselves admit
that this testimony was given by Alexander ; but
they say that Paul was more skilled in the trans-
action of business and the art of elo(juence ;
but they put emphasis for Macedonius, on the


• Soc. ii. 4. ' Soc. ii. 5.

' The nieniion of Aquileia, which is oniiitcil by Socrates, shows
consultation with another source. The statement of the agents in
his death is different also.

* Cf. Soc. ii. 6. While the order of events is the same, Soz.
had a different source, for he makes-additions. Cf. Athan. Hist.
Arian. 7. ' An endemic Synod.


testimony of his life ; and they accuse Paul of hav-
ing been addicted to effeminacy and an intliffer-
ent conduct.** It appears, however, from their
own acknowledgment, that Paul was a man of elo-
quence, and brilliant in teaching the Church.
Events proved that he was not competent to
combat the casualties of life, or to hold inter-
course with those in power ; for he was never
successful in subverting the machinations of his
enemies,' like those who are adroit in the
management of affairs. Although he was greatly
beloved by the people, he suffered severely
from the treachery of those who then rejected
the doctrine which prevailed at Nicaea. In the
first place, he was expelled from the church of
Constantinople, as if some accusation of mis-
conduct had been established against him.' He
was then condemned to banishment, and finally,
it is said, fell a victim to the devices of his ene-
mies, and was strangled. But these latter events
took place at a subsequent period.


CHAP. IV. A SEDITION WAS EXCITED ON THE

ORDINATION OF PAUL.

The ordination of Paul occasioned a great
commotion in the Church of Constantinople.*
During the life of Alexander, the Arians did not
act very openly ; for the people by being attentive
to him were well governed and honored Divine
things, and especially believed that the unex-
yjected occurrence which befell Arius, whom
they believed met such a death, was the Divine
wrath, drawn down by the imprecations of Alex-
ander. After the death of this bishop, however,
the people became divided into two parties, and
disputes and contests concerning doctrines were
openly carried on. The adherents of Arius de-
sired the ordination of Macedonius, while those
who maintained that the Son is consubstantial
with the Father wished to have Paul as their
bishop ; and this latter party prevailed. After
the ordination of Paul, the emperor, who chanced
to be away from home, returned to Constanti-
nople, and manifested as much displeasure at
what had taken place as though the bishopric
had been conferred upon an unworthy man.
Through the machinations of the enemies of
Paul a Synod was convened, and he was expelled
from the Church. It handed over the Church
of Constantinople to Eusebius, bishop of Nico-
media.


" aJtaiiopot /3'o<, literally " an indifferent life." St. Nilus, St.
Basil, and others of the Christian Fathers use this phrase as opposed
to an .Tscetic life.

' He had been originally accused by his presbyter Macedonius.
The accusation, according to Thcodoret, after his restoration was
sedition (//. E. ii. 5), the crime usually imputed to the homoou-
sians. Cf. Athan. Hist. Ariait.

" Soc. ii. 6, 7.


in- 5]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


285


CHAP. V. THE PARTIAL COUNCH, OF ANTIOCH ; IT

DEPOSKU ATHANASIUS ; IT SUBSTIIUIEU GREGORY ;
ITS TWO STATEMENTS OF THE FAITH ; THOSE WHO
AGREED WITH THEM.

Soon after these occurrences, the emperor
went to Antioch, a city of Syria.' Here a
church had already been completed, which ex-
celled in size and beauty. Constantine began to
build it daring his Hfetime, and as the structure
had been just finished by his son Constantius,
it was deemed a favorable opportunity by the
partisans of Eusebius, who of old were zealous
for it, to convene a council. They, therefore,
with those from various regions who held their
sentiments, met together in Antioch;^ their
bishops were about ninety-seven in number.
Their professed object was the consecration of
the newly finished church ; but they intended
nothing else than the abolition of the decrees
of the Nicgean Council, and this was fully proved
by the sequel. The Church of Antioch was
then governed by Placetus,^ who had succeeded
Euphronius. The death of Constantine the
Great had taken place about five years prior to
this period. When all the bishops had assem-
bled in the presence of the emperor Constantius,
the majority expressed great indignation, and
vigorously accused Athanasius of having con-
temned the sacerdotal regulation which they
had enacted,* and taken possession of the bish-
opric of Alexandria without first obtaining the
sanction of a council. They also deposed that
he was the cause of the death of several persons,
who fell in a sedition excited by his return ; and
that many others had on the same occasion been
arrested and delivered up to the judicial tribu-
nals. By these accusations they contrived to
cast odium on Athanasius, and it was decreed
that Gregory should be invested with the govern-
ment of the Church of Alexandria. They then
turned to the discussion of doctrinal questions,
and found no fault with the decrees of the coun-
cil of Nice. They dispatched letters to the bish-
ops of every city, in which they declared that, as
they were bishops themselves, they had not fol-
lowed Arius. " For how," said they, " could we
have been followers of him, when he was but a
presbyter,^ and we were placed above him?"
Since they were the testers of his faith, they had
readily received him ; and they beheved in the
faith which had from the beginning been handed
down by tradition. This they further explained
at the bottom of their letter, but without men-
tioning the substance of the Father or the Son,


' Soc. ii. 7.

- Soc. ii. 8-10. Soz. with independent matter borrows from the
same sources as Soc, one of which is Athan. de Synodis, 22-25.
•• Also called Flaccillus. Soc. ii. 8.
* Cf. Soc. ii. 10. '• Athan. de Synodis, 22.


or the term consubstantial. They resorted, in
fact, to such ambiguity of expression, that neither
the Arians nor the followers of the decrees of
the Nicaean Council could call the arrangement
of their words into question, as though they
were ignorant of the holy Scriptures. They pur-
posely avoided all forms of expression which
were rejected by either party, and only made
use of those which were universally admitted.
They confessed ^ that the Son is with the Father,
that He is the only begotten One, and that He is
God, and existed before all things ; and that He
took flesh upon Him, and fulfilled the will of His
Father. They confessed these and similar truths,
but they did not describe the doctrine of the
Son being co-eternal or consubstantial with the
Father, or the opposite. They subsequently
changed their minds, it appears, about this for-
mulary, and issued another,' which, I think, very
nearly resembled that of the council of Nice,
unless, indeed, some secret meaning be attached
to the words which is not apparent to me. Al-
though they refrained — I know not from what
motive — from saying that the Son is consub-
stantial, they confessed that He is immutable,
that His Divinity is not susceptible of change,
that He is the perfect image of the substance,
and counsel, and power, and glory of the Father,
and that He is the first-born of every creature.
They stated that they had found this formulary
of faith, and that it was entirely written by
Lucianus,^ who was martyred in Nicomedia, and
who was a man highly approved and exceedingly
accurate in the sacred Scriptures. I know not
whether this statement was really true, or whether
they merely advanced it in order to give weight
to their own document, by connecting with it
the dignity of a martyr. Not only did Eusebius
(who, on the expulsion of Paul, had been
transferred from Nicomedia to the throne of
Constantinople) participate in this council, but
likewise Acacius, the successor of Eusebius
Pamphilus, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,
Theodore, bishop of Heraclea, formerly called
Perinthus, Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia, who
subsequently directed the Church of Constanti-
nople after Macedonius, and Gregory, who had
been chosen to preside over the Church of Alex-
andria. It was universally acknowledged that
all these bishops held the same sentiments, such
as Dianius,^ bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
George, bishop of Laodicea in Syria, and many
others who acted as bishops over metropolitan
and other distinguished churches.


* This creed is Riven in Athan. de Synodis, 23. Cf. Soc. ii. 10;
here only in a suggestion and criticism.

' Theophronius' statement is passed over, and the final creed is
here given in summary. Athan. de Synodis, 24, 25.

' This person was a presbyter of Antioch. Cf. vi. 12; Philost.
ii. 12-14; Eus. H. E. ix. 6.

B He is also called Dianoeus.


286


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 6.


CHAP. VI. — EUSEBIUS SURXAMED EMESE>rUS ;
GREGORY ACCEPTED ALEXANDRU ; ATHANASIUS
SEEKS REFUGE IN ROME.

EusEBius, surnamed Emesenus, likewise at-
tended the council.' He sprang from a noble
family of Edessa, a city of Osroense. According
to the custom of his country, he had from his
youth upwards, learned the Holy Word, and was
afterwards made acquainted with the learning of
the Greeks, by the teachers who then frequented
his native city. He subsequently acquired a
more intimate knowledge of sacred literature,
under the guidance of Eusebius Pamphilus and
Patrophilus, the president of Scythopolis. He
went to Antioch at the time that Eustathius was
deposed on the accusation of Cyrus, and lived
with Euphronius, his successor, on terms of
intimacy. He fled to escape being invested
with the priestly dignity, went to Alexandria,
and frequented the schools of the philosophers.
After acquainting himself with their mode of
discipline, he returned to Antioch and dwelt
with Placetus, the successor of Euphronius.
During the time that the council was held in
that city, Eusebius, bishop of Constantinople,
entreated him to accept the see of Alexandria ;
for it was thought that, by his great reputation for
sanctity and consummate eloquence, he would
easily supplant Athanasius in the esteem of
the Egyptians. He, however, refused the ordi-
nation, on the plea that he could otherwise only
incur the ready hatred of the Alexandrians, who
would have no other bishop but Athanasius.
Gregory was, therefore, appointed to the church
of Alexandria, and Eusebius to that of Emesa.

There he suffered from a sedition ; for the
people accused him of practicing that variety of
astronomy which is called astrological, and being
obliged to seek safety by flight, he repaired to
Laodicea, and dwelt with George, bishop of that
city, who was his particular friend. He after-
wards accompanied this bishop to Antioch, and
obtained permission from the bishops Placetus
and Narcissus to return to Emesa. He was
much esteemed by the emperor Constantius,
and attended him in his military expedition
against the Persians. It is said that God
wrought miracles through his instrumentality,
as is testified by George of Laodicea,^ who has
related these and other incidents about him.

But although he was endowed with so many
exalted qualities, he could not escape the jeal-
ousy of those who are irritated by witnessing the
virtues of others. He endured the censure of
having embraced the doctrines of Sabellius. At
the present time, however, he voted with the
bishops who had been convened at Antioch. It

• From his life by George, bishop of Laodicea. Cf. See. ii. g.
' Soc. also quotes him (ii. 9), and says he wrote an Encomium
of Eusebius Emesenus, ii. 24


is said that Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem, pur-
posely, kept aloof from this council, because he
repented having unawares consented to the dep-
osition of Athanasius.^ The manager of the
Roman see, nor any representative from the east
of Italy, nor from the parts beyond Rome were
present at Antioch.* At the same period of
time, the Franks devastated Western Gaul ; and
the provinces of the East, and more particularly
Antioch after the Synod, were visited by tremen-
dous earthquakes.^ After the Synod, Gregory
repaired to Alexandria with a large body of
soldiers, who were enjoined to provide an undis-
turbed and safe entrance into the city : the
Arians also, who were anxious for the expulsion
of Athanasius, sided with him. Athanasius, fear-
ful lest the people, should be exposed to suffer-
ings on his account,*' assembled them by night
in the church, and when the soldiers came to
take possession of the church, prayers having
been concluded, he first ordered a psalm to be
sung. During the chanting of this psalm the
soldiers remained without and quietly awaited
its conclusion, and in the meantime Athanasius
passed under the singers and secretly made his
escape, and fled to Rome. In this manner
Gregory possessed himself of the see of Alex-
andria. The indignation of the people was
aroused, and they burnt the church which bore
the name of Dionysius, one of their former
bishops.

CHAP. VII. HIGH PRIESTS OF ROME AND OF CON-
STANTINOPLE ; RESTORATION OF PAUL AFTER
EUSEBIUS ; THE SLAUGHTER OF HERMOGENES,
A GENERAL OF THE ARMY ; CONSTANTIUS CAME
FROM ANTIOCH AND REMOVED PAUL, AND WAS
WRATHFULLY DISPOSED TOWARD THE CITY ; HE
ALLOWED MACEDONIUS TO BE IN DOUBT, AND RE-
TURNED TO ANTIOCH.

Thus were the schemes of those who upheld
various heresies in opposition to truth success-
fully carried into execution ; and thus did they
depose those bishops who strenuously maintained
throughout the East the supremacy of the doc-
trines of the Nicaean Council. These heretics
had taken possession of the most important
sees, such as Alexandria in Egypt, Antioch in
Syria, and the imperial city of the Hellespont,
and they held all the persuaded bishops in sub-
jection. The ruler of the Church at Rome and
all the priests of the W'est regarded these deeds
as a personal insult ; for they had accorded
from the beginning with all the decisions in the
vote made by those convened at Nice, nor did
they now cease from that way of thinking. On
the arrival of Athanasius, they received him


' Soc. ii. 8. * Soc. ii. 8. ^ Soc. ii. 10.

" Athan. Ef. Encyc. 2-7; Apol. cont. Arian. 30; Hist. Arian.

10-14, 57, 74; Soc. ii. n.


III. 8.]


THE FXCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


287


kindly, and espoused his cause amon^^ them-
selves. Irritated at this interference, Kusebius
wrote to Julius, exhorting him to constitute him-
self a judge of the decrees that had been
enacted against Athanasius by the council of
Tyre.' But before he had been able to ascertain
the sentiments of Julius, and, indeed, not long
after the council of Antioch, Eusebius died.
Immediately upon this event, those citizens of
Constantinople who maintained the doctrines of
the Nicsean Council, conducted Paul to the
church. At the same time those of the oppos-
ing multitude seized this occasion and came
together in another church, among whom were
the adherents of Theognis, bishop of Nicaea, of
Theodore, bishop of Heraclea, and others of the
same party who chanced to be present, and they
ordained Macedonius bishop of Constantinople.
This excited frequent seditions in the city which
assumed all the appearance of a war, for the peo-
ple fell upon one another, and many perished.
The city was filled with tumult, so that the em-
peror, who was then at Antioch, on hearing of
what had occurred, was moved to wrath, and issued
a decree for the expulsion of Paul. Hermogenes,
general of the cavalry, endeavored to put this
edict of the emperor's into execution ; for having
been sent to Thrace, he had, on the journey, to
pass by Constantinople, and he thought, by
means of his army, to eject Paul from the church
by force. But the people, instead of yielding,
met him with open resistance, and while the
soldiers, in order to carry out the orders they
had received, attempted still greater violence,
the insurgents entered the house of Hermo-
genes, set fire to it, killed him, and attaching a
cord to his body, dragged it through the city."
The emperor had no sooner received this in-
telligence than he took horse for Constantino-
ple, in order to punish the people. But he
spared them when he saw them coming to meet
him with tears and supplications. He deprived
the city of about half of the corn which his
father, Constantine, had granted them annually
out of the public treasury from the tributes of
Egypt, probably from the idea that luxury and
excess made the populace idle and disposed to
sedition. He turned his anger against Paul and
commanded his expulsion from the city. He
manifested great displeasure against Macedo-
nius also, because he was the occasion of the
murder of the general and of other individuals ;
and also, because he had been ordained with-
out first obtaining his sanction. He, however,
returned to Antioch, without having either con-
firmed or dissolved his ordination. Meanwhile
the zealots of the Arian tenets deposed Gregory,
because he was indifferent in the support of

* Soc. ii. 11-14; Athan. Apol, cont. Arian. 22.
' Cf. Am. Marcel, xiv. 10. 2.


their doctrines, and had moreover incurred the
ill-will of the Alexandrians on account of the
calamities which had befallen the city at his
entrance, especially the conflagration of the
church. They elected George, a native of
Cappadocia, in his stead ;'' this new bishop was
admired on account of his activity and his zeal
in support of the Arian dogma.


CHAP. VIII. — ARRIVAL OF THE EASTERN HIGH
PRIESTS AT ROME ; LEITER OF JULIUS, BISHOP
OF ROME, CONCERNING THEM ; BY MEANS OF
THE LETTERS OF JULIUS, PAUL AND ATHANASIUS
RECEIVE THEIR OWN SEES ; CONTENTS OF THE
LETIER FROM THE ARCHPRIESTS OF THE EAST TO
JULIUS.

Athanasius, on leaving Alexandria, had fled to
Rome.* Paul, bishop of Constantinople, Marcel-
lus, bishop of Ancyra, and Asclepas, bishop of
Gaza, repaired thither at the same time. Asclepas,
who was opposed to the Arians and had there-
fore been deposed, after having been accused
by some of the heterodox of having thrown
down an altar ; Quintianus had been appointed
in his stead over the Church of Gaza. Lucius also,
bishop of Adrianople, who had been deposed
from the church under his care on another
charge, was dwelling at this period in Rome. The
Roman bishop, on learning the accusation against
each individual, and on finding that they held
the same sentiments about the Nicaean dogmas,
admitted them to communion as of like ortho-
doxy \ and as the care for all was fitting to the
dignity of his see, he restored them all to their
own churches. He wrote to the bishops of the
East, and rebuked them for having judged these
bishops unjustly, and for harassing the Churches
by abandoning the Nicaean doctrines. He sum-
moned a few among them to appear before him
on an appointed day, in order to account to him
for the sentence they had passed, and threatened
to bear with them no longer, unless they would
cease to make innovations. This was the tenor
of his letters. Athanasius and Paul were rein-
stated in their respective sees, and forwarded
the letter of Julius to the bishops of the F:la§t.
The bishops could scarcely brook such docu-
ments, and they assembled together at Antioch,'
and framed a reply to Julius, beautifully ex-
pressed and composed with great legal skill, yet
filled with considerable irony and indulging in
the strongest threats. They confessed in this
epistle, that the Church of Rome wa^ entitled
to universal honor, because it was the school of
the apostles, and had become the metropolis of


3 Soc. ij. 14. Cf. Philost. iii. 3.
* Apol. cont. Arian. 20-35; Soc. ii. 15.
than Soc.

■■> From Sabinus? Cf. Soc. ii. 15.


Soz. is more extended


288


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 8.


piety from the outset, although the introducers
of the doctrine had settled there from the East.
They added that the second place in point of
honor ought not to be assigned to them, because
they did not have the advantage of size or num-
ber in their churches ; for they excelled the
Romans in virtue and determination. They
called Julius to account for having admitted the
followers of Athanasius into communion, and
expressed their indignation against him for hav-
ing insulted their Synod and abrogated their
decrees, and they assailed his transactions as
unjust and discordant with ecclesiastical right.
After these censures and protestations against
such grievances, they proceeded to state, that if
Julius would acknowledge the deposition of the
bishops whom they had expelled, and the sub-
stitution of those whom they had ordained in
their steady they would promise peace and fel-
lowship ; but that, unless he would accede to
these terms, they would openly declare their
opposition. They added that the priests who
had preceded them in the government of the
Eastern churches had offered no opposition to
the deposition of Novatian, by the Church of
Rome. They made no allusion in their letter
to any deviations they had manifested from the
doctrines of the council of Nice, but merely
stated they had various reasons to allege in justi-
fication of the course they had pursued, and that
they considered it unnecessary to enter at that
time upon any defense of their conduct, as they
were suspected of having violated justice in
■every respect.


CHAP. IX. — EJECTION OF PAUL AND ATHANASIUS ;
MACEDOXIUS IS INVESTED WITH THE GOVERN-
MENT OF THE CHURCH OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

After having written in this strain to Julius,
the bishops of the East brought accusations
against those whom they had deposed before
the emperor Constantius.' Accordingly, the em-
peror, who was then at Antioch, wrote to Philip,
the prefect of Constantinople, commanding him
to surrender the Church to Macedonius, and to
expel Paul from the city. The prefect feared
the commotion among the people, and before
the order of the emperor could be divulged, he
repaired to the public bath which is called
Zeuxippus, a conspicuous and large structure,
and summoned Paul, as if he wished to converse
with him on some affairs of general interest ; as
soon as he had arrived, he showed him the edict
of the emperor. Paul was, according to orders,
secretly conducted through the palace contigu-
ous to the bath, to the seaside, and placed on


' Soc. ii. 16, 17; Athan. Hist. Arian. 7; and Apol. de fuea
sua, 3, 6-8. Cf. Theodoret, H. £. ii. 5.


board a vessel and was sent to Thessalonica,
whence, it is said, his ancestors originally came.
He was strictly prohibited from approaching the
Eastern regions, but was not forbidden to visit
Illyria and the remoter provinces.

On quitting the court room, Philip, accompa-
nied by Macedonius, proceeded to the church.
The people, who had in the meantime been as-
sembling together in untold numbers, quickly
filled the church, and the two parties into which
they were divided, namely, the supporters of the
Arian heresy and the followers of Paul respec-
tively, strove to take possession of the building.
When the prefect and Macedonius arrived at the
gates of the church, the soldiers endeavored to
force back the people, in order to make way for
these dignitaries, but as they were so crowded
together, it was impossible for them to recede,
since they were closely packed to the farthest
point, or to make way ; the soldiers, under the im-
pression that the crowd was unwilling to retire,
slew many with their swords, and a great number
were killed by being trampled upon. The edict
of the emperor was thus accomplished, and
Macedonius received the Churches, while Paul
was unexpectedly ejected from the Church in
Constantinople.

Athanasius in the meantime had fled, and con-
cealed himself, fearing the menace of the em-
peror Constantius, for he had threatened to punish
him with death ; for the heterodox had made the
emperor believe that he was a seditious person,
and that he had, on his return to the bishopric,
occasioned the death of several persons. But
the anger of the emperor had been chiefly ex-
cited by the representation that Athanasius had
sold the provisions which the emperor Constan-
tine had bestowed on the poor of Alexandria,
and had appropriated the price.


CHAP. X. THE BISHOP OF ROME WRITES TO THE

BISHOPS OF THE EAST IN F.WOR OF ATHANASIUS,
AND THEY SEND AN EMBASSY TO ROME WHO, WITH
THE BISHOP OF ROME, ARE TO INVESTIGATE THE
CHARGES AGAINST THE EASTERN BISHOPS ; THIS
DEPUTATION IS DISMISSED BY CONSTANS, THE
OESAR.

The bishops of Egypt,^ having sent a declara-
tion in writing that these allegations were false,
and Julius having been apprised that Athanasius
was far from being in safety in Egypt, sent for
him to his own city. He replied at the same
time to the letter of the bishops who were con-
vened at Antioch, for just then he happened to
have received their epistle,^ and accused them
of having clandestinely introduced innovations

' Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 3-ig.

^ Id. 20-35, 36: Soc. ii. 17, 18. Soz. gives more points. Soc.
accuses S.ibinus of omitting the Julian letters.


III. II.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


289


contrary to the dogmas of the Nicene council,
and of having violated the laws of the Church,
by neglecting to invite him to join their Synod ;
for he alleged that there is a sacerdotal canon
which declares that whatever is enacted contrary
to the judgment of the bishop of Rome is null.
He also reproached them for having deviated
from justice in all their proceedings against
Athanasius, both at Tyre and Mareotis, and
stated that the decrees enacted at the former
city had been annulled, on account of the cal-
umny concerning the hand of Arsenius, and at
the latter city, on account of the absence of
Athanasius. Last of all he reprehended the
arrogant style of their epistle.

Julius was induced by all these reasons to
undertake the defense of Athanasius and of Paul :
the latter had arrived in Italy not long previ-
ously, and had lamented bitterly these calamities.
When Julius perceived that what he had written
to those who held the sacerdotal dignity in the
East was of no avail, he made the matter known
to Constans the emperor. Accordingly, Con-
stans wrote to his brother Constantius, request-
ing him to send some of the bishops of the
East, that they might assign a reason for the
edicts of deposition which they had passed.
Three bishops were selected for this purpose ;
namely. Narcissus, bishop of Irenopolis, in CiU-
cia ; Theodore, bishop of Heraclea, in Thrace ;
and Mark, bishop of Arethusa, in Syria. On
their arrival in Italy, they strove to justify their
actions and to persuade the emperor that the
sentence passed by the Eastern Synod was just.
Being required to produce a statement of their
belief, they concealed the formulary they had
drawn up at Antioch, and presented another
written confession ^ which was equally at vari-
ance with the doctrines approved at Nicaea.
Constans perceived that they had unjustly en-
trapped both Paul and Athanasius, and had
ejected them from communion, not for charges
against his conduct, as the depositions held, but
simply on account of differences in doctrine ; and
he accordingly dismissed the deputation without
giving any credit to the representations for which
they had come.


CHAP. XI. THE LONG FORMULARY AND THE EN-
ACTMENTS ISSUED BY THE SYNOD OF SARDICA.
JULIUS, BISHOP OF ROME, AND HOSIUS, THE
SPANISH BISHOP, DEPOSED BY THE BISHOPS OF
THE EAST, BECAUSE THEY HELD COMMUNION
WITH ATHANASIUS AND THE REST.

Three years afterwards, the bishops of the
East^ sent to those of the West a formulary of

1 Athan. de Syttodis, 25, and given in full by Soc. ii. 18.

2 Athan. de Synodis, 26, in ten heads, and given by Soc. ii. 19,
and with like introduction.


faith, which, because it had been framed with
verbiage and thoughts in excess of any former
confession, was called fw.KpoaTi^o'i lKd(.<n<i^ In
this formulary they made no mention of the
substance of God, but those are excommuni-
cated who maintain that the Son arose out of
what had no previous existence, or that He is of
another hypostasis, and not of God, or that there
was a time or an age in which He existed not.
Eudoxius, who was still bishop of Germanicia,
Martyrius, and Macedonius, carried this docu-
ment, but the Western priests did not entertain
it ; for they declared that they felt fully satisfied
with the doctrines established at Nicaea, and
thought it entirely unnecessary to be too curious
about such points.

After the Emperor Constans^ had requested
his brother to reinstate the followers of Athana-
sius in their sees, and had found his application
to be unavailing, on account of the counteract-
ing influence of those who adopted a hostile
heresy ; and when, moreover, the party of Atha-
nasius and Paul entreated Constans to assemble
a Synod on account of the plots for the aboli-
tion of orthodox doctrines, both the emperors
were of the opinion that the bishops of the
East and of the West should be convened on a
certain day at Sardica, a city of Illyria. The
bishops of the East, who had previously assem-
bled at Philippopolis, a city of Thrace, wrote to
the bishops of the West, who had already as-
sembled at Sardica, that they would not join
them, unless they would eject the followers of
Athanasius from their assembly, and from com-
munion with them, because they had been de-
posed. They afterwards went to Sardica, but
declared they would not enter the church, while
those who had been deposed by them were
admitted thither. The bishops of the West
replied, that they never had ejected them, and
that they would not yield this now, particularly
as Julius, bishop of Rome, after having investi-
gated the case, had not condemned them, and
that besides, they were present and ready to jus-
tify themselves and to refute again the offenses
imputed to them. These declarations, however,
were of no avail ; and since the time they had
appointed for the adjustment of their differences,
concerning which they had convened, had ex-
pired, they finally wTote letters to one another
on these points, and by these they were led to
an increase of their previous ill-will. And after
they had convened separately, they brought for-
ward opposite decisions ; for the Eastern bishops
confirmed the sentences they had already en-
acted against Athanasius, Paul, Marcellus, and
Asclepas, and deposed Julius, bishop of Rome,

' For the whole section, Soc. ii. 19, 20; Athan. de Synodis, 26.
Cf. Hil. Frag. ii. and iii.; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 36.
^ Soc. ii. 20, but Soz. has other details.


290


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. II.


because he had been the first to admit those
who had been condemned by them, into com-
munion ; and Hosius, the confessor, was also
deposed, partly for the same reason, and partly
because he was the friend of Paulinus and Eu-
stathius, the rulers of the church in Antioch.
Maximus, bishop of Treves, was deposed, be-
cause he had been among the first who had re-
ceived Paul into communion, and had been the
cause of his returning to Constantinople, and
because he had excluded from communion the
Eastern bishops who had repaired to Gaul.
Besides the above, they likewise deposed Proto-
genes, bishop of Sardica, and Gaudentius ; ^ the
one because he favored Marcellus, although he
had previously condemned him, and the other
because he had adopted a different line of con-
duct from that of Cyriacus, his predecessor, and
had supported many individuals then deposed by
them. After issuing these sentences, they made
known to the bishops of every region, that they
were not to hold communion with those who
were deposed, and that they were not to write
to them, nor to receive letters from them. They
likewise commanded them to believe what was
said concerning God in the formulary which
they subjoined to their letter, and in which no
mention was made of the term " consubstan-
tial," but in which, those were excommunicated
who said there are three Gods, or that Christ is
not God, or that the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost are the same, or that the Son is un-
begotten, or that there was a time or an age in
which He existed not.^


CHAP. XII. — THE BISHOPS OF THE PARTY OF
JULIUS AND HOSIUS HELD ANOTHER SESSION AND
DEPOSED THE E.ASTERN HIGH PRIESTS, AND ALSO
MADE A FORMULARY OF FAITH.

The adherents of Hosius,^ in the meantime,
assembled together, and declared them innocent :
Athanasius, because unjust machinations had
been carried on against him by those who had
convened at Tyre ; and Marcellus, because he
did not hold the opinions with which he was
charged ; and Asclepas, because he had been
re-established in his diocese by the vote of Euse-
bius Pamphilus and of many other judges ; that
this was true he proved by the records of the
trial ; and lastly, Lucius, because his accusers
had fled. They wrote to the parishes of each of
the acquitted, commanding them to receive and
recognize their bishops. They stated that Greg-
ory had not been nominated by them bishop of

• He was bishop of Nalssus in Moesia Superior.

' This section concerning the Synod of the Eastern bishops is
probably from Sabinus. Cf. Hil. Frag. iii.

■> Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 36-50: Hil. Frag. ii. and iii.:
See. ii. 20, 22. Cf Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 36. S02. used the same
source as Soc., but independently.


Alexandria ; nor Basil, bishop of Ancyra ; nor
Quintianus, bishop of Gaza ; and that they had
not received these men into communion, and
did not even account them Christians. They
deposed from the episcopates, Theodore, bishop
of Thrace ; Narcissus, bishop of Irenopolis ;
Acacius, bishop of Caesarea, in Palestine; Meno-
phantus, bishop of Ephesus ; Ursacius, bishop of
Sigidiinus in Moesia ; Valens, bishop of Mursia
in Pannonia ;_ and George, bishop of Laodicea,
although this latter had not attended the Synod
with the Eastern bishops. They ejected the
above-named individuals from the priesthood
and from communion, because they separated
the Son from the substance of the Father, and
had received those who had been formerly de-
posed on account of their holding the Arian
heresy, and had, moreover, promoted them to
the highest offices in the service of God. After
they had excided them for these perversions and
decreed them to be aliens to the Catholic Church,
they afterwards wrote to the bishops of every
nation,'' commanding them to confirm these de-
crees, and to be of one mind on doctrinal sub-
jects with themselves. They likewise compiled
another document of faith, which was more
copious than that of Nicaea, although the same
thought was carefully preserved, and very little
change was made in the words of that instru-
ment. Hosius and Protogenes, who held the
first rank among the Western bishops assembled
at Sardica, fearing perhaps lest they should be
suspected of making any innovations upon the
doctrines of the Nicene council, wrote to
Julius,'' and testified that they were firmly at-
tached to these doctrines, but, pressed by the
need of perspicuity, they had to expand the
identical thought, in order that the Arians might
not take advantage of the brevity of the docu-
ment, to draw those who were unskilled in dia-
lectics into some absurdity. When what I have
related had been transacted by each party, the
conference was dissolved, and the members re-
turned to their respective homes. This Synod
was held during the consulate of Rufinus and
Eusebius, and about eleven years after the death
of Constantine.'' There were about three hun-
dred" bishops of cities in the West, and upwards
of seventy-six Eastern bishops, among whom
was Ischyrion, who had been appointed bishop
of Mareotis by the enemies of Athanasius.


CHAP. XIII. AFTER THE S\T>JOD, THE EAST AND

THE WEST ARE SEPARATED ; THE WEST NOBLY

< This letter is in Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 44-49; and cf.
Theod. H. E. ii. 8: Hil. Frag. ii.

* This epistle is nowhere extant. Giildenpenning .<:uegests Sabi-
nus as the source, but hardly from the statement whicli Socrates
makes as to Sabinian partiality.

' A.D. 347-8. But A.D. 344 is probably the true date.

' So Soc. ; but Theodoret says 250, ii. 7.


III. 14.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


291


ADHERES TO THE FAITH OF THE NICENE COUN-
CIL, WHILE THE EAST IS DISTURBED BY CON-
TENTION HERE AND THERE OVER THIS DOGMA.

After this Synod, the Eastern and the West-
ern churches ceased to maintain the intercourse
which usually exists among people of the same
faith, and refrained from holding communion
with each other.' The Christians of the West
separated themselves from all as far as Thrace ;
those of the East as far as Illyria. This divided
state of the churches was mixed, as might be
supposed, with dissentient views and calumnies.
Although they had previously differed on doc-
trinal subjects, yet the evil had attained no great
height, for they had still held communion to-
gether and were wont to have kindred feelings.
The Church throughout the whole of the West
in its entirety regulated itself by the doctrines
of the Fathers, and kept aloof from all con-
tentions and hair-splitting about dogma. Al-
though Auxentius, who had become bishop of
Milan, and Valens and Ursacius, bishops of
Pannonia, had endeavored to lead that part
of the empire into the Arian doctrines, their
efforts had been carefully anticipated by the
president of the Roman see and the other
priests, who cut out the seeds of such a trouble-
some heresy. As to the Eastern Church, al-
though it had been racked by dissension since
the time of the council of Antioch, and although
it had already openly differed from the Nicaean
form of behef, yet I think it is true that the
opinion of the majority united in the same
thought, and confessed the Son to be of the sub-
stance of the Father. There were some, how-
ever, who were fond of wrangling and battled
against the term " consubstantial " ; for those who
had been opposed to the word at the beginning,
thought, as I infer, and as happens to most peo-
ple, that it would be a disgrace to appear as
conquered. Others were finally convinced of the
truth of the doctrines concerning God, by the
habit of frequent disputation on these themes,
and ever afterwards continued firmly attached to
them. Others again, being aware that conten-
tions ought not to arise, inchned toward that
which was gratifying to each of the sides, on
account of the influence, either of friendship or
they were swayed by the various causes which
often induce men to embrace what they ought
to reject, and to act without boldness, in cir-
cumstances which require thorough conviction.
Many others, accounting it absurd to consume
their time in altercations about words, quietly
adopted the sentiments inculcated by the coun-
cil of Nic3ea. Paul, bishop of Constantinople,
Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, the entire

1 Soc. ii. 22. The rest of the chapter is marked by an inde-
pendent survey of the division.


multitude of monks, Antony the Great, who stilF
survived, his disciples, and a great number of
Egyptians and of other places in the Roman
territory, firmly and openly maintained the doc-
trines of the Nicaean council throughout the
other regions of the East. As I have been led to
allude to the monks, I shall briefly mention those
who flourished during the reign of Constantius.


CHAP. XIV. — OF the holy MEN WHO FLOUR-
I.SHED ABOUT THIS TIME IN EGYPT, NAMELY,
ANTONY, THE TWO MACARIUSES, HERACLIUS,
CRONIUS, PAPHNUTIUS, PUTUBASTUS, ARSISIUS,
SERAPION, PITURION, PACHOMIUS, APOLLONIUS,
ANUPH, HILARION, AND A REGISTER OF MANY
OTHER SAINTS.

I SHALL commence my recital^ with Egypt
and the two men named Macarius, who were the
celebrated chiefs of Scetis and of the neighbor-
ing mountain ; the one was a native of Egypt,
the other was called Politicus, because he was a
citizen and was of Alexandrian origin. They
were both so wonderfully endowed with Divine
knowledge and philosophy, that the demons re-
garded them with terror, and they wrought many
extraordinary works and miraculous cures. The
Egyptian, the story says, restored a dead man to
life, in order to convince a heretic of the truth
of the resurrection from the dead. He lived
about ninety years, sixty of which he passed in
the deserts. When in his youth he commenced
the study of philosophy, he progressed so rapidly,
that the monks surnamed him " old child,''' and
at the age of forty he was ordained presbyter.
The other Macarius became a presbyter at a later
period of his life ; he was proficient in all the
exercises of asceticism, some of which he devised
himself, and what particulars he heard among
other ascetics, he carried through to success in
every form, so that by thoroughly drying up his
skin, the hairs of his beard ceased to grow.
Pambo, Heraclides, Cronius, Paphnutius, Putu-
bastus, Arsisius, Serapion the Great, Piturion, who
dwelt near Thebes, and Pachomius, the founder
of the monks called the Tabennesians, flourished
at the same place and period. The attire and
government of this sect differed in some respects
from those of other monks. Its members were,
however, devoted to virtue, they contemned the
things of earth, excited the soul to heavenly con-
templation, and prepared it to quit the body
with joy. They were clothed in skins in remem-
brance of Elias, it appears to me, because they

- This chapter is made up from a great variety of sources, as
well as personal observation. Prominent among these are Ruf.
H. M. and //. E.; Pall. H. L.; Syrian biographies; Ephraim
Syrus, I'ita Juliani; Athan. \'ita Antonii: Timotheus' collec-
tion of monastic biography, mentioned in Soz. vi. 29; Hieron. de
vir. illust.; Evagrius Ponticus, Gnosticus; Philippus of Side,
Hisioria Christiana; Sulp. Sev. dc Vita Martini.


292


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 14.


thought that the virtue of the prophet would be
thus always retained in their memory, and that
they would be enabled, like him to resist manfully
the seductions of amorous pleasures, to be in-
fluenced by similar zeal, and be incited to the
practice of sobriety by the hope of an equal re-
ward. It is said that the peculiar vestments of these
Egyptian monks had reference to some secret
connected with their philosophy, and did not
diffef from those of others without some adequate
cause. They wore their tunics without sleeves,
in order to teach that the hands ought not to be
ready to do presumptuous evil. They wore a
covering on their heads called a cowl, to show
that they ought to live with the same innocence
and purity as infants who are nourished with
milk, and wear a covering of the same form.
Their girdle, and a species of scarf, which they
wear across the loins, shoulders, and arms, ad-
monish them that they ought to be always ready
in the service and work of God. I am aware
that other reasons have been assigned for their
peculiarity of attire, but what I have said appears
to me to be sufficient. It is said that Pachomius
at first practiced philosophy alone in a cave, but
that a holy angel appeared to him, and com-
manded him to call together some young monks,
and live with them, for he had succeeded well in
pursuing philosophy by himself, and to train them
by the laws which were about to be delivered to
him, and now he was to possess and benefit many
as a leader of communities. A tablet was then
given to him, which is still carefully preserved.
Upon this tablet were inscribed injunctions by
which he was bound to permit every one to eat, to
drink, to work, and to fast, according to his capa-
bilities of so doing ; those who ate heartily were
to be subjected to arduous labor, and the ascetic
were to have more easy tasks assigned them ; he
was commanded to have many cells erected, in
each of wliich three monks were to dwell, who
were to take their meals at a common refectory
in silence, and to sit around the table with a veil
thrown over the face, so that they might not be
able to see each other or anything but the table
and what was set before them ; they were not to
admit strangers to eat with them, with the excep-
tion of travelers, to whom they were to show
hospitality ; those who desired to live with them,
were first to undergo a probation of three years,
during which time the most laborious tasks were
to be done, and, by this method they could share
in their community. They were to clothe them-
selves in skins, and to wear woolen tiaras adorned
with purple nails, and linen tunics and girdles.
They were to sleep in their tunics and garments of
skin, reclining on long chairs specially constructed
by being closed on each side, so that it could hold
the material of each couch. On the first and last
days of the week they were to approach the altar for


the communion in the holy mysteries, and were
then to unloose their girdles and throw off their
robes of skin. They were to pray twelve times
every day and as often during the evening, and
were to offer up the same number of prayers
during the night. At the ninth hour they were
to pray thrice, and when about to partake of food
they were to sing a psalm before each prayer.
The whole community was to be divided into
twenty-four classes, each of which was to be distin-
guished by one of the letters of the Greek alpha-
bet, and so that each might have a cognomen
fitting to the grade of its conduct and habit.
Thus the name of Iota was given to the more
simple, and that of Zeta or of Xi to the crooked,
and the names of the other letters were chosen
according as the purpose of the order most
fittingly answered the form of the letter.

These were the laws^ by which Pachomius
ruled his own disciples. He was a man who
loved men and was beloved of God, so that he
could foreknow future events, and was frequently
admitted to intercourse with the holy angels.
He resided at Tabenna, in Thebais, and hence
the name Tabennesians, which still continues. By
adopting these rules for their government, they
became very renowned, and in process of time
increased so vastly, that they reached to the num-
ber of seven thousand men. But the community on
the island of Tabenna with which Pachomius lived,
consisted of about thirteen hundred ; the others
resided in the Thebais and the rest of Egypt.
They all observed one and the same rule of life,
and possessed everything in common. They
regarded the community established in the island
of Tabenna as their mother, and the rulers of it
as their fathers and their princes.

About the same period, Apollonius became
celebrated by his profession of monastic philos-
ophy. It is said that from the age of fifteen he
devoted himself to philosophy in the deserts,
and that when he attained the age of forty, he
went according to a Divine command he then
received, to dwell in regions inhabited by men.
He had likewise a community in the 1 hebais.
He was greatly beloved of God, and was en-
dowed with the power of performing miraculous
cures and notable works. He was exact in the
observance of duty, and instructed others in
philosophy with great goodness and kindness.
He was acceptable to such a degree in his pray-
ers, that nothing of what he asked from God
was denied him, but he was so wise that he al-
ways proffered prudent recjuests and such as the
Divine Being is ever ready to grant.

I believe that .Anuph the divine, lived about
this period. I have been informed that from
the time of the persecution, when he first

' See the Collection of Regulae and Precepts, as translated by
Hieron. ii. p. 66 sqq.


III. I4-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


293


avowed his attachment to Christianity, he never
uttered a falsehood, nor desired the things of
earth. All his prayers and supplications to (iod
were duly answered, and he was instructed by a
holy angel in every virtue. Let, however, what
we have said of the Egyptian monks suffice.

The same species of philosophy was about this
time cultivated in Palestine, after being learned
in Kgypt, and Hilarion the divine then acquired
great celebrity. He was a native of Thabatha,^
a village situated near the town of Gaza, towards
the south, and hard by a torrent which falls into
the sea, and received the same name as the village,
from the people of that country. When he was
studying grammar at Alexandria, he went out into
the desert to see the monk Antony the Cireat,
and in his company he learned to adopt a like
philosophy. After spending a short time there,
he returned to his own country, because he was
not allowed to be as quiet as he wished, on ac-
count of the multitudes who flocked around
Antony. On finding his parents dead, he dis-
tributed his patrimony among his brethren and
the poor, and without reserving anything what-
ever for himself, he went to dwell in a desert
situated near the sea, and about twenty stadia
from his native village. His cell residence was a
very little house, and was constructed of bricks,
chips and broken tiles, and was of such a breadth,
height, and length that no one could stand in it
without bending the head, or lie down in it with-
out drawing up the feet ; for in everything he
strove to accustom himself to hardship and to
the subjugation of luxurious ease. To none of
those we have known did he yield in the high
reach of his unboastful and approved temper-
ance. He contended against hunger and thirst,
cold and heat, and other afflictions of the body
and of the soul. He was earnest in conduct,
grave in discourse, and with a good memory
and accurate attainment in Sacred Writ. He
was so beloved by God, that even now many
afflicted and possessed people are healed at his
tomb. It is remarkable that he was first in-
terred in the island of Cyprus, but that his re-
mains are now deposited in Palestine ; for it so
happened, that he died during his residence in
Cyprus, and was buried by the inhabitants with
great honor and respect. But Hesychas, one of
the most renowned of his disciples, stole the
body, conveyed it to Palestine, and interred it
in his own monastery. From that period, the
inhabitants conducted a public and brilliant fes-
tival yearly ; for it is the custom in Palestine to
bestow this honor on those among them, who
have attained renown by their goodness, such
as Aurelius, Anthedonius, Alexion, a native of

> According to Hieronymus, I'itn Hilaronis, 2, Hilarion was
born in the village of Thabatha, which is about five n^les from
Gaza; Thebasa, according to Niceph. i.\. 15.


Rethagathon, and Alaphion, a native of Asalea,
who, during the reign of Constantius, lived
religiously and courageously in the practice of
philosophy, and by their personal virtues they
caused a considerable increase to the faith
among the cities and villages that were still
under the pagan superstition.

About the same period, Julian practiced
philosophy near Edessa ; he attempted a very
severe and incorporeal method of life so that he
seemed to consist of bones and skin without
flesh. The setting forth of the history is due to
Ephraim, the Syrian writer, who wrote the story
of Julian's life. God himself confirmarl the
high opinion which men had formed of him ;
for He bestowed on him the power of expelling
demons and of healing all kinds of diseases,
without having recourse to drugs, but simply by
prayer.

Besides the above, many other ecclesiastical
philosophers flourished in the territories of
Edessa and Amida, and about the mountain
called Gaugalius ; among these were Daniel and
Simeon. But I shall now say nothing further of
the Syrian monks ; I shall further on, if God
will, describe them more fully.^

It is said that Eustathius,'* who governed the
church of Sebaste in Armenia, founded a society
of monks in Armenia, Paphlagonia, and Pontus,
and became the author of a zealous discipline,
both as to what meats were to be partaken of or to
be avoided, what garments were to be worn, and
what customs and exact course of conduct were
to be adopted. Some assert that he was the
author of the ascetic treatises commonly at-
tributed to Basil of Cappadocia. It is said
that his great exactness led him into certain
extravagances which were altogether contrary to
the laws of the Church. Many persons, how-
ever, justify him from this accusation, and throw
the blame upon some of his disciples, who con-
demned marriage, refused to pray to God in the
houses of married persons, despised married
presbyters, fasted on Lord's days, held their
assemblies in private houses, denounced the
rich as altogether without part in the king-
dom of God, contemned those who partook
of animal food. They did not retain the cus-
tomary tunics and stoles for their dress, but
used a strange and unwonted garb, and made
many other innovations. Many women were
deluded by them, and left their husbands ; but,
not being able to practice continence, they fell
into adultery. Other women, under the pretext
of religion, cut off their hair, and behaved other-
wise than is fitting to a woman, by arraying
themselves in men's apparel. The bishops of
the neighborhood of Gangroe, the metropolis

' See below, chap. i6, and vi. 34.
' Soc. ii. 43.


294


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 14.


of Paphlagonia, assembled themselves together,
and declared that all those who imbibed these
opinions should be aliens to the Catholic Church,
unless, according to the definitions of the Synod,
they would renounce each of the aforesaid cus-
toms. It is said that from that time, Eustathius
exchanged his clothing for the stole, and made
his journeys habited like other priests, thus
proving that he had not introduced and prac-
ticed these novelties out of self-will, but for the
sake of a godly asceticism. He was as renowned
for his discourses as for the purity of his life.
To confess the truth, he was not eloquent, nor
had h** ever studied the art of eloquence ; yet
he had admirable sense and a high capacity of
persuasion, so that he induced several men and
women, who were living in fornication, to enter
upon a temperate and earnest course of life.
It is related that a certain man and woman,
who, according to the custom of the Church,
had devoted themselves to a life of virginity,
were accused of cohabiting together. He strove
to make them cease from their intercourse ;
finding that his remonstrances produced no
effect upon them, he sighed deeply, and said,
that a woman who had been legally married
had, on one occasion, heard him discourse on
the advantage of continence, and was thereby
so deeply affected that she voluntarily abstained
from legitimate intercourse with her own hus-
band, and that the weakness of his powers of
conviction was, on the other hand, attested by
the fact, that the parties above mentioned per-
sisted in their illegal course. Such were the
men who originated the practice of monastic
discipline in the regions above mentioned.

Although the Thracians, the Illyrians, and the
other European nations were still inexperienced
in monastic communities, yet they were not
altogether lacking in men devoted to philoso-
phy. Of these, Martin,^ the descendant of a
noble family of Saboria in Pannonia, was the
most illustrious. He was originally a noted
warrior, and the commander of armies ; but, ac-
counting the service of Ciod to be a more hon-
orable profession, he embraced a life of philos-
ophy, and lived, in the first place, in Illyria.
Here he zealously defended the orthodox doc-
trines against the attacks of the Arian bishops,
and after being plotted against and frequently
beaten by the people, he was driven from the
country. He then went to Milan, and dwelt
alone. He was soon, however, obliged to quit
his place of retreat on account of the machina-
tions of .Auxentius, bishop of that region, who
did not hold soundly to the Nicene faith ; and
he went to an island called Gallenaria, where he
remained for some time, satisfying himself with
roots of plants. Gallenaria is a small and unin-

' Sulp. Sev. Vita Martini.


habited island lying in the Tyrrhenian Sea. Mar-
tin was afterwards appointed bishop of the church
of Tarracinse (Tours). He was so richly en-
dowed with miraculous gifts that he restored a
dead man to life, and performed other signs as
wonderful as those wrought by the apostles. We
have heard that Hilary, a man divine in his life
and conversation, lived about the same time, and
in the same country ; like Martin, he was obliged
to flee from his place of abode, on account of his
zeal in defense of the faith.

I have now related what I have been able to as-
certain concerning the individuals who practiced
philosophy in piety and ecclesiastical rites.
There were many others who were noted in the
churches about the same period on account of
their great eloquence, and among these the most
distinguished were, Eusebius, who administered
the priestly office at Emesa ; Titus, bishop of
Bostra ; Serapion, bishop of Thmuis ; Basil,
bishop of Ancyra ; Eudoxius, bishop of Germa-
nicia ; Acacius, bishop of Caesarea ; and Cyril,
who controlled the see of Jerusalem. A proof
of their education is in the books they have
written and left behind, and the many things
worthy of record.


CHAP. XV. DIDVMUS THE BLIND, AND AKTICS THK

HERETIC.

DiDYMUS," an ecclesiastical writer and presi-
dent of the school of sacred learning in Alexan-
dria, flourished about the same period. He was
acquainted with every branch of science, and
was conversant with poetry and rhetoric, with
astronomy and geometry, with arithmetic, and
with the various theories of philosophy. He
had acquired all this knowledge by the efforts
of his own mind, aided by the sense of hearing,
for he became blind during his first attempt at
learning the rudiments. When he had advanced
to youth, he manifested an ardent desire to ac-
quire speech and training, and for this purpose
he frequented the teachers of these branches,
but learned by hearing only, where he made
such rapid progress that he speedily compre-
hended the difficult theorems in mathematics.
It is said that he learned the letters of the alpha-
bet by means of tablets in which they were en-
graved, and which he felt with his fingers ; and
that he made himself acquainted with syllables
and words by the force of attention and mem-
ory, and by listening attentively to the sounds.
His was a very extraordinary case, and many
persons resorted to Alexandria for the express
purpose of hearing, or, at least, of seeing him.
His firmness in defending the doctrines of the


' Ruf-//. E. ii. 7; i. 30, 31; Soc. iv. 25; iii. 10; ii. 35; Hieron.
tie vir. illust. c. cix.


III. i6.J


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


295


Nicaean council was extremely displeasing to the
Arians. He easily carried conviction to the
minds of his audience by persuasion rather than
by power of reasoning, and he constituted each
one a judge of the ambiguous points. He was
much sought after by the members of the Cath-
olic Church, and was praised by the orders of
monks in Egypt, and by Antony the Great.

It is related that when Antony left the desert
and repaired to Alexandria to give his testimony
in favor of the doctrines of Athanasius, he said
to Didymus, " It is not a severe thing, nor does
it deserve to be grieved over, O Didymus, that
you are deprived of the organs of sight which
are possessed by rats, mice, and the lowest
animals ; but it is a great blessing to possess
eyes like angels, whereby you can contemplate
keenly the Divine Being, and see accurately the
true knowledge." In Italy and its territories,
Eusebius and Hilary, whom I have already
mentioned, were conspicuous for strength in the
use of their native tongue, whose treatises ^ con-
cerning the faith and against the heterodox, they
say, were approvingly circulated. Lucifer, as
the story goes, was the founder of a heresy which
bears his name,^ and flourished at this period.
Aetius^ was likewise held in high estimation
among the heterodox ; he was a dialectician, apt
in syllogism and proficient in disputation, and a
diligent student of such forms, but without art.
He reasoned so boldly concerning the nature
of God, that many persons gave him the name
of "Atheist." It is said that he was originally
a physician of Antioch in Syria, and that, as he
frequently attended meetings of the churches,
and thought over the Sacred Scriptures, he be-
came acquainted with Gallus, who was then
Caesar, and who honored religion much and
cherished its professors. It seems likely that,
as Aetius obtained the esteem of Csesar by means
of these disputations, he devoted himself the
more assiduously to these pursuits, in order to
progress in the favor of the emperor. It is
said that he was versed in the philosophy of
Aristotle, and frequented the schools in which
it was taught at Alexandria.

Besides the individuals above specified, there
were many others in the churches who were
capable of instructing the people and of reason-
ing concerning the doctrines of the Holy Scrip-
tures. It would be too great a task to attempt
to name them all. Let it not be accounted
strange, if I have bestowed commendations
upon the leaders or enthusiasts of the above-
mentioned heresies. I admire their eloquence,
and their impressiveness in discourse. I leave

1 He alludes to the treatises of Hilary against the Arians and
Auxentius, and against Constantius.

- That, namely, of the Luciferians. Cf. Soc. iii. 9.

■* Cf. Soc. ii. 35; Philost. iii. 15-20; supplementa from Phot.
cod. 40; fragmenta from Suidas, s.v.


their doctrines to be judged by those whose
right it is. For I have not been set forth to
record such matters, nor is it befitting in his-
tory ; I have only to give an account of events
as they happened, not supplementing my own
additions. Of those who at that time became
most distinguished in education and discourse
and who used the Roman and Greek languages,
I have enumerated in the above narrative as
many as I have received an account of.

CHAP. XVI. CONCERNING ST. EPHRAIM.

Ephraim the Syrian* was entitled to the
highest honors, and was the greatest ornament
of the Catholic Church. He was a native of
Nisibis, or his family was of the neighboring
territory. He devoted his life to monastic
philosophy ; and although he received no in-
struction, he became, contrary to all expectation,
so proficient in the learning and language of the
Syrians, that he comprehended with ease the
most abstruse theorems of philosophy. His
style of writing was so replete with splendid
oratory and with richness and temperateness of
thought that he surpassed the most approved
writers of Greece. If the works of these writers
were to be translated into Syriac, or any other
language, and divested, as it were, of the beauties
of the Greek language, they would retain little
of their original elegance and value. The pro-
ductions of P^phraim have not this disadvantage :
they were translated into Greek during his life,
and translations are even now being made, and
yet they preserve much of their original force,
so that his works are not less admired when
read in Greek than when read in Syriac. Basil,
who was subsequently bishop of the metropolis
of Cappadocia, was a great admirer of Ephraim,
and was astonished at his erudition. The
opinion of Basil, who is universally confessed to
have been the most eloquent man of his age, is
a stronger testimony, I think, to the merit of
Ephraim, than anything that could be indited
to his praise. It is said that he wrote three
hundred thousand verses, and that he had many
disciples who were zealously attached to his
doctrines. The most celebrated of his disciples
were Abbas, Zenobius, Abraham, Maras, and
Simeon, in whom the Syrians and whoever among
them pursued accurate learning make a great
boast. Paulanas and Aranad are praised for
their finished speech, although reported to have
deviated from sound doctrine.

I am not ignorant that there were some very
learned men who formerly flourished in Osroene,
as, for instance, Bardasanes, who devised a her-
esy designated by his name,* and Harmonius, his

* See below, vi. 34. This chapter is independent. Theod. iv.
20 has Soz. before him, and possibly also the same original. Cf.
Hieron. tie vir. illust. cxv. 5 Qf. Euseb. H. E. iv. 30.


296


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 16.


son. It is related that this latter was deeply
versed in Grecian erudition, and was the first to
subdue his native tongue to meters and musical
laws ; these verses he delivered to the choirs,
and even now the Syrians frequently sing, not
the precise copies by Harmonius, but the
same melodies. For as Harmonius was not al-
together free from the errors of his father, and
entertained various opinions concerning the
soul, the generation and destruction of the body,
and the regeneration which are taught by the
Greek philosophers, he introduced some of
these sentiments into the lyrical songs which he
composed. When Ephraim perceived that the
Syrians were charmed with the elegance of the
diction and the rhythm of the melody, he be-
came apprehensive, lest they should imbibe the
same opinions ; and therefore, although he was
ignorant of Grecian learning, he applied himself
to the understanding of the metres of Harmo-
nius, and composed similar poems in accord-
ance with the doctrines of the Church, and
wrought also in sacred hymns and in the praises
of passionless men. From that period the
Syrians sang the odes of Ephraim according to
the law of the ode established by Harmonius.
The execution of this work is alone sufficient to
attest the natural endowments of Ephraim. He
was as celebrated for the good actions he per-
formed as for the rigid course of discipline he
pursued. He was particularly fond of tranquil-
lity. He was so serious and so careful to avoid
giving occasion to calumny, that he refrained
from the very sight of women. It is related
that a female of careless life, who was either de-
sirous of tempting him, or who had been bribed for
the purpose, contrived on one occasion to meet
him face to face, and fixed her eyes intently
upon him ; he rebuked her, and commanded
her to look down upon the ground, " Wherefore
should I obey your injunction," replied the
woman ; " for I was born not of the earth, but
of you? It would be more just if you were to
look down upon the earth whence you sprang,
while I look upon you, as I was born of you."
Ephraim, astonished at the little woman, re-
corded the whole transaction in a book, which
most Syrians regard as one of the best of his pro-
ductions. It is also said of him, that, although
he was naturally prone to passion, he never
exhibited angry feeling toward any one from
the period of his embracing a monastic life.
It once happened that after he had, according
to custom, been fasting several days, his attend-
ant, in presenting some food to him, let fall
the dish on which it was placed. Ephraim, per-
ceiving that he was ovenvhelmed with shame
and terror, said to him, " Take courage; we will
go to the food as the food does not come to
us " ; and he immediately seated himself beside


the fragments of the dish, and ate his supper.
What I am about to relate will suffice to show
that he was totally exempt from the love of vain-
glory. He was appointed bishop of some town,
and attempts were made to convey him away
for the purpose of ordaining him. As soon as
he became aware of what was intended, he ran
to the market-place, and showed himself as a
madman by stepping in a disorderly way, drag-
ging his clothes along, and eating in public.
Those who had come to carry him away to be
their bishop, on seeing him in this state, be-
lieved that he was out of his mind, and de-
parted ; and he, meeting with an opportunity
for effecting his escape, remained in concealment
until another had been ordained in his place.
What I have now said concerning Ephraim must
suffice, although his own countrymen relate many
other anecdotes of him. Yet his conduct on one
occasion, shortly before his death, appears to me
so worthy of remembrance that I shall record it
here. The city of Edessa being severely visited
by famine, he quitted the solitary cell in which
he pursued philosophy, and rebuked the rich for
permitting the poor to die around them, in-
stead of imparting to them of their superfluities ;
and he represented to them by his philosophy,
that the wealth which they were treasuring up
so carefully would turn to their own condemna-
tion, and to the ruin of the soul, which is of
more v^alue than all riches, and the body itself
and all other values, and he proved that they
were putting no estimate upon their souls, be-
cause of their actions. The rich men, revering
the man and his words, replied, " We are not
intent upon hoarding our wealth, but we know
of no one to whom we can confide the distribu-
tion of our goods, for all are prone to seek after
lucre, and to betray the trust placed in them."
"What think you of me?" asked Ephraim.
On their admitting that they considered him an
efficient, excellent, and good man, and worthy,
and that he was exactly what his reputation con-
firmed, he offered to undertake the distribution
of their alms. As soon as he received their
money, he had about three hundred beds fitted
up in the public porches ; and here he tended
those who were ill and suffering from the effects
of the famine, whether they were foreigners or
natives of the surrounding country. On the
cessation of the famine he returned to the cell
in which he had previously dwelt ; and, after
the lapse of a few days, he expired. He at-
tained no higher clerical degree than that of
deacon, although he became no less famous for
his virtue than those who are ordained to the
priesthood and are admired for the conversation
of a good life and for learning. I have now
given some account of the virtue of Ephraim. It
would require a more experienced hand than


III. i8.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


297


mine, to furnish a full description of his char-
acter and that of the other illustrious men who,
about the same period, had devoted themselves
to a life and career of philosophy ; and for
some things, it would require such a writer as he
himself was. The attempt is beyond my powers
by reason of weakness of language, and igno-
rance of the men themselves and their exploits.
Some of them concealed themselves in the
deserts. Others, who lived in the intercourse of
cities, strove to preserve a mean appearance,
and to seem as if they differed in no respect
from the multitude, working out their virtue,
concealing a true estimate of themselves, that
they might avoid the praises of others. For as
they were intent upon the exchange of future
benefits, they made God alone the witness of
their thoughts, and had no concern for outward
glory.


CHAP. XVII. TRANSACTIONS OF THAT PERIOD, AND

PROGRESS OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE THROUGH THE
JOINT EFFORTS OF EMPERORS AND ARCH-PRIESTS.

Those who presided over the churches at this
period were noted for personal conduct, and, as
might be expected, the people whom they gov-
erned were earnestly attached to the worship of
Christ. 1 Religion daily progressed, by the zeal,
virtue, and wonderful works of the priests, and
of the ecclesiastical philosophers, who attracted
the attention of the pagans, and led them to re-
nounce their superstitions. The emperors who
then occupied the throne were as zealous as
was their father in protecting the churches, and
they granted honors and tax exemptions to the
clergy, their children, and their slaves. They
confirmed the laws enacted by their father, and
enforced new ones prohibiting the offering of
sacrifice, the worship of images, or any other
pagan observance. They commanded that all
temples, whether in cities or in the country,
should be closed. Some of these temples were
presented to the churches, when either the
ground they stood on or the materials for build-
ing were required. The greatest possible care was
bestowed upon the houses of prayer, those which
had been defaced by time were repaired, and
others were erected from the foundations in a
style of extraordinary magnificence. The church
of- E mesa is one most worthy to see and famous
for its beauty. The Jews were strictly forbidr
den to purchase a slave belonging to any other
heresy than their own. If they transgressed this
law, the slave was confiscated- to the public ;
but if they administered to him the Jewish rite


1 This chapter is an independent view, and also groups the laws
under Constantius. Cf. Cod. Theod.

2 6i)no(rioi' oifceTT)!- eli-ai. The early interpreters understood
these words as referring to the Jewish offender, and not to the slave.


of circumcision, the penalties were death and
total confiscation of property. For, as the em-
perors were desirous of promoting by every
means the spread of Christianity, they deemed
it necessary to prevent the Jews from proselyt-
ing those whose ancestors were of another relig-
ion, and those who were holding the hope of
professing Christianity were carefully reserved
for the Church ; for it was from the pagan mul-
titudes that the Christian religion increased.


chap. XVIII. — concerning THE DOCTRINES HELD
BY THE SONS OF CONSTANTINE. DISTINCTION


BETWEEN THE TERMS


HOMOOUSIOS


AND


" HOMOIOUSIOS. WHENCE IT CAME THAT CON-

STANTIUS QUICKLY ABANDONED THE CORRECT
FAITH.

The emperors^ had, from the beginning, pre-
served their father's view about doctrine ; for
they both favored the Nicene form of belief.
Constans maintained these opinions till his
death ; Constantius held a similar view for some
time ; he, however, renounced his former senti-
ments when the term " consubstantial " was
calumniated, yet he did not altogether refrain
from confessing that the Son is of like substance
with the Father. The followers of Eusebius,
and other bishops of the East, who were admired
for their speech and life, made a distinction, as
we know, between the term " consubstantial "
{^ho7noousios) and the expression " of like sub-
stance," which latter they designated by the
term, " homoiousiosy They say that the term
" consubstantial " (homoousios) properly be-
longs to corporeal beings, such as men and other
animals, trees and plants, whose participation and
origin is in like things ; but that the term " homoi-
ousios " appertains exclusively to incorporeal
beings, such as God and the angels, of each one
of whom a conception is formed according to
his own peculiar substance. The Emperor
Constantius was deceived by this distinction ;
and although I am certain that he retained the
same doctrines as those held by his father and
brother, yet he adopted a change of phraseology,
and, instead of using the term " homoousios,"
made use of the term " homoiousios." The
teachers to whom we have alluded maintained
that it was necessary to be thus precise in the
use of terms, and that otherwise we should be in
danger of conceiving that to be a body which is
incorporeal. Many, however, regard this dis-
tinction as an absurdity, " for," say they, " the
things which are conceived by the mind can be

But the law itself is extant in Cod. Theod. xvi. 91, 2, and is entitled
Ne Ckristianum Mancipium Judaus habeat. The second law
begins: Si aliquis Judseorum, mancipium sectas alterius seu natio-
nis crediderit comparandum, tnancipium fisco protenus vindicetur.
•> An independent survey of the imperial and clerical views.


298


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 18.


designated only by names derived from things
which are seen ; and there is no danger in the
use of words, provided that there be no error
about the idea.


CHAP. XIX. — FURTHER PARTICULAiiS CONCERNING
THE TERM " CONSUBSTANTIAL." COUNCIL OF
ARIMINUM, THE MANNER, SOURCE, AND REASON
Of its CONVENTION.

It is not surprising that the Emperor Con-
stantius was induced to adopt the use of the
term " homoiousios," for it was admitted by
many priests who conformed to the doctrines of
the Nicaean council.' Many use the two words
indifferently, to convey the same meaning.
Hence, it appears to me, that the Arians departed
greatly from the truth when they affirmed that,
after the council of Nicasa, many of the priests,
among whom were Eusebius and Theognis,
refused to admit that the Son is consubstantial
with the Father, and that Constantine was in
consequence so indignant, that he condemned
them to banishment. They say that it was after-
wards revealed to his sister by a dream or a vision
from God, that these bishops held orthodox
doctrines and had suffered unjusdy ; and that
the emperor thereupon recalled them, and de-
manded of them wherefore they had departed
from the Nicene doctrines, since they had been
participants in the document concerning the
faith which had been there framed ; and that
they urged in reply that they had not assented
to those doctrines from conviction, but from the
fear that, if the disputes then existing were pro-
longed, the emperor, who was then just begin-
ning to embrace Christianity, and who was yet
unbaptized, might be impelled to return to
Paganism, as seemed likely, and to persecute
the Church. They assert that Constantine was
pleased with this defense, and determined upon
convening another council ; but that, being pre-
vented by death from carrying his scheme into
execution, the task devolved upon his eldest
son, Constantius, to whom he represented that
it would avail him nothing to be possessed of
imperial power, unless he could establish uni-
formity of worship throughout his empire ; and
Constantius they say, at the instigation of his
father, convened a council at Ariminum.- This
story is easily seen to be a gross fabrication, for
the council was convened during the consulate
of Hypatius and pAisebius, and twenty-two years
after Constantius had, on the death of his father,
succeeded to the empire. Now, during this in-
terval of twenty-two years, many councils were
held, in which debates were carried on concern-

I An independent chapter on the true cause of division and the
origin of the council of Ariminum. Cf. Athan. Ef. de Synodis.
' Cf. Soc. ii. 37.


ing the terms " homoousios" and " homoiousios."
No one, it appears, ventured to deny that the
Son is of like substance ^ with the Father, until
Aetius, by starting a contrary opinion, so offended
the emperor that, in order to arrest the course of
the heresy, he commanded the priests to assemble
themselves together at Ariminum and at Seleucia.
Thus the true cause of this council being con-
vened was not the command of Constantine,*
but the question agitated by Aetius. And this
will become still more apparent by what we shall
hereafter relate.


CHAP XX. ATHANASIUS AGAIN REINST.ATED BY THE

LETTER OF CONSTANTIUS, AND RECEIVES HIS SEE.
THE ARCH-PRIESTS OF ANTIOCH. QUF.STION PUT
BY CONSTANTIUS TO ATHAN.\SIUS. THE PRAISE
OF GOD IN HYMNS.

When Constans was apprised of what had
been enacted at Sardica, he wrote ^ to his
brother to request him to restore the followers
of Athanasius and Paul to their own churches.
.As Constantius seemed to hesitate, he wrote
again, and threatened him with war, unless he
would consent to receive the bishops. Con-
stantius, after conferring on the subject with the
bishops of the East, judged that it would be
foolish to excite on this account the horrors of
civil war. He therefore recalled Athanasius
from Italy, and sent public carriages to convey
him on his return homewards, and wrote several
letters requesting his s])eedy return. Athanasius,
who was then residing at Aquilea, on receiving
the letters of Constantius, repaired to Rome to
take leave of Julius and his friends. Julius
parted from him with great demonstrations of
friendship, and gave him a letter addressed to
the clergy and people of Alexandria, in which
he spoke of him as a wonderful man, deserving
of renown by the numerous trials he had under-
gone, and congratulated the church of Alexan-
dria on the return of so good a priest, and ex-
horted them to follow his doctrines.

He then proceeiled to Antioch in Syria, where
the emperor was then residing. Leontius pre-
sided over the churches of that region ; for after
the flight of Eustathius, those who held heret-
ical sentiments had seized the see of Antioch.
The first bishop they appointed was Euphronius ;
to him succeeded Placetus ; and afterwards
Stephen. This latter was deposed as being un-
worthy of the dignity, and Leontius obtained
the bishopric. Athanasius avoided him as a
heretic, and communed with those who were


' Kar oixriav acduotoi' is the right correction of Valesius.

* A mistake for Constantius.

• Athan. Apol. cont. Arinn. 51-56; Hisi. Arian. 15, 16; Ruf.
i. 19; .Soc. ii. 22, 23, who gives texts from Athanasius of the second
letter of Constans (in part); those of Constantius to Athanasius;
and Julius to the Alexandrians. Philost. iii. 13.


III. 22.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


299


called Eustathians, who assembled in a private
house. Since he found that Constantius was
well disposed, and agreeable, and it looked as if
the emperor would restore his own church to
him, Constantius, at the instigation of the leaders
of the opposing heresy, replied as follows :
*' 1 am ready to perform all that I promised
when I recalled you ; but it is just that you
should in return grant me a favor, and that is,
that you yield one of the numerous churches
which are under your sway to those who are
averse to holding communion with you." Atha-
nasius replied: "O emperor, it is exceedingly
just and necessary to obey your commands,
and I will not gainsay, but as in the city of An-
tioch there are many who eschew communion
between the heterodox and ourselves, I seek a
like favor that one church may be conceded to
us, and that we may assemble there in safety."
As the request of Athanasius appeared reasona-
ble to the emperor, the heterodox deemed it
more politic to keep quiet ; for they reflected
that their peculiar opinions could never gain
any ground in Alexandria, on account of Atha-
nasius, who was able both to retain those who
held the same sentiments as himself, and lead
those of contrary opinions ; and that, moreover,
if they gave up one of the churches of Antioch,
the Eustathians, who were very numerous, would
assemble together, and then probably attempt
innovations, since it would be possible for them
without risk to retain those whom they held.
Besides, the heterodox perceived that, although
the government of the churches was in their
hands, all the clergy and people did not conform
to their doctrines.' When they sang hymns to
God, they were, according to custom, divided
into choirs, and, at the end of the odes, each
one declared what were his own peculiar senti-
ments. Some offered praise to " the Father av^
the Son," regarding them as co-equal in glory ;
others glorified "The Father i>y the Son," to
denote by the insertion of the preposition that
they considered the Son to be inferior to the
Father. While these occurrences took place,
Leontius, the bishop of the opposite faction,
who then presided over the see of Antioch, did
not dare to prohibit the singing of hymns to
God which were in accordance with the tradi-
tion of the Nicaean Synod, for he feared to excite
an insurrection of the people. It is related,
however, that he once raised his hand to his
head, the hairs of which were quite white, and
said, " When this snow is dissolved, there will
be plenty of mud." By this he intended to sig-
nify that, after his death, the different modes of
singing hymns would give rise to great seditions.


' Here he uses Athan. Historia Arian. 28: Apol. defuga sua,
26. Theodoret, too, in hi<; sketch of Leontius, H. E. ii. 24, quotes
briefly from Athan. Cf. Philost. iii. 13.


and that his successors would not show the same
consideration to the people which he had
manifested.

CHAP. XXI. LETTER OF CONSTANTIUS TO THE

EGYPTIANS IN BEHALF OF ATHANASIUS. SYNOD
OF JERUSALEM.

The emperor, on sending back^ Athanasius
to Egypt, wrote in his favor to the bishops and
presbyters of that country, and to the people of
the church of Alexandria ; he testified to the in-
tegrity of his conduct and the virtue of his man-
ners, and exhorted them to be of one mind, and
to unite in prayer and service to God under his
guidance. He added that, if any evil-disposed
persons should excite disturbances, they should
receive the punishment awarded by the laws for
such offenses. He also commanded that the
former decrees he had enacted against Athana-
sius, and those who were in communion with
him, should be effaced from the public registers,
and that his clergy should be admitted to the
same exemptions they had previously enjoyed ;
and edicts to this effect were dispatched to the
governors of Egypt and Libya.

Immediately on his arrival in Egypt, Athanasius
displaced those whom he knew to be attached
to Arianism, and placed the government of the
Church and the confession of the Nicaean council
in the hands of those whom he approved, and
he exhorted them to hold to this with earnest-
ness. It was said at that time, that, when he
was traveling through other countries, he effected
the same change, if he happened to visit churches
which were under the Arians. He was certainly
accused of having dared to perform the ceremony
of ordination in cities where he had no right to
do so. But because he had effected his return,
although his enemies were unwilling, and it did
not seem that he could be easily cast under
suspicion, in that he was honored with the
friendship of the Emperor Constans, he was
regarded with greater consideration than before.
Many bishops, who had previously been at
enmity with him, received him into communion,
particularly those of Palestine. When he at
that time visited these latter, they received
him kindly. They held a Synod at Jerusalem,
and Maximus and the others wrote the following
letter in his favor.

CHAP. XXII. EPISTLE WRITTEN BY THE SYNOD OF

JERUSALEM IN FAVOR OF ATHANASIUS.

"The holy Synod assembled at Jerusalem,
to the presbyters, deacons, and people of Egypt,
Libya, and Alexandria, our beloved and most
cherished brethren, greeting in the Lord.^


' Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 54-56; Hist. Arian. 23; these are
given in Soc. ii. 23; and for the Synod of Jerusalem, ii. 24; Ruf. i. 19.

' From Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 57, where also the names of
the subscribers are given.


lOO


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[III. 22.


" We can never, O beloved, return adequate
thanks to God, the Creator of all things, for the
wonderful works he has now accomplished, par-
ticularly for the blessings He has conferred on
your churches by the restoration of Athanasius,
your shepherd and lord, and our fellow-minister.
Who could have hoped to have ever seen this
with his eyes, which now you are realizing in
deed? But truly your prayers have been heard
by the God of the universe who is concerned
for His Church, and who has regarded your tears
and complaint, and on this account has heard
your requests. For you were scattered abroad
and rent like sheep without a pastor. Therefore,
the true Shepherd, who from heaven watched
over you, and who is concerned for His own sheep,
has restored to you him whom you desired.
Behold, we do all things for the peace of the
Church, and are influenced by love like yours.
Therefore we received and embraced your pastor,
and, having held communion with you through
him, we dispatch this address and our eucha-
ristic prayers that you may know how we are
united by the bond of love to him and you. It is
right that you should pray for the piety of the em-
perors most beloved of God, who having recog-
nized your desire about him and his purity de-
termined to restore him to you with every honor.
Receive him, then, with uplifted hands, and be
zealous to send aloft the requisite eucharistic
prayers in his behalf to the God who has con-
ferred these benefits upon you ; and may you
ever rejoice with God, and glorify the Lord^in
Christ Jesus our Lord, by whom be glory to the
Father throughout all ages. Amen."

CHAP. XXIII. — VALENS AND URSACIUS, WHO BE-
LONGED TO THE ARIAN FACTION, CONFESS TO THE
BISHOP OF ROME THAT THEY HAD MADE FALSE
CHARGES AGAINST ATHANASIUS,

Such was the letter written by the Synod con-
vened in Palestine. Some time after Athana-
sius had the satisfaction of seeing the injustice
of the sentence enacted against him by the
council of Tyre publicly recognized.' Valens
and Ursacius, who had been sent with Theognis
and his followers to obtain information in Mare-
otis; as we before mentioned, concerning the
holy cup which Ischyrion had accused Athana-
sius of having broken, wrote the following retrac-
tion to Julius, bishop of Rome : —

" Ursacius and Valens, to the most blessed
Lord Pope Julius.

"Since we previously, as is well known, made
many various charges against Athanasius, the
bishop, by our letters, and although we have
been urged persistently by the epistles of your
excellency in this matter which we publicly

' From Athan. A^l. cont. Arian. 58: Soc. ii. 34, only an allu-
■ sion; Hil. Fragnt. ii. 20; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 36.


alleged and have not been able to give a reason
for our accusation, therefore, we now confess to
your excellency in the presence of all the pres-
byters, our brethren, that all that you have heard
concerning the aforesaid Athanasius is utterly
false and fictitious, and in every way foreign to
his nature. For this reason, we joyfully enter
into communion \vith him, particularly as your
piety in accordance with your implanted love of
goodness has granted forgiveness to us for our
error. Moreover, we declare unto you that if
the bishojis of the East, or even Athanasius him-
self, should at any time malignantly summon us
to judgment, we would not sever ourselves from
your judgment and disposition about the case.
We now and ever shall anathematize, as we for-
merly did in the memorial which we presented
at Milan, the heretic Arius and his followers,
who say that there was a time, in which the Son
existed not, and that Christ is from that which
had no existence, and who deny that Christ was
God and the Son of God before all ages. We
again protest, in our own handwriting, that we
shall ever condemn the aforesaid Arian heresy,
and its originators.

" I, Ursacius, sign this confession with my own
signature. In like manner also Valens."

This was the confession which they sent to
Julius. It is also necessary to append to it their
letter to Athanasius : it is as follows : —

CHAP. XXIV. — LETTER OF CONCILIATION FROM VA-
LENS AND URSACIUS TO THE GREAT ATHANASIUS.
RESTORATION OF THE OTHER EASTERN BISHOPS
TO THEIR OWN SEES. EJECTION OF MACEDONIUS
AGAIN ; AND ACCESSION OF PAUL TO THE SEE.

" The bishops, Ursacius and Valens, to
Athanasius, our brother in the Lord.^

" We take the opportunity of the departure of
Museus, our brother and fellow- presbyter, who
is going to your esteemed self, O beloved
brother, to send you amplest greeting from
Aquileia through him, and hope that our letter
will find you in good health. You will afford us
great encouragement if you will write us a reply
to this letter. Know that we are at peace and
in ecclesiastical communion with you."

Athanasius therefore returned under such cir-
cumstances from the West to Egypt. Paul, Mar-
cellus, Asclepas, and Lucius, whom the edict of
the emperor had returned from exile, received
their own sees. Immediately on the return of
Paul to Constantinople Macedonius retired, and
held church in private. There was a great tu-
mult at Ancyra on the deposition of Basil from
the church there, and the reinstallation of Mar-
cellus. The other bishops were reinstated in
their churches without difficulty.^


' Athan. Apol. cont. Arian. 58; Hil. Fragm. ii. 20.
' Soc. ii. 23.


BOOK IV.


CHAP. I. — DEATH OF CONSTANS C.«SAR. OCCUR-
RENCES WHICH TOOK PLACE IN ROME.

Four years after the council of Sardica/
Constans was killed in Western Gaul.^ Mag-
nentius, who had plotted his murder, reduced
the entire government of Constans under his
own sway. In the meantime Vetranio was pro-
claimed emperor at Sirmium, by the Illyrian
troops. Nepotian, the son of the late emperor's
sister, gathered about him a body of gladiators,
and wrangled for the imperial power, and ancient
Rome had the greatest share of these evils.
Nepotian, however, was put to death by the
soldiers of Magnentius.^ Constantius, finding
himself the sole master of the empire, was pro-
claimed sole ruler, and hastened to depose the
tyrants. In the meantime, Athanasius, having
arrived in Alexandria, prepared to convene a
Synod of the Egyptian bishops, and had the
enactments confirmed which had been passed
at Sardica, and in Palestine, in his favor.


CHAP. II. — CONSTANTIUS AGAIN EJECTS ATHANASIUS,
AND BANISHES THOSE WHO REPRESENTED THE
HOMOOUSIAN DOCTRINE. DEATH OF PAUL, BISHOP
OF CONSTANTINOPLE. MACEDONIUS : HIS SECOND
USURPATION OF THE SEE, AND HIS EVIL DEEDS.

The emperor,* deceived by the calumnies of
the heterodox, changed his mind, and, in oppo-
sition to the decrees of the council of Sardica,
exiled the bishops whom he had previously
restored. Marcellus was again deposed, and
Basil re-acquired possession of the bishopric of
Ancyra. Lucius was thrown into prison, and
died there. Paul was condemned to perpetual
banishment, and was conveyed to Cucusum, in
Armenia, where he died. I have never, how-
ever, been able to ascertain whether or not he
died a natural death. It. is still reported, that
he was strangled by the adherents of Mace-
donius.' As soon as he was sent into exile,
Macedonius seized the government of his

' According to Soz. a.d. 351, really a.d. 350.

' Ruf. H. E. i. 19; Soc. ii. 25, 26. Soz. here condenses Soc.
Cf. Athan. Apol. ad. Imp. Constantiiim.

3 Zos. ii. 41-53: Am. Marcel, xv. i, 2; Petrus Patricius, His-
torta, 14; Eutrop. Brev. Hist. Rom. x. 9-11.

* Soc. ii. 26, 27; Athan. Hist. Arian. 7; Apol. de/uga sua, 3;
cf. Theodoret, H. E.'w. 5.

' See preceding references; Athan. is decided.


church ; and, being aided by several orders of
monks whom he had incorporated at Constanti-
nople, and by alliances with many of the neigh-
boring bishops, he commenced, it is said, a
persecution against those who held the senti-
ments of Paul. He ejected them, in the first
place, from the church, and then compelled
them to enter into communion with himself.
Many perished from wounds received in the
struggle ; some were deprived of their posses-
sions ; some, of the rights of citizenship ; and
others were branded on the forehead with an
iron instrument, in order that they might be
stamped as infamous. The emperor was dis-
pleased when he heard of these transactions,
and imputed the blame of them to Macedonius
and his adherents.

CHAP. III. MARTYRDOM OF THE HOLY NOTARIES.

The piersecution increased in violence,® and
led to deeds of blood. Martyrius and Marcian
were among those who were slain. They had
lived in Paul's house,^ and were delivered up by
Macedonius to the governor, as having been
guilty of the murder of Hermogenes, and of
exciting the former sedition against him. Mar-
tyrius was a sub-deacon, and Marcian a singer
and a reader of Holy Scripture. Their tomb is
famous, and is situated before the walls of Con-
stantinople, as a memorial of the martyrs ; it is
placed in a house of prayer, which was com-
menced by John and completed by Sisinnius ;
these both afterwards presided over the church
of Constantinople. For they who had been
unworthily adjudged to have no part in the
honors of martyrdom, were honored by God,
because the very place where those conducted
to death had been decapitated, and which pre-
viously was not approached on account of ghosts,
was now purified, and those who were under the
influence of demons were released from the dis-
ease, and many other notable miracles were
wrought at the tomb. These are the particulars
which should be stated concerning Martyrius
and Marcian. If what I have related appears

"An independent chapter.

' Niceph. Coll. H. E. ix. 30 adds that they were the notaries of
Paul; hence the caption. The memory of these martyrs is cele-
brated in the Greek Church under the name of the Notaries, on the
25th of October.


302


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 3-


to be scarcely credible, it is easy to apply for
further information to those who are more accu-
rately acquainted with the circumstances ; and
perhaps far more wonderful things are related
concerning them than those which I have de-
tailed.


CHAP. IV. — CAMPAIGN OF CONSTANTIUS IN SIRMIUM,
AND DETAILS CONCERNING VETRANIO AND MAG-
NENTIUS. GALLUS RECEIVES THE TITLE OF C-«SAR,
AND IS SENT TO THE EAST.

On the expulsion of Athanasius, which took
place about this period, George persecuted ' all
those throughout Egypt who refused to conform
to his sentiments. The emperor marched into
Illyria, and entered Sirmium, whither Vetranio
had repaired by appointment. The soldiers
who had proclaimed him emperor suddenly
changed their mind, and saluted Constantius as
sole sovereign, and as Augustus, for both the
emperor and his supporters, strove for this very
action. Vetranio perceived that he was be-
trayed, and threw himself as a suppliant at the
feet of Constantius. Constantius pitied him
indeed, but stripped him of the imperial orna-
ments and purple, obliged him to return to
private life, liberally provided for his wants out
of the public treasury, and told him that it was
more seemly to an old man to abstain from the
cares of empire and to live in quietude. After
terminating these arrangements in favor of
Vetranio, Constantius sent a large army into
Italy against Magnentius. He then conferred
the title of Caesar on his cousin Callus, and sent
him into Syria to defend the provinces of the
East.


CHAP. V. CYRIL DIRECTS THE SACERDOTAL OFFICE

AFTER MAXIMUS, AND THE LARGEST FORM OF THE
CROSS, SURPASSING THE SUN IN SPLENDOR, AGAIN
APPEARS IN THE HEAVENS, AND IS VISIBLE DURING
SEVERAL DAYS.

At the time that Cyril administered the
church of Jerusalem after Maximus, the sign
of the cross appeared in the heavens. It
shone brilliantly, not with divergent rays like
a comet, but with the concentration of a great
deal of light, apparently dense and yet trans-
parent. Its length was about fifteen stadia
from Calvary to the Mount of Olives, and its
breadth was in proportion to its length. So
extraordinary a phenomenon excited universal

> Eutrop. Brtv. Hist. Rom. x. ii, la; Zos. ii. 44, 45; Athan.
A/o/. de fugn sua, 6, 7: Ef>. ad Episc. /Eg. et Lib. 7; Soc. ii.
25-29; Ruf. H. E. i. 19; Phiiost. iii. aa, 25.


terror. Men, women, and children left their
houses, the market-place, or their respective
employments, and ran to the church, where they
sang hymns to Christ together, and voluntarily
confessed their belief in God. The intelligence
disturbed in no little measure our entire domin-
ions, and this happened rapidly ; for, as the
custom was, there were travelers from every
part of the world, so to speak, who were dwelling
at Jenisalem for prayer, or to visit its places of
interest, these were spectators of the sign, and
divulged the facts to their friends at home. The
emperor was made acquainted with the occur-
rence, partly by numerous reports concerning it
which were then current, and partly by a letter
from Cyril '^ the bishop. It was said that this
prodigy was a fulfillment of an ancient prophecy
contained in the Holy Scriptures. It was the
means of the conversion of many pagans and
Jews to Christianity.


CHAP. VI. — PHOTINUS, BISHOP OF SIRMIUM. HIS
HERESY, AND THE COUNCIL CONVENED AT SIRMI-
UM IN OPPOSITION THERETO. THE THREE FOR-
MULARIES OF FAITH. THIS AGITATOR OF EMPT\-
IDEAS WAS REFUTED BY BASIL OF ANCYRA. AFTER
HIS DEPOSITION PHOTINUS, ALTHOUGH SOLICITED,
DECLINED RECONCILIATION.

About this time,' Photinus, who administered
the church of Sirmium, laid before the emperor,
who was then staying at that city, a heresy which
he had originated some time previously. His
natural ease of utterance and powers of persua-
sion enabled him to lead many into his own way
of thinking. He acknowledged that there was
one God Almighty, by whose own word all
things were created, but would not admit that
the generation and existence of the Son was
before all ages ; on the contrary, he alleged that
Christ derived His existence from Mary. As soon
as this opinion was divulged, it excited the indig-
nation of the Western and of the Eastern bish-
ops, and they considered it in common as an
innovation of each one's particular belief, for it
was equally opposed by those who maintained
the doctrines of the Nicaean council, and by those
who favored the tenets of Arius. The emperor
also regarded the heresy with aversion, and con-
vened a council at Sirmium, where he was then
residing. Of the Eastern bishops, George, who
governed the church of Alexandria, Basil, bishop
of Ancyra, and Mark, bishop of Arethusa, were
present at this council ; and among the Western


' The letter here alluded to by Sozomen was addressed by Cyril
of Jerusalem to Constantius, and is extant among his wortcs. c.
ii65,./V/. P. O. 33; cf. Soc. ii. 28; Phiiost. iii. 26; Hieron. Chron.
Eus. s. A.D. 357.

' Aihan. de Synodis, 8, 9; Soc. ii. 29-31, 37: Sulp. Sev. H. S.
ii. 36, 37-


IV. 7.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


303


bishops were Valens, bishop of Miirsa, and
Hosius the Confessor. This latter, who had at-
tended the council of Nicaea, was unwillingly a
participant of this ; he had not long previously
been condemned to banishment through the
machinations of the Arians ; he was summoned
to the council of Sirmium by the command of
the emperor extorted by the Arians, who be-
lieved that their party would be strengthened, if
they could gain over, either by persuasion or
force, a man held in universal admiration and
esteem, as was Hosius. The period at which
the council was convened at Sirmium, was the
year after the expiration of the consulate of Ser-
gius and Nigrinian ; and during this year there
were no consuls either in the East or the West,
owing to the insurrections excited by the tyrants.
Photinus was deposed by this council, because
he was accused of countenancing the errors of
Sabellius and Paul of Samosata. The council
then proceeded to draw up three formularies of
faith in addition to the previous confessions, of
which one was written in Greek, and the others
in Latin. But they did not agree with one an-
other, nor with any other of the former exposi-
tions of doctrine, either in word or import. It
is not said in -the Greek formulary,' that the Son
is consubstantial, or of hke substance, with the
Father, but it is there declared, that those who
maintain that the Son had no commencement,
or that He proceeded from an expansion of the
substance of the Father, or that He is united to
the Father without being subject to Him, are ex-
communicated. In one of the Roman formu-
laries,^ it is forbidden to say, of the essence of
the Godhead which the Romans call substance,
that the Son is either consubstantial, or of like
substance with the Father, as such statements
do not occur in the Holy Scriptures, and are
beyond the reach of the understanding and
knowledge of men. It is said, that the Father
must be recognized as superior to the Son in
honor, in dignity, in divinity, and in the rela-
tionship suggested by His name of Father ; and
that it must be confessed that the Son, like all
created beings, is subject to the Father, that
the Father had no commencement, and that the
generation of the Son is unknown to all save the
Father. It is related, that when this formulary
was completed, the bishops became aware of the
errors it contained, and endeavored to withdraw
it from the public, and to correct it ; and that
the emperor threatened to punish those who
should retain or conceal any of the copies that
had been made of it. But having been once
published, no efforts were adequate to suppress
it altogether.


1 Soc. ii. 30, text.

* Soc. ii. 30, Latin text translated into Greek,


The third formulary ^ is of the same import as
the others. It prohibits the use of the term
" substance " on account of the terms used in
Latin, while the Greek term having been used
with too much simplicity by the Fathers, and
having been a cause of offense to many of the un-
learned multitude, because it was not to be found
in the Scriptures, " we have deemed it right
totally to reject the use of it : and we would
enjoin the omission of all mention of the term
in allusion to the Godhead, for it is nowhere said
in the Holy Scriptures, that the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are of the same substance,
where the word person is written. But we say,
in conformity with the Holy Scriptures, that the
Son is like unto the Father."

Such was the decision arrived at in the pres-
ence of the emperor concerning the faith. Ho-
sius at first refused to assent to it. Compulsion,
however, was resorted to ; and being extremely
old, he sunk, as it is reported, beneath the blows
that were inflicted on him, and yielded his con-
sent and signature.

After the deposition of Photinus, the Synod
thought it expedient to try whether it were not
somehow possible to persuade him to change
his views. But when the bishop urged him,
and promised to restore his bishopric if he
would renounce his own dogma, and vote for
their formulary, he would not acquiesce, but
challenged them to a discussion. On the day
appointed for this purpose, the bishops, there-
fore, assembled with the judges who had been
appointed by the emperor to preside at their
meetings, and who, in point of eloquence and
dignity, held the first rank in the palace. Basil,
bishop of Ancyra, was selected to commence
the disputation against Photinus. The conflict
lasted a long time, on account of the numerous
questions started and the answers given by each
party, and which were immediately taken down
in short-hand ; but finally the victory declared
itself in favor of Basil. Photinus was condemned
and banished, but did not cease on that account
from enlarging his own dogma. He wrote and
published many works in Greek and Latin, in
which he endeavored to show that all opinions,
except his own, were erroneous. I have now
concluded all that I had to say concerning Pho-
tinus and the heresy to which his name was
affixed.


CHAP. VII. — DEATH OF THE TYRANTS MAGNENTIUS
AND SILVANUS THE APOSTATE. SEDITION OF THE
JEWS IN PALESTINE. CALLUS C-«SAR IS SLAIN,
ON SUSPICION OF REVOLUTION.

In the meantime,* Magnentius made himself

' Athan. de Synodis, 8; Soc. ii. 37, text translated into Greek.
* Soc. ii. 32-34; cf. Philost. iii. 26-28; iv. i; Orosius, vii. so;


304


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 7.


master of ancient Rome, and put numbers of
the senators, and of the people, to death.
Hearing that the troops of Constantius were ap-
proaching, he retired into Gaul ; and here the
two parties had frequent encounters, in which
sometimes the one and sometimes the other was
victorious. At length, however, Magnentius was
defeated, and fled to Mursa, which is the fortress
of this Gaul, and when he saw that his soldiers
were dispirited because they had been defeated,
he stood on an elevated spot and endeavored
to revive their courage. But, although they
addressed Magnentius with the acclamations
usually paid to emperors, and were ready to
shout at his public appearance, they secretly
and without premeditation shouted for Constan-
tius as emperor in place of Magnentius. Mag-
nentius, concluding from this circumstance, that
he was not destined by God to hold the reins of
empire, endeavored to retreat from the fortress
to some distant place. But he was pursued by
the troops of Constantius, and being overtaken
at a spot called Mount Seleucus, he escaped
alone from the encounter, and fled to Lugduna.
On his arrival there, he slew his own mother
and his brother, whom he had named Caesar ;
and lastly, he killed himself.^ Not long after,
Decentius, another of his brothers, put an end
to his own existence. Still the public tumults
were not quelled ; for not long after, Silvanus
assumed the supreme authority in Gaul ; but he
was put to death immediately by the generals of
Constantius.

The Jews of Diocaesarea also overran Pales-
tine and the neighboring territories ; they took
up arms with the design of shaking off the
Roman yoke.^ On hearing of their insurrection,
Gallus Caesar, who was then at Antioch, sent
troops against them, defeated them, and de-
stroyed Diocaesarea. Gallus, intoxicated with
success, could not bear his prosperity, but
aspired to the supreme power, and he slew
Magnus, the quaestor, and Domitian, the prefect
of the East, because they apprised the emperor
of his innovations. The anger of Constantius
was excited ; and he summoned him to his
presence. Gallus did not dare to refuse obedi-
ence, and set out on his journey. When, how-
ever, he reached the island Elavona he was
killed by the emperor's order ; this event oc-
curred in the third year of his consulate, and the
seventh of Constantius.^

CHAP. VIII. — ARRIVAL OF CONSTANTIUS AT ROME.
A COUNCIL HELD IN ITALY. ACCOUNT OF WHAT
HAPPENED TO ATHANASIUS THE GREAT THROUGH
THE MACHINATIONS OF THE ARL\NS.

language and order like Soz. ; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 38; Am. Marcel,
xiv. I, 7-9, 11; Zos. it. 45-55; Eutrop. Brev. hist. Rom. x. 12, 13.

n ^ct ' Snr. li 11 -yA 3 An ^c^


» A.D. 353.


bOC. II. 33, 34.


A.D. 353.


On the death of the tyrants,^ Constantius an-
ticipated the restoration of peace and cessation
of tumults, and quitted Sirmium in order to re-
turn to ancient Rome, and to enjoy the honor
of a triumph after his victory over the tyrants.
He likewise intended to bring the Eastern and
the Western bishops, if possible, to one mind
concerning doctrine, by convening a council in
Italy. JuUus died about this period, after having
governed the church of Rome during twenty-
five years ;^ and Liberius succeeded him.
Those who were opposed to the doctrines of the
Nicaean council thought this a favorable opportu-
nity to calumniate the bishops whom they had
deposed, and to procure their ejection from the
church as abettors of false doctrine, and as dis-
turbers of the public peace ; and to accuse them
of having sought, during the life of Constans, to
excite a misunderstanding between the empe-
rors ; and it was true, as we related above,^ that
Constans menaced his brother with war unless
he would consent to receive the orthodox
bishops. Their efforts were principally directed
against Athanasius, towards whom they enter-
tained so great an aversion that, even when he
was protected by Constans, and enjoyed the
friendship of Constantius, they could not con-
ceal their enmity. Narcissus, bishop of Cilicia,
Theodore, bishop of Thrace, Eugenius, bishop
of Nicaea, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,
Menophantes, bishop of Ephesus, and other
bishops, to the number of thirty, assembled
themselves in Antioch,' and wrote a letter to all
the bishops of every region, in which they stated
that Athanasius had returned to his bishopric in
violation of the rules of the Church, that he had
not justified himself in any council, and that he
was only supported by some of his own faction ;
and they exhorted them not to hold communion
with him, nor to write to him, but to enter into
communion with George, who had been or-
dained to succeed him. .Athanasius only con-
temned these proceedings ; but he was about to
undergo greater trials than any he had yet expe-
rienced. Immediately on the death of Magnen-
tius, and as soon as Constantius found himself
sole master of the Roman Empire, he directed
all his efforts to induce the bishops of the West
to admit that the Son is of like substance with
the Father. In carrying out this scheme, how-
ever, he did not, in the first place, resort to
compulsion, but endeavored by persuasion to
obtain the concurrence of the other bishops
in the decrees of the Eastern bishops against
Athanasius ; for he thought that if he could

♦ Independent chapter.

* Sozomen is mistaken in saying twenty-five years: he was bishop
from A.D. 337-352, fifteen years; tnis error is due to his earlier con-
fusion of Julius and Silvester.

' See above, iii. 20.

' Sozomen is the only historian who makes mention of this Synod
at Antioch in Syria; probably from Sabinus.


IV. lo.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


305


bring them to be of one mind on this point, it
would be easy for him to regulate aright the
affairs connected with reUgion.

CHAP. IX. — COUNCIL OF MILAN. FLIGHT OF
ATHANASIUS.

The emperor ' was extremely urgent to con-
vene a council in Milan, yet few of the Eastern
bishops repaired thither ; some, it appears, ex-
cused themselves from attendance under the
plea of illness ; others, on account of the length
and difficulties of the journey. There were,
however, upwards of three hundred of the
Western bishops at the council. The Eastern
bishops insisted that Athanasius should be con-
demned to banishment, and expelled from Alex-
andria ; and the others, either from fear, fraud,
or ignorance, assented to the measure. Diony-
sius, bishop of Alba, the metropolis of Italy,
Eusebius, bishop of Vercella in Liguria, Paulinus,
bishop of Treves, Rhodanus,^ and Lucifer, were
the only bishops who protested against this de-
cision ; and they declared that Athanasius ought
not to be condemned on such slight pretexts ;
and that the evii would not cease with his con-
demnation ; but that those who supported the
orthodox doctrines concerning the Godhead
would be forthwith subjected to a plot. They
represented that the whole measure was a scheme
concerted by the emperor and the Arians with
the view of suppressing the Nicene faith. Their
boldness was punished by an edict of immediate
banishment, and Hilary was exiled with them.
The result too plainly showed for what purpose
the council of Milan had been convened. For
the councils which were held shortly after at
Ariminum and Seleucia were evidently designed
to change the doctrines established by the
Nicaean council, as I shall directly show.

Athanasius, being apprised that plots had
been formed against him at court, deemed it
prudent not to repair to the emperor himself, as
he knew that his life would be thereby endan-
gered, nor did he think that it would be of any
avail. He, however, selected five of the Egyp-
tian bishops, among whom was Serapion, bishop
of Thumis, a prelate distinguished by the won-
derful sanctity of his life and the power of his
eloquence, and sent them with three presbyters
of the Church to the emperor, who was then in
the West. They were directed to attempt, if
possible, to conciliate the emperor ; to reply,
if requisite, to the calumnies of the hostile party ;
and to take such measures as they deemed most

' Ruf. H. E. i. 19, 20; Athan. Hist. Arian. 31-46, .ind probably
the lost letter of consecration addressed to the nuns; Theodoret,
H. E. ii. 14, 15; Soc. ii. 36; Snip. Sev. //. .9. ii. 39.

^ Or, as Rufinus and Sulpicius Sevenis call him, Rhodanius. Soc-
rates omits Rhodanius and Lucifer, and does not mention Hilary.
Sozomen evidently used Rufinus. Rhodanius was bishop of Tou-
louse. Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 39.


advisable for the welfare of the Church and
himself Shortly after they had embarked on
their voyage, Athanasius received some letters
from the emperor, summoning him to the palace.
Athanasius and all the people of the Church
were greatly troubled at this command ; for
they considered that no safety could be enjoyed
when acting either in obedience or in disobedi-
ence to an emperor of heterodox sentiments.
It was, however, determined that he should
remain at Alexandria, and the bearer of the
letters quitted the city without having effected
anything. The following summer, another mes-
senger from the emperor arrived with the gov-
ernors of the provinces, and he was charged
to urge the departure of Athanasius from the
city, and to act with hostility against the clergy.
When he perceived, however, that the people of
the Church were fbll of courage, and ready to
take up arms, he also departed from the city
without accomplishing his mission. Not long
after, troops, called the Roman legions, which
were quartered in Egypt and Libya, marched
into Alexandria. As it was reported that Atha-
nasius was concealed in the church known by
the name "Theonas," the commander of the
troops, and Hilary,^ whom the emperor had
again intrusted with the transaction of this affair,
caused the doors of the church to be burst
open, and thus effected their entrance ; but
they did not find Athanasius within the walls,
although they sought for him everywhere. It is
said that he escaped this and many other perils
by the Divine interposition ; and that God had
disclosed this previously ; directly as he went
out, the soldiers took the doors of the church,
and were within a little of seizing him.

CHAP. X. DIVERS MACHINATIONS OF THE ARIANS

AGAINST ATHANASIUS, AND HIS ESCAPE FROM
VARIOUS DANGERS THROUGH DIVINE INTERPOSI-
TION. EVIL DEEDS PERPETRATED BY GEORGE IN
EGYPT AFTER THE EXPULSION OF ATHANASIUS.

There is no doubt but that Athanasius was
beloved of God, and endowed with the gift of
foreseeing the future.* More wonderful facts than
those which we have related might be adduced to
prove his intimate acquaintance with futurity.
It happened that during the life of Constans,
the Emperor Constantius was once determined
upon ill-treating this holy man ; but Athanasius
fled, and concealed himself with some one of
his acquaintances. He lived for a long time
in a subterraneous and sunless dwelling, which

' The general was Syrianus; Hilary was notary to the Emperor
Constantius, and was sent by him to expel Athanasius from Alexan-
dria. On the whole passage, see Athan. Apol. ad Const, imp.
19-25: Apol. de fuga sua, 24.

* Ruf. //. E. i. 18, 33, 34; Soc. ii. 45; iii. 14; Sozomen groups
these stories without regard to time; see next chapter; he has some
independent material.


3o6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. lo.


had been used as a reservoir for water. No
one knew where he was concealed except a
serving-woman, who seemed faithful, and who
waited upon him. As the heterodox, however,
were anxiously intent upon taking Athanasius
alive, it appears that, by means of gifts or
promises, they at length succeeded in corrupting
the attendant. But Athanasius was forewarned
by God of her treachery, and effected his escape
from the place. The servant was punished for
having made a false deposition against her
masters, while they, on their part, fled the
country ; for it was accounted no venial crime
by the heterodox to receive or to conceal
Athanasius, but was, on the contrary, regarded
as an act of disobedience against the express
commands of the emperor, and as a crime
against the empire, and was visited as such by
the civil tribunals. It has come to my hearing
that Athanasius was saved on another occasion
in a similar manner. He was again obliged for
the same reason to flee for his life ; and he set
sail up the Nile ' with the design of retreating
to the further districts of Egypt, but his enemies
received intelligence of his intention, and pur-
sued him. Being forewarned of God that he
would be pursued, he announced it to his
fellow-passengers, and commanded them to
return to Alexandria. While he sailed down the
river, his plotters rowed by. He reached Alex-
andria in safety, and effectually concealed him-
self in the midst of its similar and numerous
houses. His success in avoiding these and many
other perils led to his being accused of sorcery
by the pagan and the heterodox. It is reported,
that once, as he was passing through the city, a
crow was heard to caw, and that a number of
pagans who happened to be on the spot, asked
him in derision what the crow was saying. He
replied, smiling, " It utters the sound eras, the
meaning of which in the Latin language is, ' to-
morrow ' ; and it has hereby announced to you
that the morrow will not be propitious to you ;
for it indicates that you will be forbidden by the
Roman emperor to celebrate your festival to-
morrow." Although this prediction of Athanasius
appeared to be absurd, it was fulfilled ; for the
following day edicts were transmitted to the
governors from the emperor, by which it was
commanded that the pagans were not to be
permitted to assemble in the temples to perform
their usual ceremonies, nor to celebrate their
festival ; and thus was abolished the most solemn
and magnificent feast which the pagans had
retained. What I have said is sufficient to show
that this holy man was endowed with the gift
of prophecy.

After Athanasius had escaped, in the manner

> Soc. iii. n.


we have described, from those who sought to
arrest him, his clergy and people remained for
some time in possession of the churches ; but
eventually, the governor of Egypt and the com-
mander of the army forcibly ejected all those
who maintained the sentiments of Athanasius, in
order to deliver up the government of the
churches to those who favored George, whose
arrival was then expected. Not long after he
reached the city, and the churches were placed
under his authority. He ruled by force rather
than by priestly moderation ; and as he strove
to strike terror into the minds of the people,
and carried on a cruel persecution against the
followers of Athanasius, and, moreover, impris-
oned and maimed many men and women, he
was accounted a tyrant. For these reasons he fell
into a universal hate ; the people were so deeply
incensed at his conduct, that they rushed into
the church, and would have torn him to pieces ;
in such an extremity of danger, he escaped with
difficulty, and fled to the emperor. Those who
held the sentiments of Athanasius then took
possession of the churches. But they did not
long retain the mastery of them ; for the com-
mander of the troops in Egypt came and re-
stored the churches to the partisans of George.
An imperial shorthand writer of the notary
class was afterwards sent to punish the leaders
of the sedition, and he tortured and scourged
many of the citizens. When George returned a
little while after, he was more formidable, it
appears, than ever, and was regarded with
greater aversion than before, for he instigated
the emperor to the perpetration of many evil
deeds ; and besides, the monks of Egypt openly
declared him to be perfidious and inflated with
arrogance. The opinions of these monks were
always adopted by the people, and their testi-
mony was universally received, because they
were noted for their virtue and the philosophical
tenor of their lives.

CHAP. XI. — UBERIUS, BISHOP OF ROME, AND THE
CAUSE OF HIS BEING EXILED BY CONSTANTIUS.
FEI.IX HIS SUCCESSOR.

Although what I have recorded did not
occur to Athanasius and the church of Alexan-
dria, at the same period of time after the death
of Constans, yet I deemed it right, for the sake
of greater clearness, to relate all these events
collectively. The council of Milan - was dis-
solved without any business having been trans-
acted, and the emperor condemned to banish-
ment all those who had opposed the designs of
the enemies of Athanasius. As Constantius


' Athan. ffi'it. Arian. 31-46; Ruf. H. E. i. 21; Soc. ii. 36;
Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 39: cf. Theodorct, f/. E. ii. 16, dialogue be-
tween the emperor and Libcrius; Am. Marcel, xv. 7.


IV. 12.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


307


wished to establish uniformity of doctrine
throughout the Church, and to unite the priest-
hood in the maintenance of the same senti-
ments, he formed a plan to convene the bishops
of every religion to a council, to be held in the
West. He was aware of the difficulty of carry-
ing this scheme into execution, arising from the
vast extent of land and seas which some of the
bishops would have to traverse, yet he did not
altogether despair of success. While this pro-
ject was occupying his mind, and before he pre-
pared to make his triumphal entrance into
Rome, he sent for Liberius, the bishop of
Rome, and strove to persuade him to conform-
ity of sentiment with the priests by whom he
was attended, amongst whom was Eudoxius. As
Liberius, however, refused compliance, and pro-
tested that he would never yield on this point,
the emperor banished him to Beroea, in Thrace.
It is alleged, that another pretext for the banish-
ment of Liberius was, that he would not with-
draw from communion with Athanasius, but
manfully opposed the emperor, who insisted that
Athanasius had injured the Church, had occa-
sioned the death of the elder of his two
brothers,' and had sown the seeds of enmity
between Constans and himself. As the empe-
ror revived all the decrees which had been
enacted against Athanasius by various councils,
and particularly by that of Tyre, Liberius told
him that no regard ought to be paid to edicts
which were issued from motives of hatred, of
favor, or of fear. He desired that the bishops
of every region should be made to sign the for-
mulary of faith compiled at Nicsea, and that
those bishops who had been exiled on account
of their adherence to it should be recalled. He
suggested that after these matters were righted
all the bishops should, at their own expense,
and without being furnished either with public
conveyances or money, so as not to seem bur-
densome and destructive, proceed to Alexan-
dria, and make an accurate test of the truth,
which could be more easily instituted at that
city than elsewhere, as the injured and those
who had inflicted injury as well as the confuters
of the charges dwelt there. He then exhibited
the letter written by Valens and Ursacius to
Julius, his predecessor in the Roman see, in
which they solicited his forgiveness, and ac-
knowledged that the depositions brought against
Athanasius, at the Mareotis,were false ; and he be-
sought the emperor not to condemn Athanasius
during his absence, nor to give credit to enact-
ments which were evidently obtained by the
machinations of his enemies. With respect to
the alleged injuries which had been inflicted on
his two brothers, he entreated the emperor not


1 The dialogue is preserved in Theodoret, H. E. ii. 16. Cf. Hil.
Fragm. v., vi.


to revenge himself by the hands of priests who
had been set apart by God, not for the execu-
tion of vengeance, but for sanctification, and the
performance of just and benevolent actions.

The emperor perceiving that Liberius was not
disposed to comply with his mandate, com-
manded that he should be conveyed to Thrace,
unless he would change his mind within two
days. "To me, O emperor," replied Liberius,
" there is no need of deliberation ; my resolu-
tion has long been formed and decided, and I
am ready to go forth to exile." It is said, that
when he was being conducted to banishment,
the emperor sent him five hundred pieces of
gold ; he, however, refused to receive them,
and said to the messenger who brought them,
" Go, and tell him who sent this gold to give it
to the flatterers and hypocrites^ who surround
him, for their insatiable cupidity plunges them
into a state of perpetual want which can never
be reHeved. Christ, who is in all respects,'' like
unto his Father, supplies us with food and with
all good things."

Liberius having for the above reasons been
deposed from the Roman church, his govern-
ment was transferred to Felix, a deacon of the
clergy there. It is said that Felix always con-
tinued in adherence to the Nicene faith ; and
that, with respect to his conduct in religious
matters he was blameless. The only thing al-
leged against him was, that, prior to his ordina-
tion, he held communion with the heterodox.
When the emperor entered Rome, the people
loudly demanded Liberius, and besought his
return ; after consulting with the bishops who
were with him, he replied that he would recall
Liberius and restore him to the people, if he
would consent to embrace the same sentiments
as those held by the priests of the court.


CHAP. XII. AETIUS, THE SYRIAN, AND EUDOXIUS,

THE SUCCESSOR OF LEONTIUS IN ANTIOCH. CON-
CERNING THE TERM " CONSUBSTANTIAL."

About this time,* Aetius broached his peculiar
opinions concerning the Godhead. He was
then deacon of the church of Antioch, and had
been ordained by Leontius.^ He maintained,
like Arius, that the Son is a created being, that
He was created out of nothing, and that He is
dissimilar from the Father. As he was extremely
addicted to contention, very bold in his asser-
tions on theological subjects, and prone to have

' He means the Arian bishops. It is like the terms Athana.sius
employs.

3 One would have expected from Liberius " the same," i.e. o/ioi
instead of b/aoiot.

* iii. 15, and references there; Athan. ^^ Synodis,%, 38; Soc. ii.
35, 36; cf. Theodoret, H. E. ii. 24.

^ So also says Socrates. But Epiphanius asserts that he was
ordained by George of Alexandria in Taurus. Adv. hares, iii. i, 38
{hares. Ixxiii.).


3o8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 12.


recourse to a very subtle mode of argumentation,
he was accounted a heretic, even by those who
held the same sentiments as himself. When he
had been, for this reason, excommunicated by
the heterodox, he feigned a refusal to hold com-
munion with them, because, they had unjustly
admitted Arius into communion after he had
perjured himself by declaring to the Emperor
Constantine that he maintained the doctrines of
the council of Nicaea. Such is the account
given of Aetius.

While the emperor was in the West, tid-
ings arrived of the death of Leontius, bishop
of Antioch. Eudoxius requested permission of
the emperor to return to Syria, that he might
superintend the affairs of that church. On per-
mission being granted, he repaired with all
speed to Antioch, and installed himself as bishop
of that city without the sanction of George,
bishop of Laodicea ; of Mark, bishop of Are-
thusa ; of the other Syrian bishops ; or of any
other bishop to whom the right of ordination
pertained. It was reported that he acted with
the concurrence of the emperor, and of the
eunuchs belonging to the palace, who, like
Eudoxius, favored the doctrines of Aetius, and
believed that the Son is dissimilar from the
Father. When Eudoxius found himself in pos-
session of the church of Antioch, he ventured
to uphold this heresy openly. He assembled in
Antioch all those who held the same opinions
as himself, among whom was Acacius, bishop
of Tyre, and rejected the terms, " of like sub-
stance," and " consubstantial," under the pretext
that they had been denounced by the Western
bishops. For Hosius, with some of the priests
there, had certainly, with the view of arresting
the contention excited by Valens, Ursacius, and
Germanius,' consented, though by compulsion,^
at Sirmium, as it is reported, to refrain from the
use of the terms " consubstantial " and " of like
substance," because such terms do not occur in
the Holy Scriptures, and are beyond the under-
standing of men.' They * sent an epistle to the
bishops as though these sustained the writings
of Hosius on this point, and conveyed their
thanks to Valens, Ursacius, and Germanius,
because they had given the impulse of right
views to the Western bishops.

CHAP. XIII. — INNOVATIONS OF EUDOXIUS CENSURED
IN A LETTER WRITTEN BY GEORGE, BISHOP OF
LAODICEA. DEPUTATION FROM THE COUNCIL OF
ANCVRA TO CONSTANTIUS.

' Otherwise called Germinius. He was afterwards promoted to
the bishopric of Sirmium, according to Athan. Hist. A nan. 74; cf.
de Synodis, i, 8.

' Sec, above, chap. vi. near the end.

' Athanasius also excuses the lapse of Hosius on the ground
that he acted under compulsion.

' Not the individual fetter of Eudoxius, according to some read-
ings, but of the Synod of Antioch.


Ai-TER Eudoxius had introduced these new
doctrines, many members of the church of Anti-
och, who were opposed to them, were excom-
municated.'^ George, bishop of Laodicea, gave
them a letter to take to the bishops who had
been invited from the neighboring towns of
Ancyra in Galatia by Basil, for the purpose of
consecrating a church which he had erected.
This letter was as follows : —

" George, to his most honored lords Mace-
donius, Basil, Cecropius, and Eugenius, sends
greeting in the Lord.

" Nearly the whole city has suffered from the
shipwreck of Aetius. The disciples of this
wicked man, whom you contemned, have been
encouraged by Eudoxius, and promoted by him
to clerical appointments, and Aetius himself has
been raised to the highest honor. Go, then, to
the assistance of this great city, lest by its ship-
wreck the whole world should be submerged.
Assemble yourselves together, and solicit the
signatures of other bishops, that Aetius may be
ejected from the church of Antioch, and that
his disciples who have been manipulated before-
hand into the lists of the clergy by Eudoxius,
may be cut off. If Eudoxius persist in affirming
with Aetius, that the Son is dissimilar from the
Father, and in preferring those who uphold this
dogma to those who reject it, the city of Anti-
och is lost to you." Such was the strain of
George's letter.

The bishops who were assembled at Ancyra
clearly perceived by the enactments of F^udox-
ius at Antioch, that he contemplated the in-
troduction of innovations in doctrine ; they
apprised the emperor of this fact, and besought
him that the doctrine established at Sardica, at
Sirmium, and at other councils, might be con-
firmed, and especially the dogma that the Son
is of like substance with the Father. In order
to proffer this request to the emperor, they sent
to him a deputation composed of the following
bishops : Basil, bishop of Ancyra ; Eustathius,
bishop of Sebaste ; Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus ;
and Leontius, the presbyter of the imperial bed-
chamber. On their arrival at the palace, they
found that Asphalius, a presbyter of Antioch,
and a zealot of the Aetian heresy, was on the
point of taking his departure, after having ter-
minated the business for which he undertook the
journey and having obtained a letter from the em-
peror. On receiving, however, the intelligence
concerning the heresy conveyed by the depu-
tation from Ancyra, Constantius condemned
Eudoxius and his followers, withdrew the letter
he had confided to Asphalius, and wrote the fol-
lowing one : —

" Philost. iv. 4-6, 8: X. 12: and fragment in Suidas s. Eudoxius;
Athan. Hist. Ari'an. 4, 5; Hil. de Synod. 8, 9, 90; Soc. ii. 37, 40;
Theodoret, H. E. ii. 25, 26.


IV. ISO


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


309


CHAP. XIV. — LETTER OF THE EMPEROR CONSTAN-
TIUS AGAINST EUDOXIUS AND HIS PARTISANS.

" CoNSTANTius AUGUSTUS the Conqueror, to
the holy church in Antioch.^

" Eudoxius came without our authority ; let no
one suppose that he had it, for we are far from re-
garding such persons with favor. If they have
recourse to deceit with others in transactions like
this, they give evidence that they will refine
away the truth in still higher things. For from
what will they voluntarily refrain, who, for the
sake of power, follow the round of the cities,
leaping from one to another, as a kind of wan-
derer, prying into every nook, led by the desire
for more ? It is reported that there are among
these people certain quacks and sophists, whose
very names are scarcely to be tolerated, and
whose deeds are evil and most impious. You
all know to what set of people I allude ; for you
are all thoroughly acquainted with the doctrines
of Aetius and the heresy which he has cultivated.
He and his followers have devoted themselves
exclusively to the task of corrupting the people ;
and these clever fellovvs have had the audacity
to publish that we approved of their ordination.
Such is the report they circulate, after the man-
ner of those who talk overmuch ; but it is not
true, and, indeed, far removed from the truth.
Recall to your recollection the words of which
we made use, when we first made a declaration
of our belief ; for we confessed that our Saviour
is the Son of God, and of like substance with
the Father. But these people, who have the
audacity to set forth whatever enters their imag-
ination, concerning the Godhead, are not far re-
moved from atheism ; and they strive, moreover,
to propagate their opinions among others. We
are convinced that their iniquitous proceedings
will fall back upon their own heads. In the
meantime, it is sufficient to eject them from
synods and from ordinary conference ; for I will
not now allude to the chastisements which must
hereafter overtake them, unless they will desist
from their madness. How great is the evil they
perpetrate, when they collect together the most
wicked persons, as if by an edict, and they select
the leaders of heresy for the clergy, thus debas-
ing the reverend order as though they were al-
lowed to do what they please! Who can bear
with people who fill the cities with impiety, who
secrete impurity in the most distant regions,
and who delight in nothing but in injuring the
righteous? What an evil-working unity it is,
which limps forward to enthrone itself in the
diviner seats ! Now is the time for those who
have imbibed the truth to come forward into the

1 Independent document. Cf. Theodoret, ii. 26, who alludes to the
first part of this letter, then apparently mixes another one by Con-
stantius with it.


light, and whoever were previously restrained
through fear, and now would escape from con-
ventionalism, let them step into the middle ; for
the artifices of these evil men have been thor-
oughly confuted, and no sort of device can be
invented which will deliver them from acting
impiously. It is the duty of good men to retain
the faith of the Fathers, and, so to speak, to
augment it, without busying themselves with
other matters. I earnestly exhort those who
have escaped, though but recently, from the pre-
cipice of this heresy, to assent to the decrees
which the bishops who are wise in divine learn-
ing, have righdy determined for the better."

Thus we see that the heresy usually denomin-
ated Anomian was within a little of becoming
predominant at this period.


CHAP. XV. — THE EMPEROR CONSTANTIUS REPAIRS
TO SIRMIUM, RECALLS LIBERIUS, AND RESTORES
HIM TO THE CHURCH OF ROME ; HE ALSO COM-
MANDS FELIX TO ASSIST LIBERIUS IN THE SACER-
DOTAL OFFICE.

Not long after these events, the emperor
returned to Sirmium from Rome ; on receiving a
deputation from the Western bishops, he recalled
Liberius from Beroea.^ Constantius urged him,
in the presence of the deputies of the Eastern
bishops, and of the other priests who were at
the camp, to confess that the Son is not of the
same substance as the Father. He was instigated
to this measure by Basil, Eustathius, and Euse-
bius, who possessed great influence over him.
They had formed a compilation, in one docu-
ment, of the decrees against Paul of Samosata,
and Photinus, bishop of Sirmium ; to which
they subjoined a formulary of faith drawn up at
Antioch at the consecration of the church, as if
certain persons had, under the pretext of the
term " consubstantial," attempted to establish a
heresy of their own. Liberius, Athanasius, Alex-
ander, Severianus, and Crescens, s^-priest of Af-
rica, were induced to assent to this document, as
were likewise Ursacius, Germanius, bishop of
Sirmium, Valens, bishop of Mursa, and as many
of the Eastern bishops as were present. They
partially approved of a confession of faith drawn
up by Liberius, in which he declared that those
who afiirm that the Son is not like unto the
Father in substance and in all other respects,
are excommunicated. For when Eudoxius and
his partisans at Antioch, who favored the heresy
of Aetius, received the letter of Hosius, they
circulated the report that Liberius had renounced
the term "consubstantial," and had admitted

' Athan. Hist. Arian. 35-41; Epistles of Liberius, M. P. L. 8;
Hil. Fragm. iv.-vi.; Theodoret, H. E. ii. 17; Ruf. i. 22; Philost. iv.
3; Soc. ii. 37; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 39. Many independent details.


3IO


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 15.


that the Son is dissimilar from the Father.
After these enactments had been made by the
Western bishops, the emperor permitted Liberius
to return to Rome. The bishops who were then
convened at Sirmium ' wrote to FeHx, who gov-
erned the Roman church, and to the other bishops,
desiring them to receive Liberius. They directed
that both should share the apostolical throne
and discharge the priestly duties in common,
with harmony of mind ; and that whatever ille-
galities might have occurred in the ordination
of Felix, or the banishment of Liberius, might
be buried in oblivion. The people of Rome
regarded Liberius as a very excellent man, and
esteemed him highly on account of the courage
he had evinced in opposing the emperor, so
that they had even excited seditions on his
account, and had gone so far as to shed blood.
Felix survived but a short time ; and Liberius
found himself in sole possession of the church.
This event was, no doubt, ordained by God,
that the seat of Peter might not be dishonored
by the occupancy of two bishops ; for such an
arrangement is a sign of discord, and is foreign
to ecclesiastical law.


CHAP. XVI. — THE EMPEROR PURPOSED, ON ACCOUNT
OF THE HERESY OF AETIUS AND THE INNOVATIONS
IN ANTIOCH, 10 CONVENE A COUNCIL AT NICO-
MEDIA ; BUT AS AN EARTHQUAKE TOOK PLACE IN
THAT CITY, AND MANY OTHER AFFAIRS INTER-
VENED, THE COUNCIL WAS FIRST CONVENED AT
NIC^A, AND AFTERWARDS AT ARIMINUM AND
SELEUCIA. ACCOUNT OF ARSACIUS, THE CON-
FESSOR.

Such were the events which transpired at
Sirmium. It seemed at this period as if, from
the fear of displeasing the emperor, the Eastern
and Western Churches had united in the pro-
fession of the same doctrine. The emperor had
determined upon convening a council at Nicaea
to take into consideration the innovations intro-
duced at Antioch, and the heresy of Aetius.^
As Basil, however, and his party were averse to
the council being held in this city, because
doctrinal questions had previously been agitated
there, it was determined to hold the council at
Nicomedia in Bithynia ; and edicts were issued,
summoning the most intelligent and eloquent
bishops of every nation to repair thither punc-
tually on an appointed day, so that it might be
the privilege of all the priests of the state to
share in the Synod and to be present at its
decisions. The great number of these bishops
had commenced their journey when the calamity

• The fourth Sirmium council, a.d. 358.

• Philost. iv. 10, 11; Athan. dt Sytindis, i-T, Soc. ii. 37, 39;
cf. Theodoret, H. E.'\\. 18, 26. Soz.'s facts arc more voluminous,
and the grouping independent.


that had come upon Nicomedia was reported,
and that God had shaken the entire city to its
foundations. Since the story of the destruction
of the city everywhere prevailed and grew, the
bishops arrested their journey ; for as is usual
in such cases, far more was rumored to those
at a distance, than had actually occurred. It
was reported that Nicaea, Perinthus, and the
neighboring cities, even Constantinople, had
been involved in the same catastrophe. The
orthodox bishops were grieved immoderately at
this occurrence ; for the enemies of religion
took occasion, on the overthrow of a magnifi-
cent church, to represent to the emperor that
a multitude of bishops, men, women, and chil-
dren fled to the church in the hope of their
finding safety, and that they all perished. This
report was not true. The earthquake occurred
at the second hour of the day, at which time
there was no assembly in the church. The only
bishops who were killed were Cecropius, bishop
of Nicomedia, and a bishop from the Bosphorus,
and they were outside of the church when the
fatal accident happened. The city was shaken
in an instant of time, so that the people had not
the power, even if they had the wish, to seek
safety by flight ; at the first experience of dan-
ger, they were either preserved, or they perished
on the spot where they were standing.^

It is said that this calamity was predicted by
Arsacius.'* He was a Persian, and a soldier who
was employed in tending the emperor's lions ;
but during the reign of Licinius he became a
noted confessor, and left the army. He then
went to the citadel of Nicomedia, and led the
life of a monastic philosopher within its walls.
Here a vision from heaven appeared to him,
and he was commanded to quit the city im-
mediately, that he might be saved from the
calamity about to happen. He ran with the
utmost earnestness to the church, and besought
the clergy to ofi"er supplications to God that His
anger might be turned away. But, finding that
far from being believed by them, he was regarded
with ridicule, and as disclosing unlooked-for suf-
ferings, he returned to his tower, and prostrated
himself on the ground in prayer. Just at this
moment the earthquake occurred, and many
perished. Those who were spared fled into the
country and the desert. And as happens in a
prosperous and large city, there were fires in the
brasiers and extinguishers of every house, and in
the ovens of the baths, and in the furnaces of all
who use fire in the arts ; and when the framework
fell in ruin, the flame was hemmed in by the stuff,
and of course there was dry wood commingled,
much of which was oily, — this served as a con-


' Cf. Am. Marcell. xvii. 7; Idatius under 358 in Descriptio Con-
sulum.

* A story from tradition by Soz.


IV. 1 6.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


311


tribution to the rapid conllagration, and nour-
ished the fire without stint ; the flame creeping
everywhere, and attaching to itself all circumja-
cent material, made the entire city, so to speak,
one mass ot' fire. It being impossible to obtain
access to the houses, those who iiad been saved
ft-om the earthquake rushed to the citadel.
Arsacius was found dead in the unshaken tower,
and prostrated on the ground, in the same
posture in which he had begim to pray. It was
said that he had supplicated God to permit him
to die, because he preferred death to beholding
the destruction of a city in which he had first
known Christ, and practiced monastical philos-
ophy. As I have been led to speak of this good
man, it is well to mention that he was endowed
by God with the power of exorcising demons
and of purifying those troubled by them. A
man possessed with a demon once ran through
the market-place with a naked sword in his
hand. The people fled from him, and the
whole city was in confusion. Arsacius went out
to meet him, and called upon the name of
Christ, and at that name the demon was ex-
pelled, and the man restored to sanity. Be-
sides the above, Arsacius performed many other
actions beyond the power and skill of man.
There was a dragon, or some other species of
reptile, which had entrenched itself in a cavity
of the roadside, and which destroyed those who
passed by, with its breath. Arsacius went to the
spot and engaged in prayer, and the serpent
voluntarily crept forth from its hole, dashed its
head against the ground, and killed itself. All
these details I have obtained from persons who
heard them stated by those who had seen
Arsacius.

As the bishops were deterred from continuing
their journey by the intelligence of the calamity
which had occurred at Nicomedia, some awaited
the' further commands of the emperor, and
others declared their opinions concerning the
faith in letters which they wrote on the subject.
The emperor hesitates as to what measures
ought to be adopted, and writes to consult
Basil as to whether a council ought to be con-
vened. In his reply, it appears, Basil com-
mended his piety, and tried to console him for
the destruction of Nicomedia by examples
drawn from the Holy Scriptures ; he exhorted
him, for the sake of religion, to hasten the
Synod ; and not to drop such a proof of his
zeal for religion, and not to dismiss the priests
who had been gathered together for this pur-
pose, and had already set forth and were on
their way, until some business had been trans-
acted. He also suggested that the council might
be held at Nicsea instead of Nicomedia, so that
the disputed points might be finally decided on
the very spot where they had been first called


in question. Basil, in writing to this effect,
believed that the emperor would be pleased
with this proposition, as he had himself origi-
nally suggested the propriety of holding the
council at Nicaea. On receiving this epistle
from Basil, the emperor commanded that, at the
commencement of summer, the bishops should
assemble together at Nicaea, with the exception
of those who were laboring under bodily infirm-
ity ; and these latter were to depute presbyters
and deacons to make known their sentiments
and to consult together on contested points of
doctrine, and arrive at the same decision con-
cerning all points at issue. He ordained that
ten delegates should be selected from the West-
ern churches, and as many from the Eastern, to
take cognizance of the enactments that might
be issued, and to decide whether they were in
accordance with the Holy Scriptures, and also to
exercise a general superintendence over the trans-
actions of the council. After further consulta-
tion the emperor enacted that the bishops should
remain where they might be residing, or in their
own churches, until it had been decided where
the council was to be held, and until they re-
ceived notice to repair thither. He then writes
to Basil, and directs him to inquire by letter of
the Eastern bishops, where they would advise the
council to be held, so that a public announce-
ment might be made at the commencement of
spring ; for the emperor was of opinion that it
was not advisable to convene the council at
Nicaea, on account of the earthquake which had
recently occurred in the province. Basil wrote
to the bishops of every province, urging them to
dehberate together, and to decide quickly upon
the locality in which it would be most expedient
to hold the council, and he prefixed a copy of
the emperor's letter to his epistle. As is fre-
quently the case in similar circumstances, the
bishops were divided in opinion on the subject,
and Basil repaired to the emperor, who was then
at Sirmium. He found several bishops at that
city who had gone thither on their own private
affairs, and among them were Mark, bishop of
Arethusa, and George, who had been appointed
to preside over the church of Alexandria. When
at length it was decided that the council should
be held in Seleucia, a city of Isauria, by Valens
and his adherents, for Valens was then sojourn-
ing in Sirmium ; since they favored the heresy of
the Anomians, they urged the bishops who were
present at the military court, to subscribe to a
formulary of the faith which had been prepared,
and in which there was no mention of the term
" substance." But while preparations were being
zealously made for convening the council, Eu-
doxius and Acacius, Ursacius and Valens, with
their followers, reflected that, while. many of the
bishops were attached to the Nicene faith, and


312


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. i6.


others favored the formulary drawn up at the
consecration of the church of Antioch, yet that
both parties retained the use of the term " sub-
stance," and maintained that the Son was, in
every respect, Hke unto the Father ; and being
aware that if both parties assembled together in
one place they would readily condemn the doc-
trines of Aetius, as being contrary to their respec-
tive creeds, they so contrived matters that the
bishops of the West were convened at Ariminum,
and those of the East at Seleucia, a city of Isau-
ria. As it is easier to convince a few than a great
many individuals, they conceived that they might
possibly lead both parties to favor their senti-
ments by dealing with them separately, or that
they might, at any rate, succeed with one, so
that their heresy might not incur universal con-
demnation. They accomplished this through
Eusebius, a eunuch who was superintendent of
the imperial house : he was on terms of friend-
ship with Eudoxius, and upheld the same doc-
trines, and many of those in power were seeking
to conciliate this very Eusebius.


CHAP. XVII. — PROCEEDINGS OF THE COUNCIL OF
ARIMINUM.

The emperor^ was persuaded that it would
not be desirable for the public, on account of
the expense, nor advantageous to the bishops,
on account of the length of the journey, to con-
vene them all to the same place for the purpose
of holding a council. He therefore writes to
the bishops who were then at Ariminum, as well
as to those who were then at Seleucia, and
directed them to enter upon an investigation of
contested points concerning the faith, and then
to turn their attention to the complaints of Cyril,
bishop of Jerusalem, and of other bishops who had
remonstrated against the injustice of the decrees
of deposition and banishment which had been
issued against them, and to examine the legality
of various sentences which had been enacted
against other bishops. There were, in fact, sev-
eral accusations pending against different bishops.
George was accused by the Egyptians of rapine
and violence. Finally, the emperor commanded
that ten deputies should be sent to him from
each council, to inform him of their respective
proceedings.

In accordance with this edict, the bishops
assembled at the appointed cities. The Synod
at Ariminum first commenced proceedings ; - it
consisted of about four hundred members.
Those who regarded Athanasius with the greatest
enmity, were of opinion that there was nothing
further to be decreed against him. When they

• Athan. dr Synodis, 8-11; Soc. ii. 37; Ruf. i. 21; Philost.
H. E. iv. 10; Theodoret, H. E. ii. 18.

' A.D. 359.


had entered upon the investigation of doctrinal
questions, Valens and Ursacius, supported by
Germenius, Auxentius, Caius, and Demophilus,
advanced into the middle of the assembly, and
demanded that all the formularies of the faith
which had been previously compiled should be
suppressed, and that the formulary which they
had but a short time previously set forth in the
Latin language at Sirmium should be alone
retained. In this formulary it was taught,
according to Scripture, that the Son is like unto
the Father ; but no mention was made of the
substance of God. They declared that this
formulary had been approved by the emperor,
and that it was incumbent upon the council to
adopt it, instead of consulting too scrupulously
the individual opinions of every member of the
council, so that disputes and divisions might not
spring up, were the terms to be delivered up to
debate and accurate proof. They added that it
would better enable those who were more igno-
rant of the art of discourse to have a right con-
ception of God, than were they to introduce
novelties in terms, so akin to disputatious jug-
glery. By these representations, they designed
to denounce the use of the term " consubstan-
tial," because they said it was not found in the
Holy Scriptures, and was obscure to the multi-
tude ; and, instead of this term, they wished to
substitute the expression that " the Son is like
unto the Father in all things," which is borne
out by the Holy Scriptures. After they had read
their formulary containing the above representa-
tions, many of the bishops told them that no
new formulary of the faith ought to be set forth,
that those which had been previously compiled
were quite sufficient for all purposes, and that
they were met together for the express purpose
of preventing all innovations. These bishops
then urged those who had compiled and read
the formulary to declare publicly their con-
demnation of the Arian doctrine, as the cause of
all the troubles which had agitated the churches
of every region. Ursacius and Valens, Germenius
and Auxentius, Demophilus and Caius, having
protested against this protestation, the council
commanded that the expositions of the other
heresies should be read, and likewise that set
forth at Nicaea ; so that those formularies which
favored divers heresies might be condemned,
and those which were in accordance with the
Nicene doctrines might be approved ; in order
that there might be no further ground for dispute,
and no future necessity for councils, but that
an efficient decision might be formed.^ They
remarked that it was absurd to compose so many
formularies, as if they had but just commenced
to become acquainted with the faith, and as if


' This speech is quoted directly in Soc. ii. 37.


IV. 1 8.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


313


they wished to slight the ancient traditions of
the Church, by which the churches had been
governed by themselves, and by their prede-
cessors, many of whom had witnessed a good
confession, and had received the crown of mar-
tyrdom. Such were the arguments adduced by
these bishops, to prove that no innovations ought
to be attempted. As Valens and Ursacius and
their partisans refused to be convinced by these
arguments, but persisted in advocating the
adoption of their own formulary, they were de-
posed, and it was decided that their formulary
should be rejected. It was remarked that the
declaration at the commencement of this formu-
lary, of its having been compiled at Sirmium, in
the presence of Constantius, " the eternal Au-
gustus," and during the consulate of Eusebius
and Hypatius, was an absurdity. Athanasius
made the same remark, in a letter addressed to
one of his friends,^ and said that it was ridiculous
to term Constantius the eternal emperor, and
yet to shrink from acknowledging the Son of
God to be eternal ; he also ridiculed the date
afifixed to the formulary, as though condemnation
were meant to be thrown on the faith of former
ages, as well as on those who had, before that
period, been initiated into the faith.

After these events had transpired at Ariminum,
Valens and Ursacius, together with their ad-
herents, irritated at their deposition, repaired
with all haste to the emperor.


CHAP. XVIII. LETTER FROM THE COUNCIL AT

ARIMINUM TO THE EMPEROR CONSTANTIUS.

The Synod selected twenty bishops,^ and sent
them on an embassy to the emperor, with the
following letter, which has been translated from
Latin into Greek : — ^

" We believe that it is by the command of
God, as well as by the arrangement of your
piety, that we have been led from all the cities
of the West, to assemble at Ariminum, for the
purpose of declaring the faith of the CathoHc
Church, and of detecting those who have set
forth heresies in opposition to it. After a pro-
tracted investigation, we have come to the con-
clusion that it is best to preserve that faith which
has been continuous from antiquity, and which
was preached by the prophets, the evangelists,
the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Guar-
dian of your empire, and Protector of your
strength, by holding on thereto and guarding it
to the end. It would have been absurd, as well
as illegal, to have introduced any change in the
doctrines which were so rightly and so justly

1 Athan. de Synodis, 3; quoted by Soc. ii. 37.
^ The emperor had requested ten; cf. also ii. 23.
s Athan. de Synodis, c. 10; YiW. Fra^t. viii., Latin form; Soc.
ii. 37; Theod. ii 19.


propounded by the bishops at Nicaea, with the
concurrence of the most illustrious Constantine,
the emperor and your father, whose teaching
and thought has gone forth and been preached
in the universal hearing and reflection of men ;
and it is the antagonist and destroyer of the
Arian heresy ; through whose agency not only
that deflection from the faith, but all others
have been destroyed. There is great danger in
adding to, or in taking away from, these doc-
trines ; nor can the slightest alteration be made
in any one of them, without giving an oppor-
tunity to the adversaries to do what they list.
Ursacius and Valens, after having been sus-
pected of participating in and advising about the
Arian doctrine, were cut off from communion
with us. In the hope of being restored to com-
munion, they confessed their error, and obtained
forgiveness, as their own writings testify, through
which they were spared and received a par-
don from the charges. The occasion on which
the edict of forgiveness was conceded, was
at the council of Milan, when the presbyters of
the Roman church were also present.

" Since we know that the formulary of the
faith set forth at Nicaea was compiled with the
greatest care and accuracy, in the presence of
Constantine, of worthy memory, who maintained
it throughout his life, and at his baptism, and
when he departed to enjoy the merited peace
of heaven, we judge that it would be absurd to
attempt any alteration in it, and to overlook so
many holy confessors and martyrs, and the
writers and authors of this dogma, who have
bestowed much thought upon it, and have per-
petuated the ancient decree of the CathoHc
Church. God has transmitted the knowledge
of their faith to the time in which you live,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom you
reign and rule the world. Again have these
wretched men, who are lamentable, to our way
of thinking, announced themselves as heralds of
an impious view with unlawful rashness, and
have attempted to overturn the entire system
of truth. For according to your injunction, the
Synod was convened, and these men laid bare
the view of their own deceit ; for they attempted
an innovation which they introduced with knav-
ery and disturbance, and they found some com-
panions whom they captured for this nefarious
transaction ; viz. Germanius, Auxentius, and
Caius, who caused contention and discord. The
teaching of these men, although it was uniform,
exceeded the entire range of blasphemies. As
they perceived that they were after all not of the
same heresy, and that they did not think alike in
any of the points of their evil suggestions, they
went over to our symbol, so that it might appear
as some other document. The time was indeed
brief, but it was sufficient to refute their opinions.


3H


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. i8.


In order that the affairs of the Church might not
be wrecked by them and that the disturbance and
tumult which tossed everything to and fro might
be restrained, it appeared the safe thing to pre-
serve the ancient and immovable definitions, and
to eject the aforesaid persons from communion
with us. We have, for this reason, sent our re-
instructed deputies to your Clemency, and have
furnished them with letters, declaratory of the
sentiments of the council. These deputies have
been especially charged by us to maintain the
truths which were defined rightly by the found-
ers, and to instruct your Holiness as to the falsity
of the assertion of Valens and Ursacius, that a
few changes in righteous truths would produce
peace in the Church. For how can peace be
reproduced by those who destroy peace ? They
would be more likely to introduce contention
and disturbance into the other cities and into
the Church of Rome. We therefore entreat
your Clemency to consider our deputies with
gentle audience and mild look, and not to allow
the dead to be dishonored by any novel changes.
We pray you to permit us to remain in the defi-
nitions and decrees which we received from our
ancestors, who, we would affirm, did their work
with ready minds, with prudence, and with the
Holy Spirit. For these innovations not only
lead believers to infidelity, but also delude un-
believers to immaturity. We likewise entreat
you to command that the bishops who are now
absent from their churches, and of whom some
are laboring under the infirmities of old age,
and others under the privations of poverty, may
be furnished with the means of returning to their
own homes, in order that the churches may not
be longer deprived of their ministry.

" Again, we beseech you that nothing be taken
away from the former decisions, or added to
them ; let all remain unchanged, even as it has
been preserved from the piety of your father to
the present time ; so that we may not in future
be fatigued, and be compelled to become stran-
gers to our own parishes, but that bishops and
people may dwell together in peace, and be able
to devote themselves to prayer and supplication
for your own personal salvation and empire and
peace, which may the Deity graciously vouch-
safe to you uninterniptedly.

" Our deputies will show you the signatures
and the names of the bishops, and some of
them will offer instruction to your Holiness out
of the Sacred Scriptures."


CHAP. XIX. CONCERNING THE DEPUTIES OF THE
COUNCIL .\ND THE EMPEROR'S LETTER ; AGREE-
MENT OF THE ADHERENTS OF URSACIUS AND
VALENS AFTERWARDS WITH THE LETPER PUT
FORTH; EXILE OF THE ARCHBISHOPS. CON-


CERNING THE SYNOD AT NIOEA, AND THE
REASON WHY THE SYNOD W.\S HELD IN ARIMI-
NUM.

We have now transcribed the letter of the
council of Ariminum. Ursacius and Valens,
with their adherents, anticipating the arrival of
the deputies of the council, showed to the em-
peror the document which they had read, and
calumniated the council.' The emperor was
displeased at the rejection of this formulary, as
it had been composed in his presence at Sirmi-
um, and he therefore treated Ursacius and Va-
lens with honor ; while, on the other hand, he
manifested great contempt towards the deputies,
and even delayed granting them an audience.
At length, however, he wrote to the Synod, and
informed them that an expedition which he was
compelled to undertake against the barbarians
prevented him from conferring with the deputies ;
and that he had, therefore, commanded them to
remain at Adrianople until his return, in order
that, when public business had been dismissed,
his mind might be at liberty to hear and test the
representations of the deputies ; " for it is right,"
he said, " to bring to the investigation of Divine
subjects, a mind unfettered by other cares."
Such was the strain of his letter.-

The bishops replied that they could never
depart from the decision they had formed, as
they had before declared in writing, and had
charged their deputies to declare ; and they be-
souglit him to regard them with favor, and to
give audience to their deputies, and to read their
letter. They told him that it must appear griev-
ous to him that so mar>>y churches should be de-
prived of their bishops ; and that, if agreeable to
him, they would return to their churches before
the winter. After writing this letter, which was
full of supplications and entreaties, the bishops
waited for a time for a reply ; but as no answer
was granted them, they afterwards returned to
their own cities.

What I have above stated clearly proves that
the bishops who were convened at Ariminum
confirmed the decrees which had of old been
set forth at Nicaea. Let us now consider how it
was that they eventually assented to the formu-
lary of faith compiled by Valens and Ursacius
and their followers. Various accounts have been
given me of this transaction. Some say that
the emperor was offended at the bishops having
departed from Ariminum without his permission,
and allowed Valens and his partisans to govern
the churches of the West according to their own
will, to set forth their own formulary, to eject

• In addition to the references in i8, Athan. de Synodis, 55;
Ep. ad. Afros episcofias, 3, 4. Documents reproduced in Soc.
ii. 37.

' The reply of the bishops to Constantius, also reproduced in
Theodoret, //. E. ii. 20, from Athan. de Synodis, 55. Soz. presents
the best general grouping of the facts.


IV. 20.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


315


those who refused to sign it from the churches,
and to ordain others in their place. They say
that, taking advantage of this power, Valens
compelled some of the bishops to sign the for-
mulary, and that he drove many who refused
compliance, from their churches, and first of all
Liberius, bishop of Rome. It is further asserted
that when "Valens and his adherents had acted
in this manner in Italy, they resolved to handle
the Eastern churches in the same way. As these
persecutors were passing through Thrace, they
stopped, it is said, at Nicaea, a city of that prov-
ince. They there convened a council, and read
the formulary of Ariminum, which they had trans-
lated into the Greek language, and by represent-
ing that it had been approved by a general coun-
cil, they obtained its adoption at Nicaea ; they
then cunningly denominated it the Nicaean for-
mulary of faith, in order, by the resemblance of
names, to deceive the simple, and cause it to be
mistaken for the ancient formulary set forth by
the Nicaean council. Such is the account given
by some parties. Others say that the bishops
who were convened at the council of Ariminum
were wearied by their* detention in that city, as
the emperor neither honored them with a reply
to their letter, nor granted them permission to
return to their own churches ; and that, at this
juncture, those who had espoused the opposite
heresy represented to them that it was not right
that divisions should exist between the priests
of the whole world for the sake of one word,
and that it was only requisite to admit that the
Son is like unto the Father in order to put an
end to all disputes ; for that the bishops of the
East would never rest until the term " substance "
was rejected. By these representations, it is said,
the members of the council were at length per-
suaded to assent to the formulary which Ursacius
had so sedulously pressed upon them. Ursacius
and his partisans, being apprehensive lest the
deputies sent by the council to the emperor
should declare what firmness was in the first
place evinced by the Western bishops, and
should expose the true cause of the rejection of
the term " consubstantial," detained these depu-
ties at Nicaea in Thrace throughout the winter,
under the pretext that no public conveyance
could be then obtained, and that the roads were
in a bad state for traveling ; and they then in-
duced them, it is said, to translate the formulary
they had accepted from Latin into Greek, and
to send it to the Eastern bishops. By this means,
they anticipated that the formulary would pro-
duce the impression they intended without the
fraud being detected ; for there was no one to
testify that the members of the council of Arimi-
num had not voluntarily rejected the term " sub-
stance " from deference to the Eastern bishops,
who were averse to the use of that word. But


this was evidently a false account; for all the
members of the council, with the exception of
a few, maintained strenuously that the Son is
like unto the Father in substance, and the only
differences of opinion existing between them
were that some said that the Son is of the same
substance as the Father, while others asserted
that he is of like substance with the Father.
Some state this, matter in one form, others in a
different one.


CHAP. XX. EVENTS WHICH TOOK PLACE IN THE

EASTERN CHURCHES : MARATHONIUS, ELEUSIUS
OF CYZICUS, AND MACEDONIUS EXPEL THOSE
WHO MAINTAIN THE TERM " CONSUBSTANTIAL."
CONCERNING THE CHURCHES OF THE NOVATIANS ;
HOW ONE CHURCH WAS TRANSPORTED ; THE NO-
VATL^NS ENTER INTO COMMUNION WITH THE
ORTHODOX.

While the events I have above related were
taking place in Italy, the East, even before the
council of Seleucia had been constituted, was
the theatre of great disturbances.^ The adher-
ents of Acacius and Patrophilus, having ejected
Maximus, turned over the church of Jerusalem
to Cyril. Macedonius harassed Constantinople
and the neighboring cities ; he was abetted by
Eleusius and Marathonius. This latter was origi-
nally a deacon in his own church, and was a
zealous superintendent of the poor of the monas-
tical dwellings inhabited by men and women,
and Macedonius raised him to the bishopric of
Nicomedia. Eleusius, who, not without distinc-^'
tion, was formerly attached to the military ser-
vice of the palace, had been ordained bishop of
Cyzicus. It is said that Eleusius and Maratho-
nius were both good men in their conduct, but
that they were zealous in persecuting those who
maintained that the Son is of the same substance
as the Father, although they were not so distinctly
cruel as Macedonius, who not only expelled
those who refused to hold communion with him,
but imprisoned some, and dragged others before
the tribunals. In many cases he compelled the
unwilling to communion. He seized children
and women who had not been initiated and ini-
tiated them, and destroyed many churches in
different places, under the pretext that the em-
peror had commanded the demolition of all
houses of prayer in which the Son was recog-
nized to be of the same substance as the Father.

Under this pretext the church of the Nova-
tians at Constantinople, situated in that part of
the city called Pelargus, was destroyed. It is
related that these heretics performed a cour-
ageous action with the aid of the members of the

1 Soc. ii. 38, from which the most of this chapter is derived; a
few details in addition are given by Soz. Cf. Theodoret, H. E.
ii. 26.


3i6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 20.


Catholic Church, with whom they made common
cause. When those who were employed to de-
stroy this church were about to commence the
woric of demolition, the Novatians assembled
themselves together ; some tore down the mate-
rials, and others conveyed them to a suburb of
the city called Sycae. They quickly achieved
this task ; for men, women, and children partici-
pated in it, and by offering their labor to God
they were extraordinarily inspirited. By the
exercise of this zeal the church was soon re-
newed, and, from this circumstance, received the
name of Anastasia. After the death of Constan-
tius, Julian, his successor, granted to the Nova-
tians the ground which they had previously
possessed, and permitted them to rebuild their
church. The people spiritedly took advantage
of this permission, and transported the identical
materials of the former edifice from Sycae. But
this happened at a later period of time than that
which we are now reviewing. At this period a
union was nearly effected between the Novatian
and Catholic churches ; for as they held the same
opinions concerning the Ciodhead, and were sub-
jected to a common persecution, the members
of both churches assembled and prayed together.
The Catholics then possessed no houses of prayer,
for the Arians had wrested them from them. It
appears, too, that from the frequent intercourse
between the members of each church, they rea-
soned that the differences between them were
vain, and they resolved to commune with one
another. A reconciliation would certainly have
been effected, I think, had not the desire of the
multitude been frustrated by the slander of a
few individuals, who asserted that there was an
ancient law prohibiting the union of the churches.


CHAP. XXI. — PROCEEDINGS OF MACEDONIUS IN MAN-
TINIUM. HIS REMOVAL FROM HIS SEE WHEN HE
ATTEMPTED TO REMOVE THE COFFIN OF CON-
STANTINE THE GREAT. JULIAN WAS PRONOUNCED
OESAR.

About the same time Eleusius wholly demol-
ished the church of the Novatians in Cyzicus.'
The inhabitants of other parts of Paphlagonia,
and particularly of Mantinium, were subjected
to similar persecutions. Macedonius, having
been apprised that the majority of these people
were followers of Novatus, and that the eccle-
siastical power was not of itself sufficiently strong
to expel them, persuaded the emperor to send
four cohorts against them. For he imagined
that men who are unaccustomed to arms would,
on the first appearance of soldiers, be seized
with terror, and conform to his sentiments. But
it happened otherwise, for the people of Manti-

* Soc. ii. 38; order and detail from Socrates.


nium armed themselves with sickles and axes
and whatever other weapons chanced to be at
hand, and marched against the military. A
severe conflict ensued, and many of the Paphla-
gonians fell, but nearly all the soldiers were
slain. Many of the friends of Macedonius
blamed him for having occasioned so great a
disaster, and the emperor was displeased, and
regarded him with less favor than before. In-
imical feelings were engendered still more
strongly by another occurrence. Macedonius
contemplated the removal of the coffin of the
Emperor Constantine, as the structure in which
it had been concealed was falling into ruin.
The people were divided in opinion on this
subject : some concurred in the design, and
others opposed it, deeming it impious and sim-
ilar to digging up a grave. Those who maintained
the Nicene doctrines were of the latter senti-
ment, and insisted that no indignity should be
offered to the body of Constantine, as that em-
peror had held the same doctrines as themselves.
They were besides, I can readily imagine, eager
to oppose the projects of Macedonius. How-
ever, without further delay, Macedonius caused
the cofifin to be conveyed to the same church in
which the tomb of Acacius the martyr is placed.
The people, divided into two factions, the one
approving, the other condemning the deed,
rushed upon each other in the same church, and
so much carnage ensued that the house of prayer
and the adjoining place were filled with blood
and slaughtered bodies. The emperor, who was
then in the West, was deeply incensed on hearing
of this occurrence ; and he blamed Macedonius
as the cause of the indignity offered to his father,
and of the slaughter of the people.

The emperor had determined to visit the
East, and held on his way ; he conferred the
title of Caesar on his cousin Julian, and sent him
to Western Gaul.

CHAP. XXII. — COUNCIL OF SELEUCU.

About the same period the Eastern bishops
assembled,- to the number of about one hundred
and sixty, in Seleucia, a city of Isauria. This was
during the consultate of Eusebius and Hypatius.
Leonas, who held a brilliant military office at
the palace, repaired to this council at the com-
mand of Constantius, so that the doctrinal con-
fession might be conducted in his presence.
Lauricius, the military governor of the province,
was present to prepare whatever might be neces-
sary ; for the letter of the emperor had com-
manded him to render this service. At the


' Soz. alludes to the original acts of the Synod at the end, and
Soc. ii. 39, to Sabinus' collection. Sabinus probably reported the
exact originals. Athan. dt Synodis, 12, 13: Hil. contra Con-
itaiitium, 12; Philost. iv. 11; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 42. Cf. Theodo-
rct, //. E. ii. 26; Athan. de Synodis, 29.


IV. 22.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


317


first session of this council, several of the bish-
ops were absent, and among others, Patrophikis,
bishop of ScythopoHs ; Macedonius, bishop of
Constantinople ; and Basil, bishop of Ancyra.
They resorted to divers pretexts in justification
of their non-attendance. Patrophilus alleged in
excuse a complaint in the eyes, and Macedonius
pleaded indisposition ; but it was suspected they
had absented themselves from the fear that
various accusations would be brought against
them. As the other bishops refused to enter
upon the investigation of disputed points during
their absence, Leonas commanded them to pro-
ceed at once to the examination of the ques-
tions that had been agitated. Thus some were
of opinion that it was necessary to commence
with the discussion of doctrinal topics, while
others maintained that inquiries ought first to be
instituted into the conduct of those among them
against whom accusations had been laid, as had
been the case with Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem,
Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste, and others. The
ambiguity of the emperor's letters, which some-
times prescribed one course and sometimes an-
other, gave rise to this dispute. The contention
arising from this source became so fierce, that
all union was destroyed between them, and they
became divided into two parties. However,
the advice of those who wished to commence
with the examination of doctrine, prevailed.
When they proceeded to the investigation of
terms, some desired to reject the use of the
term "substance," and appealed to the authority
of the formulary of faith which had not long pre-
viously been compiled by Mark^ at Sirmium,
and had been received by the bishops who were
at the court, among whom was Basil,' bishop of
Ancyra. Many others were anxious for the
adoption of the formulary of faith drawn up at
the dedication of the church of Antioch. To
the first of these parties belonged Eudoxius,
Acacius, Patrophilus, George, bishop of Alex-
andria, Uranius, bishop of Tyre, and thirty-two
other bishops. The latter party was supported
by George, bishop of Laodicea, in Syria ; by
Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus ; by Sophronius,
bishop of Pompeiopolis, in Paphlagonia ; with
these the majority agreed. It was suspected,
and with reason, that Acacius and his partisans
absented themselves on account of the difference
between their sentiments and those of the afore-
said bishops, and also because they desired to
evade the investigation of certain accusations
which had been brought against them ; for,
although they had previously acknowledged in
writing to Macedonius, bishop of Constanti-
nople, that the Son is in all respects like unto
the Father, and of the same substance, now they

' The author of the first formulary of Sirmium is here given by
Soz. Soc. stated it, ii. 30. 2 See above, 16.


fought entirely shy of their former professions.
After prolonged disputations and contention,
Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, declared, in a loud
and peremptory tone, that no new formulary of
faith ought to be introduced but that which had
been approved at Antioch, and this alone ought
to prevail. As this proposition was repugnant
to the followers of Acacius, they withdrew, and/
the other bishops read the formulary of Antioch.
The following day these bishops assembled in
the church, closed the doors, and privately con-
firmed this formulary. Acacius condemned this
proceeding, and laid the formulary which he
advocated before Leonas and Lauricius pri-
vately. Three days afterwards the same bishops
reassembled, and were joined by Macedonius
and Basil, who had been previously absent.
Acacius and his partisans declared that they
would take no part in the proceedings of the
council until those who had been deposed and
accused had quitted the assembly. His demand
was complied with ; for the bishops of the oppo-
site party were determined that he should have
no pretext for dissolving the council, which was
evidently his object, in order to prevent the
impending examination of the heresy of Aetius,
and of the accusations which had been brought
against himself and his partisans. When all the
members were assembled, Leonas stated that he
held a document which had been handed to him
by the partisans of Acacius ; it was their formu-
lary of faith, with introductory remarks. None
of the other bishops knew anything about it ;
for Leonas, who was of the same sentiment as
Acacius, had willingly kept the whole matter a
secret. When this document^ was read, the
whole assembly was filled with tumult ; for
some of the statements it contained were to the
effect that, though the emperor had prohibited
the introduction of any term into the formularies
of faith which was not found in the Sacred
Scriptures, yet tlitit bishops who had been de-
posed, having been brought from various prov-
inces to the assembly, with others who had been
illegally ordained, the council had been thrown
into confusion, and that some of the members
had been insulted, and others prevented from
speaking. It was added that Acacius and his
partisans did not reject the formulary which had
been compiled at Antioch, although those who
had assembled in that city had drawn it up for
the express purpose of meeting the difficulty
which had just then arisen ; but that, as the
terms "consubstantial " and "of similar sub-
stance" had grieved some individuals, and that;
as it had been recently asserted that the Son is
dissimilar from the Father, it was necessary, on
this account, to reject the terms " consubstan-

' Given by Soc. ii. 40.


3i8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 22.


tial " and a "similar substance," which do not
occur in Scripture, to condemn the term " dis-
similar," and to confess clearly that the Son is
like unto the Father ; for He is, as the Apostle
Paul somewhere says, " the image of the in-
visible God." These prefatory observations
were followed by a formulary, which was neither
conformable with that of Nicgea, nor with that
of Antioch, and which was so artfully worded
that the followers of Arius and of Aetius would
not appear to be in error if they should thus
state their faith. In this formulary, the words
used by those who had convened at Nicaea, in
condemnation of the Arian doctrine, were
omitted, and the declarations of the council of
Antioch, concerning the immutability of the
Deity of the Son, and concerning His being the
unchangeable image of the substance, the coun-
sel, and the power, and the glory of the Father,
were passed over in silence, and belief was sim-
ply expressed in the Father, in the Son, and in
the Holy Ghost ; and after bestowing some vul-
gar epithets on a few individuals who had never
entered into any doctrinal contention on one
side or the other, all those who entertained any
other opinions than those set forth in this for-
mulary were declared to be aliens to the Cath-
olic Church. Such were the contents of the
document presented by Leonas, and which had
been signed by Acacius, and by those who had
adopted his sentiments. After it had been read,
Sophronius, a bishop of Paphhigonia, exclaimed,
"If we daily receive the opinions of individuals
as a statement of the faith, we shall fail in at-
taining precision of the truth." Acacius having
retorted that it was not forbidden to compile
new formularies, as that of Nicaea had been
once and frequently altered, Eleusius replied as
follows : " But the council has not now met for
the purpose of learning what is already known, or
of accepting any other formulary than that which
has been already approved by those who assem-
bled at Antioch ; and, moreover, living and dying,
we will adhere to this formulary." The dispute
having taken this turn, they entered upon another
inquiry, and asked the partisans of Acacius, in
what they considered the Son to be like unto the
Father. They replied that the Son is similar in
will only, but not in substance, and the others
thereupon insisted that He is similar in substance,
and convicted .\cacius, by a work which he had
formerly written, that he had once been of their
opinion. Acacius replied that he ought not to
be judged from his own writings ; and the dis-
pute had continued with heat for some time,
when Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, spoke as fol-
lows : " It matters little to the council whether
Mark or Basil has transgressed in any way, or
whether they or the adherents of Acacius have
any accusation to bring against each other ;


neither does the trouble devolve upon the coun-
cil of examining whether their formulary be
commendable or otherwise ; it is enough to
maintain the formulary which has been already
confirmed at Antioch by ninety-seven priests ;
and if any one desire to introduce any doctrine
which is not contained therein, he ought to be
held as an alien to religion and the Church."
Those who were of his sentiments applauded
his speech ; and the assembly then arose and
separated. The following day, the partisans
of Acacius and of George refused to attend
the council ; and Leonas, who had now openly
declared himself to be of their sentiments, like-
wise refused, in spite of all entreaties, to repair
thither. Those who were deputed to request his
attendance found the partisans of Acacius in his
house ; and he declined their invitation, under
the plea that too much discord prevailed in the
council, and that he had only been commanded
by the emperor to attend the council in case of
unanimity among the members. Much time was
consumed in this way ; and the partisans of Aca-
cius were frequently solicited by the other bish-
ops to attend the assemblies ; but they sometimes
demanded a special conference in the house of
Leonas, and sometimes alleged that they had
been commissioned by the emperor to judge
those who had been accused ; for they would not
receive the creed adopted by the other bishops,
nor clear themselves of the crimes of which they
had been accused ; neither would they examine
the case of Cyril, whom they had deposed ; and
there was no one to compel them to do so. The
council, however, eventually deposed George,
bishop of Alexandria ; Acacius, bishop of Caesa-
rea ; Uranius, bishop of Tyre ; Patrophilus,
bishop of Scythopolis ; and Eudoxius, bishop of
Antioch ; and several other prelates. Many per-
sons were likewise put out of communion until
they could purge themselves of the crimes
imputed to them. The transactions were con-
veyed in writing to the parish of each of the
clergy. Adrian,' a presbyter of Antioch, was
ordained bishop over that church, in room of
Eudoxius ; but the partisans of Acacius arrested
him and delivered him over to Leonas and
Lauricius. They committed him into the custody
of the soldiers, but afterwards sent him into exile.
We have now given a brief account of the
termination of the council of Seleucia. Those
who desire more detailed information must seek
it in the acts of the council,^ which have been
transcribed by attendant shorthand writers.


CHAP. XXIII. — ACACIUS AND AETIUS ; AND HOW THE
DEPUTIES OF THE TWO COITNCILS OF ARIMINUM


■ Mistake for Anniamis, as given in 24.

' Soc. refers anxious readers to the collectioQ by Sabinus, ii. 39.


IV. 24.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


319


AND OF SELEUCIA WERE LED BY THE EMPEROR
TO ACCEPT THE SAME DOCTRINES.

Immediately after the above transactions, the
adherents of Acacius repaired to the emperor ; *
but the other bishops returned to their respec-
tive homes. The ten bishops who had been
unanimously chosen as deputies to the emperor,
met, on their arrival at the court, the ten
deputies - of the council of Ariminum, and like-
wise the partisans of Acacius. These latter had
gained over to their cause the chief men attached
to the palace, and, through their influence, had
secured the favor of the emperor. It was
reported that some of these proselytes had
espoused the sentiments of Acacius at some
previous period ; that some were bribed by
means of the wealth belonging to the churches ;
and that others were seduced by the subtilty of
the arguments presented to them, and by the
dignity of the persuader. Acacius was, in fact,
no common character ; by nature he was gifted
with great powers of intellect and eloquence,
and he exhibited no want of skill or of address
in the accomplishment of his schemes. He was
the president of an illustrious church, and could
boast of Eusebius Pamphilus as his teacher,
whom he succeeded in the episcopate, and was
more honorably known than any other man by
the reputation and succession of his books.
Endowed with all these advantages, he suc-
ceeded with ease in whatever he undertook.

As there were at this period at Constantino-
ple all together twenty deputies, ten from each
council, besides many other bishops, who, from
various motives, had repaired to the city, Hono-
ratus,^ whom the emperor, before his departure
to the West, had constituted chief governor of
Constantinople, received directions to examine,
in the presence of the exarchs of the great coun-
cil, the reports circulated concerning Aetius and
his heresy. Constantius, with some of the rulers,
eventually undertook the investigation of this
case ; and as it was proved that Aetius had
introduced dogmas essentially opposed to the
faith, the emperor and the other judges were
offended at his blasphemous statements. It is
said that the partisans of Acacius at first feigned
ignorance of this heresy, for the purpose of
inducing the emperor and those around him to
take cognizance of it ; for they imagined that
the eloquence of Aetius would be irresistible ;
that he would infallibly succeed in convincing
his auditory ; and that his heresy would conquer
the unwilling. When, however, the result proved
the futility of their expectations, they demanded


1 A few hints in Philost. iv. 12; Soc. ii. 41. Cf. Sulp. Sev. H. S.
ii. 43-45; Theodoret, //. £. ii. 27. But the main part is independent.

2 Cf. iv. 18; twenty. Philost. tells us that Acacius prepared the
minutes of this Synod.

' Concerning this Honoratus see the Desc-riptio Ccnsulum of
Idatius.


that the formulary of faith accepted by the coun-
cil of Ariminum should receive the sanction of
the deputies from the council of Seleucia. As
these latter protested that they would never re-
nounce the use of the term " substance," the
Acacians declared to them upon oath that they
did not hold the Son to be, in substance, dis-
similar from the Father ; but that, on the con-
trary, they were ready to denounce this opinion
as heresy. They added that they esteemed the
formulary compiled by the Western bishops at
Ariminum the more highly, because the word
" substance " had been unexpectedly expunged
from it ; because, they said, if this formulary
were to be received, there would be no further
mention, either of the word " substance " or of
the term " consubstantial," to which many of the
Western priests were, from their reverence for
the Nicsean council, peculiarly attached.

It was for these reasons that the emperor ap-
proved of the formulary ; and when he recalled
to mind the great number of bishops who had
been convened at Ariminum, and reflected that
there is no error in saying either that " the Son
is like unto the Father" or "of the same sub-
stance as the Father " ; and when he further con-
sidered that no difference in signification would
ensue, if, for terms which do not occur in Scrip-
ture, other equivalent and uncontrovertible expres-
sions were to be substituted (such, for instance,
as the word "similar"), he determined upon giv-
ing his sanction to the formulary. Such being
his own sentiments, he commanded the bishops
to accept the formulary. The next day prepara-
tions were made for the pompous ceremony of
proclaiming him consul, which, according to the
Roman custom, took place in the beginning of
the month of January, and the whole of that day
and part of the ensuing night the emperor spent
with the bishops, and at length succeeded in per-
suading the deputies of the council of Seleucia to
receive the formulary transmitted from Ariminum.

CH.'VP. XXrV. — FORMUIJ^RY OF THE COUNCIL OF
ARIMINUM APPROVED BY THE ACACIANS. UST OF
THE DEPOSED CHIEF-PRIESTS, AND THE CAUSES
OF THEIR CONDEMNATION.

The partisans of Acacius^ remained some time
at Constantinople, and invited thither several
bishops of Bithynia, among whom were Maris,
bishop of Chalcedon, and Ulfilas, bishop of the
Goths. These prelates having assembled to-
gether, in number about fifty, they confirmed
the formulary read at the council of Ariminum,
adding this provision, that the terms "substance "^

* The acts of this Synod of Constantinople were written by
Acacius. Cf. Philost. iv. 12. Further, cf. Philost. iv. 12, v. 1;
Athan. de Syiwdis, 30, the formufar^-; Soc. ii. 41 (with the revised
formulary), 42, 43; Theodoret, H. E. ii. 27, 28. Soz. enlarges on
the depositions, giving us much new material; Theodoret gives a
letter against Aetius (from Sabinus?).


320


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 24.


and "hypostasis " should never again be used in
reference to God. They also declared that all
other formularies set forth in times past, as like-
wise those that might be compiled at any future
period, should be condemned. They then de-
posed Aetius from his office of deacon, because
he had written works full of contention and of
a species of vain knowledge opposed to the
ecclesiastical vocation ; because he had used in
writing and in disputation several impious ex-
pressions ; and because he had been the occasion
of troubles and seditions in the Church. It was
alleged by many that they did not depose him
willingly, but merely because they wished to re-
move all suspicion from the mind of the emr
peror which he had with regard to them, for
they had been accused of holding Aetian views.
Those who held these sentiments took advantage
of the resentment with which, for reasons above
mentioned, the emperor regarded Macedonius,
and they accordingly deposed him, and hkewise
Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus ; Basil, bishop of An-
cyra; Heortasius, bishop of Sardis ; and Dracon-
tius, bishop of Pergamus. Although they differed
about doctrine from those bishops, yet in depos-
ing them, no blame was thrown upon their faith,
but charges were alleged against them in common
with all, that they had disturbed the peace and vio-
lated the laws of the Church. They specified, in
particular, that when the presbyter Diogenes was
traveling from Alexandria 10 Ancyra, Basil seized
his papers, and struck him ; they also deposed
that Basil had, without trial, delivered over many
of the clergy from Antioch, from the banks of
the Euphrates, and from Cilicia, Galatia, and
Asia, to the rulers of the provinces, to be exiled
and subjected to cruel punishments, so that
many had been loaded with chains, and had been
compelled to bribe the soldiers, who were con-
ducting them away, not to ill-use them. They
added that, on one occasion, when the emperor
had commanded Aetius and some of his followers
to be led before Cecropius, that they might
answer to him for various accusations laid to
their charge, Basil recommended the person
who was intrusted with the execution of this
edict, to act according to the dictates of his own
judgment. They said that he wrote directions to
Hermogenes,' the prefect and governor of Syria,
stating who were to be banished, and whither
they were to be sent ; and that, when the exiles
were recalled by the emperor, he would not
consent to their return, but opposed himself to
the wishes of the nilers and of the priests. They
further deposed that Basil had excited the clergy
of Sirimium against Germanius ; and that, al-
though he stated in writing that he had admitted
Germanius, Valens, and Ursacius into commun-

• Further mention is made of this Hermogenes by Am. Marcell.
xix. 12, 6; xxi. 6, 9.


ion, he had placed them as criminals before the
tribunal of the African bishops ; and that, when
taxed with this deed, he had denied it, and per-
jured himself; and that, when h^ was afterwards
convicted, he strove to justify his perjury by
sophistical reasoning. They added, that he had
been the cause of contention and of sedition in
Illyria, Italy, Africa, and in the Roman church ;
that he had thrown a servant into prison to com-
pel her to bear false witness against her mistress ;
that he had baptized a man of loose life, who
lived in illicit intercourse with a woman, and had
promoted him to be a deacon ; that he had neg-
lected to excommunicate a quack-doctor who
had occasioned the death of several persons ;
and that he and some of the clergy had bound
themselves by oath before the holy table, not to
bring accusations against each other. This,
they said, was an artifice adopted by the presi-
dent of the clergy to shield himself from the
accusations of his plaintiffs. In short, such
were the reasons they specified for the deposi-
tion of Basil. Eustathius, they said, was de-
posed because, when a presbyter, he had been
condemned, and put away from the communion
of prayers by Eulalius, his own father, who was
bishop of the church of Caesarea, in Cappado-
cia ; and also because he had been excommuni-
cated by a council held at Neocsesarea, a city
of Pontus, and deposed by Eusebius, bishop of
Constantinople, for unfaithfulness in the dis-
charge of certain duties that had devolved upon
him. He had also been deprived of his bishop-
ric by those who were convened in Gangroe, on
account of his having taught, acted, and thought
contrary to sound doctrine. He had been con-
victed of perjury by the council of Antioch.
He had likewise endeavored to reverse the
decrees of those convened at Melitina ; and,
although he was guilty of many crimes, he had the
assurance to aspire to be judge over the others,
and to stigmatize them as heretics. They de-
posed 'Eleusius because he had raised inconsid-
erately one Heraclius, a native of Tyre, to be a
deacon ; this man had been a priest of Hercu-
les at Tyre, had been accused of and tried for
sorcery, and, therefore, had retired to Cyzicus and
feigned conversion to Christianity ; and moreover,
Eleusius, after having been apprised of these cir-
cumstances, had not driven him from the Church.
He had also, without inquiry, ordained certain
individuals, who had come to Cyzicus, after
they had been condemned by Maris, bishop of
Chalcedonia, who participated in this council.
Heortasius was deposed because he had been
ordained bishop of Sardis without the sanction
of the bishops of Lydia. They deposed Dra-
contius, bishop of Pergamus, because he had
previously held another bishopric in Galatia,
and because, thev stated, he had on both occa-


IV. 25-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


321


sions been unlawfully ordained. After these
transactions, a second assembly of the council
was held, and Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, So-
phronius, bishop of Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia,
Elpidius, bishop of Satala, and Neonas, bishop
of Seleucia in Isauria, were deposed. The rea-
son they assigned for the deposition of Silvanus
was, that he had constituted himself the leader
of a foolish party in Seleucia and Constantinople ;
he had, besides, constituted Theophilus as presi-
dent of the church of Castabala, who had been
previously ordained bishop of Eleutheropolis by
the bishops of Palestine, and who had promised
upon oath that he would never accept any other
bishopric without their permission. Sophronius
was deposed on account of his avarice, and on
account of his having sold some of the offerings
presented to the church, for his own profit ;
besides, after he had received a first and second
summons to appear before the council, he could,
at last, be scarcely induced to make his appear-
ance, and then, instead of replying to the accu-
sations brought against him, he appealed to
other judges. Neonas was deposed for having
resorted to violence in his endeavors to procure
the ordination in his own church, of Annianus,
who had been appointed bishop of Antioch,'
and for having ordained as bishops certain in-
dividuals who had previously been engaged in
politics, and who were utterly ignorant of the
Holy Scriptures and of ecclesiastical canons,
and who, after their ordination, preferred the
enjoyment of their property to that of the
priesdy dignity, and declared in writing that
they would rather take charge of their own pos-
sessions than to discharge the episcopal func-
tions without them. Elpidius was deposed be-
cause he had participated in the malpractices
of Basil, and had occasioned great disorders;
and because he had, contrary to the decrees of
the council of Melitina, restored to his former
rank in the presbytery a man named Eusebius,
who had been deposed for having created Nec-
taria a deaconess, after she had been excom-
municated on account of violating agreements
and oaths ; and to confer this honor upon her
was clearly contrary to the laws of the Church.

CHAP, XXV. CAUSES OF THE DEPOSITION OF CYRIL,

BISHOP OF JERUSALEM. MUTUAL DISSENSIONS
AMONG THE BISHOPS. MELITIUS IS ORDAINED
BY THE ARIANS, AND SUPPLANTS EUSTATHIUS
IN THE BISHOPRIC OF SEBASTE.

Besides the prelates above mentioned, Cyril,
bishop of Jerusalem, was deposed ^ because he
had admitted Eustathius and Elpidius into com-
munion, after they had opposed the decrees


1 Cf. iv. 22.


' See references to previous chapter.


enacted by those convened at Melitina, among
whom was Cyril himself; and because he had
also received Basil and George, bishop of Lao-
dicea, into communion after their deposition in
Palestine- When Cyril was first installed in the
bishopric of Jerusalem, he had a dispute with
Acacius, bishop of Caesarea, concerning his rights
as a Metropolitan, which he claimed on the
ground of his bishopric being an apostolic see.
This dispute excited feelings of enmity between
the two bishops, and they mutually accused
each other of unsoundness of doctrine concern-
ing the Godhead. In fact, they had both been
suspected previously ; the one, that is, Acacius,
of favoring the heresy of Arius ; and the other,
of siding with those who maintain that the Son
is in substance like unto the Father. Acacius
being thus inimically disposed towards Cyril,
and finding himself supported by the bishops
of the province, who were of the same senti-
ments as himself, contrived to depose Cyril
under the following pretext. Jerusalem and
the neighboring country was at one time visited
with a famine, and the poor appealed in great
multitudes to Cyril, as their bishop, for neces-
sary food. As he had no money to purchase
the requisite provisions, he sold fortthis purpose
the veil and sacred ornaments of the church.
It is said that a man, having recognized an offer-
ing which he had presented at the altar as form-
ing part of the costume of an actress, made it
his business to inquire whence it was procured ;
and ascertained that a merchant had sold it to
the actress, and that the bishop had sold it to the
merchant. It was under this pretext that Acacius
deposed Cyril.

And on inquiry I find these to be the facts.
It is said that the Acacians then expelled from
Constantinople all the bishops above mentioned
who had been deposed. Ten bishops of their
own party who had refused to subscribe to these
edicts of deposition, were separated from the
others, and were interdicted from performing the
functions of the ministry or ruling their churches
until they consented to give their signatures.
It was enacted that unless they complied within
six months,^ and yielded their assent to all the
decrees of the council, they should be deposed,
and that the bishops of every province should
be summoned to elect other bishops in their
stead. After these determinations and deeds,
letters were then sent to all the bishops and
clergy, to observe and fulfill its decrees.

As a consequence, not long after, some of the
Eudoxian party were substituted here and there.
Eudoxius himself took possession of the bishop-
ric of Macedonius ; Athanasius was placed over
the church of Basil ; and Eunomius, who was

' See the abrogation of the time-limit through a Synod convened
by Eudoxius. Philost. vii. 6.


322


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 25.


subsequently the leader of a heresy bearing his
name, took the see of Eleusius ; and Meletius
was appointed to the church of Sebaste, instead
of Eustathius.


CHAP. XXVI. — DEATH OF ^UCEDONIUS, BISHOP OF
CONSTANTINOPLE. WHAT F.UDOXIUS SAID IN HIS
TEACHING. EUDOXIUS AND ACACIUS STRENU-
OUSLY SOUGHT THE ABOLITION OF THE FORMULA-
RIES OF FAITH SET FORTH AT NIC^A AND AT
ARIMINUM ; TROUBLES WHICH THENCE AROSE
IN THE CHURCHES.

Macedonius,^ on his expulsion from the church
of Constantinople, retired to one of the suburbs
of the city, where he died. Eudoxius took pos-
session of his church in the tenth year of the
consulate of Constantius, and the third of Julian,
sumamed Caesar. It is related that, at the
dedication of the great church called " Sophia,"
when he rose to teach the people, he commenced
his discourse with the following proposition :
" The Father is impious, the Son is pious " ;
and that, as these words excited a great commo-
tion among the people, he added, " Be calm ;
the Father is impious, because he worships no
one ; the Son is pious, because he worships the
Father." On this explanation, he threw his au-
dience into laughter. Eudoxius and Acacius
jointly exerted themselves to the utmost in en-
deavoring to cause the edicts of the Nicene
Council to fall into oblivion. They sent the for-
mulary read at Ariminum with various explana-
tory additions of their own, to every province of
the empire, and procured from the emperor an
edict for the banishment of all who should refuse
to subscribe to it. But this undertaking, which
appeared to them so easy of execution, was the be-
ginning of the greatest calamities, for it excited
commotions throughout the empire, and entailed
upon the Church in every region a persecution
more grievous than those which it had suffered
under the pagan emperors.^ For if this persecu-
tion did not occasion such tortures to the body as
the preceding ones, it appeared more grievous
to all who reflected aright, on account of its
disgraceful nature ; for both the persecutors and
the persecuted belonged to the Church ; and the
one was all the more disgraceful in that men of
the same religion treated their fellows with a
degree of cruelty which the ecclesiastical laws
prohibit to be manifested towards enemies and
strangers.


chap, xxvii. — macedonius, after his rejection

FROM his see, blasphemes AGAINST THE HOLY
' Soc. ii. 43: Ruf. H. E. i. 21. Soz. has independent details.


• boc. II. 43: Kul. H. £.. I.
» Cf. with Ruf. H. E. i. 21.


SPIRFT ; PROPAGATION OF HIS HERESY THROUGH
THE INSTRUMENTAUTY OF RL\RATHONIUS AND
OTHERS.

The spirit of innovation is self-laudatory,^ and
hence it advanced further and further, and crept
along to greater novelties with increasing self-
conceit, and in scorn of the fathers it enacted
laws of its own, nor does it honor the doctrines
of the ancients concerning God, but is always
thinking out strange dogmas and restlessly adds
novelty to novelty as the events now show. For
after Macedonius had been deposed from the
church of Constantinople, he renounced the
tenets of Acacius and Eudoxius.'* He began to
teach that the Son is God, and that He is in all
respects and in substance like unto the Father.
But he affirmed that the Holy Ghost is not a
participant of the same dignities, and designated
Him a minister and a servant, and applied to
Him whatever could, without error, be said of
the holy angels. This doctrine was embraced
by Eleusius, Eustathius, and by all the other
bishops who had been deposed at Constantinople,
by the partisans of the opposite heresy. Their
example was quickly followed by no small part
of the people of Constantinople, Bithynia, Thrace,
the Hellespont, and of the neighboring provinces.
For their mode of life had no little influence,
and to this do the people give special attention.
They assumed great gravity of demeanor, and
their discipline was like that of the monks ; their
conversation was plain and of a style fitted to
persuade. It is said that all these qualifications
were united in Marathonius. He originally held
a public appointment in the army, under the
command of the prefect. After amassing some
money in this employment, he quit military sci-
ence, and undertook the superintendence of the
establishments for the relief of the sick and the
destitute. Afterwards, at the suggestion of Eusta-
thius, bishop of Sebaste, he embraced an ascetic
mode of life, and founded a monastical institu-
tion in Constantinople which exists to the present
day. He brought so much zeal, and so much of
his own wealth to the support of the aforesaid
heresy, that the Macedonians were by many
termed Marathonians, and it seems to me not
without reason ; for it appears that he alone, to-
gether with his institutions, was the cause that it
was not altogether extinguished in Constantino-
ple. In fact, after the deposition of Macedonius,
the Macedonians possessed neither churches nor
bishops until the reign of Arcadius.*

The Arians, who drove out of the churches
and rigorously persecuted all who held different

' Soc. ii. 45 ; Ruf. H. E. ii. 25; Theodoret, H. E. ii. 6. Soz.
independent.

« Cf. Philost. iv. 9.

' After A.D. 395. Yet according to vii. 2, the Macedonians took
advantage of the Gralian law and repossessed the churches fronv
which Valens had ejected them.


IV. 29.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


323


sentiments from themselves, deprived them of
all these privileges. It would be no easy task
to enumerate the names of the priests who were
at this period ejected from their own cities ; for
I believe that no province of the empire was
exempted from such a calamity.


CHAP. XXVIII. THE ARIANS, UNDER THE IMPRES-
SION THAT THE DIVINE MELETIUS UPHELD THEIR
SENT'IMENTS, TRANSLATE HIM FROM SEBASTE TO
ANTIOOH. ON HIS BOLD CONFESSION OF THE
ORTHODOX DOCTRINES, THEV WERE CONFOUNDED,
AND AFFER THEV HAD DEPOSED HIM THEV PLACED
EUZOIUS IN THE SEE. MELETIUS FORMED HIS
OWN CHURCH : BUT THOSE WHO HELD TO CONSUB-
STANTIALITY TURNED AWAY FROM HIM BECAUSE
HE HAD BEEN ORDAINED BY ARIANS.

At the period that Eudoxius obtained the gov-
ernment of the church of Constantinople,^ there
were many aspirants to the see of Antioch ; and
as is frequently the case under such circum-
stances, contentions and seditions divided the
clergy and the people of that church.

Each party was anxious to commit the gov-
ernment of the church to a bishop of its own
persuasion ; for interminable disputes concern-
ing doctrine were rampant among them, and
they could not agree as to the mode of singing
psalms ; and, as has been before stated, psalms
were sung by each individual, in conformity
with his own peculiar creed. Such being the
state of the church at Antioch, the partisans of
Eudoxius thought it would be well to intrust the
bishopric of that city to Meletius, then bishop
of Sebaste, he being possessed of great and per-
suasive eloquence, of excellent life, and above
all, as they imagined, being of like opinions with
themselves. They believed that his reputation
would attract the inhabitants of Antioch and of
the neighboring cities to conform to their heresy,
particularly those called Eustathians, who had
adhered invariably to the Nicene doctrines. But
their expectations were utterly frustrated. It is
said that on his first arrival in Antioch, an im-
mense multitude, composed of Arians, and of
those who were in communion with Paulinus,
flocked around him. Some wished to see the
man because his fame was great, even before
his coming j others were anxious to hear what
he had to say, and to ascertain the nature of his
opinions ; for a report had been spread abroad
which was afterwards proved to be true, that he
maintained the doctrines of those convened at
Nicaea. In his first discourses he confined him-
self to instructing the people in what we call


1 Soc. ii. 44. The order is the same in Soz. , but with many new
details. Philost. v. i, 5; Ruf. H. E. i. 24. Cf. Theodorct, H. E.
ii. 31.


ethics ; afterwards, however, he openly declared
that the Son is of the same substance as the
Father. It is said that at these words, the arch-
deacon of the church, who was then one of the
clergy there, stretched out his hand, and covered
the mouth of the preacher ; but that he continued
to explain his sentiments more clearly by means
of his fingers than he could by language. He
extended three fingers only towards the people,
closed them, and then allowed only one finger
to remain extended, and thus expressed by signs
what he was prevented from uttering. As the arch-
deacon, in his embarrassment, seized the hand,
he released the mouth ; the tongue was free,
and Meletius declared his opinion still more
clearly and with a loud voice, and exhorted his au-
ditors to adhere to the tenets of the council of
Nicaea, and he testified to his hearers that those
who held other views deviated from the truth.
As he persisted in the enunciation of the same
sentiments, either by word of mouth or by means
of signs, when the archdeacon closed his mouth,
a contention between both sides occurred, not
unlike that of the pancratium ; the followers of
Eustathius shouted aloud and rejoiced and leaped,
while the Arians were cast down. Eudoxius and
his partisans were transported with indignation
at this discourse, and contrived by their machi-
nations to expel Meletius from Antioch. Soon
afterwards, however, they recalled him, for they
fancied he had renounced his former sentiments
and had espoused theirs. As, however, it soon
became apparent that his devotion to the Nicene
doctrines was firm and unalterable, he was ejected
from the church, and banished by order of the
emperor ; and the see of Antioch was conferred
on Euzoius, who had formerly been banished
with Arius. The followers of Meletius separated
themselves from the Arians, and held their as-
semblies apart, for those who had from the begin-
ning maintained that the Son is consubstantial
with the Father refused to admit them into com-
munion, because Meletius had been ordained by
Arian bishops, and because his followers had
been baptized by Arian priests. For this reason
they were separated, although holding the same
views.

The emperor having been informed that an
insurrection was about to arise in Persia, repaired
to Antioch.


CHAP. XXIX. THE PARTISANS OF ACACIUS AGAIN

DO NOT REMAIN QUIET, BUT STRIVE TO ABOLISH
THE TERM " CONSUBSTANTIAL," AND TO CONFIRM
THE HERESY OF ARIUS.

The partisans of Acacius "^ were not able to

^ Soc. ii. 45. Soz. and he are much alike, but yet each has inde-
pendent statements; both evidently draw from the same source.
Athan. de Synodis, 31 ; Ruf. H. E. i. 25.


324


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IV. 29.


remain in tranquillity ; and they therefore assem-
bled together with a few others in Antioch, and
condemned the decrees which they had them-
selves enacted. They decided to erase the
term " similar " from the formulary which had
been read at Ariminum and at Constantinople,
and affirmed that in all respects, in substance
and in will, the Son is dissimilar from the
Father, and that He proceeded from what had
no previous existence, even as Arius had taught
from the commencement. They were joined
by the partisans of Aetius, who had been the
first after Arius to venture openly upon the pro-
fession of these opinions ; hence Aetius was
called atheist, and his approvers, Anomians and
Exucontians.

When tliose who maintained the Nicene doc-
trines demanded of the Acacians how they could
say that the Son is dissimilar from the Father,
and that He proceeded out of nothing, when it
was affirmed in their own formulary that He is
" God of God," they replied that the Apostle
Paul had declared that " All things are of
God," ' and that the Son is included in the term
" all things " ; and that it was in this sense, and
in accordance with the Sacred Scriptures, that
the expressions in their formulary were to be
understood. Such were the equivocations and
sophistry to which they had recourse. At length,
finding that they could advance no efficient argu-
ment to justify themselves in the opinion of those
who pressed them on this point, they withdrew
from the assembly, after the formulary of Con-
stantinople had been read a second time, and
returned to their own cities.

^ I Cot. xi. 13.


CHAP. XXX. — GEORGE, BISHOP OF ANTfOCH, AND
THE CHIEF-PRIESTS OF JERUSALEM. THREE
CHIEF-PRIESTS SUCCESSIVELY SUCCEED CYRIL ;
RESTORATION OF CYRIL TO THE SEE OF JERUSA-
LEM.

During this period,^ Athanasius was obliged
to remain in concealment, and George returned
to Alexandria, and commenced a cruel perse-
cution against the pagans, and against the
Christians who differed from him in opinion.
He compelled both parties to offer worship in
the mode he indicated, and where opposition
was made, he enforced obedience by compul-
sion. He was hated by the rulers because he
scorned them and was giving orders to the offi-
cers ; and the multitude detested him on account
of his tyranny, for his power was greater than
all the rest. The pagans regarded him with
even greater aversion than the Christians, be-
cause he prohibited them from offering sacri-
fices, and from celebrating their ancestral festi-
vals ; and because he had on one occasion,
introduced the governor of Egypt ^ and armed
soldiery into the city, and despoiled their images,
votives and temple ornaments. This was, in
fact, the cause of his death, on which I will
dwell.

On the deposition of Cyril, Erennius obtained
the church of Jerusalem ; ■* he was succeeded
by Heraclius, and to Heraclius succeeded Hila-
rius ; for we have gathered from tradition that
in that period these persons administered the
church there, until the reign of Theodosius,
when Cyril was once more restored to his own
see.

' Soc. ii. 45. Soz. has some order, but varying points.

' Namely, Artemius, who was afterwards martyred under Julian.
Am. Marcel, xxii. 11. 3-8.

* Soc. iv. 25. Epiphanius {adv. Hcrres,\\. -iyio; Hirres,\x\'\.),
places another Cynl after Herennius. Soc. calls Erennius, Arrenius.


BOOK V.


CHAP. 1. — APOSTASY OF JULIAN, THE TRAITOR.
DEATH OF THE EMPEROR CONSTANTIUS.

Such were the transactions which took ' place
in the Eastern Church. In the meantime, how-
ever, Julian, the Csesar, attacked and conquered
the barbarians who dwelt on the banks of the
Rhine ; many he killed, and others he took pris-
oners. As the victory added greatly to his
fame, and as his moderation and gentleness had
endeared him to the troops, they proclaimed
him Augustus. Far from making an excuse to
Constantius for this act, he exchanged the offi-
cers who had been elected by Constantius, and
industriously circulated letters wherein Con-
stantius had solicited the barbarians to enter
the Roman territories, and aid him against
Magnentius. He then suddenly changed his
religion, and although he had previously con-
fessed Christianity, he declared himself high-
priest, frequented the pagan temples, offered
sacrifices, and invited his subjects to adopt that
form of worship.

As an invasion of Roman territory by the Per-
sians was expected, and as Constantius had on
this account repaired to Syria, Julian conceived
that he might without battle render himself
master of Illyricum ; he therefore set out on his
journey to this province, under pretense that he
intended to present an apology to Constantius
for having, without his sanction, received the
symbofs of imperial power. It is said, that
when he arrived on the borders of Illyria, the
vines appeared full of green grapes, although the
time of the vintage was past, and the Pleiades
had set ; and that there fell upon his followers a
dashing of the dew from the atmosphere, of
which each drop was stamped with the sign of
the cross. He and many of those with him
regarded the grapes appearing out of season as
a favorable omen ; while the dew had made
that figure by chance on the garments upon
which it happened to fall.

Others thought that of the two symbols, the
one of the green grapes signified that the emperor
would die prematurely, and his reign would be
very short ; while the second sign, that of the


' Soc. 11. 47, and iii. i; Ruf. H. E. i. 26; Orosiiis, vii. 29, 30;
Philost. VI. 5,6. Soz. has much that is independent. Cf. Eunapius,
Zos., and Am. Marcel, under the reigns of Constantius and Julian.
Eutrop. Brev. Hist. Rom. x. 14, 15.


crosses formed by the drops of dew, inoicated that
the Christian religion is from heaven, and that
all persons ought to receive the sign of the cross.
I am, for my own part, convinced that those who
regarded these two phenomena as unfavorable
omens for Julian, were not mistaken; and the
progress of time proved the accuracy of their
opinion. !

When Constantius heard that Julian was
marching against him at the head of an army,
he abandoned his intended expedition against
the Persians, and departed for Constantinople ;
but he died on the journey, when he had arrived
as far as Mopsucrenae, which lies near the Taurus,
between Cilicia and Cappadocia.

He died in the forty-fifth year of his age, after
reigning thirteen years conjointly with his father
Constantine, and twenty-five years after the death
of that emperor.

A Httle while after the decease of Constantius,
Julian, who had already made himself master of
Thrace, entered Constantinople and was pro-
claimed emperor. Pagans assert that diviners
and demons had predicted the death of Con-
I stantius, and the change in affairs, before his
departure for Galatia, and had advised him to
undertake the expedition. This might have
been regarded as a true prediction, had not
the life of Julian been terminated so shortly
afterwards, and when he had only tasted the
imperial power as in a dream. But it appears
to me absurd to believe that, after he had
heard the death of Constantius predicted, and
had been warned that it would be his own
fate to fall in battle by the hands of the Per-
sians, he should have leaped into manifest death,
— offering him no other feme in the world than
that of lack of counsel, and poor generalship, —
and who, had he lived, would probably have
suffered the greater part of the Roman territo-
ries to fall under the Persian yoke. This obser-
vation, however, is only inserted lest I should be
blamed for omitting it. I leave every one to
form his own opinion.

CHAP. II. THE LIFE, EDUCATION, AND TR.'VINING OF

JULIAN, .\ND HIS ACCP:SSI0N TO THE E.MPIRE.

Immediately after the death of Constantius,^


' s,


Soc. iii. I. Much the same order is followed by Soz., but with


326


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 2.


the dread of a persecution arose in the Church,
and Christians suffered more anguish from the
anticipation of this calamity than they would
have experienced from its actual occurrence.
This state of feeling proceeded from the fact
that a long interval had made them unaccus-
tomed to such dangers, and from the remem-
brance of the tortures which had been exercised
by the tyrants upon their fathers, and from their
knowledge of the hatred with which the emperor
regarded their doctrines. It is said that he
openly renounced the faith of Christ so entirely,
that he by sacrifices and expiations, which the
pagans call renunciatory, and by the blood of
animals, purged himself of our baptism. From
that period he employed himself in auguries and
in the celebration of the pagan rites, both pub-
licly and privately. It is related^ that one day,
as he was inspecting the entrails of a victim, he
beheld among them a cross encompassed with
a crown. This appearance terrified those who
were assisting in the ceremony, for they judged
that it indicated the strength of religion, and the
eternal duration of the Christian doctrines ; in-
asmuch as the crown by which it was encircled
is the symbol of victory, and because of its con-
tinuity, for the circle beginning everywhere and
ending in itself, has no limits in any direction.
The chief augur commanded Julian to be of
good cheer, because in his judgment the victims
were propitious, and since they surrounded the
symbol of the Christian doctrine, and was in-
deed pushing into it, so that it would not spread
and expand itself where it wished, since it was
limited by the circumference of the circle.

I have also heard that one day Julian de-
scended into a most noted and terrific adytum,^
either for the purpose of participating in some
initiation, or of consulting an oracle ; and that,
by means of machinery which is devised for this
end, or of enchantments, such frightful specters
were projected suddenly before him, that through
perturbation and fear, he became forgetful of
those who were present, for he had turned to his
new religion when already a man, and so uncon-
sciously fell into his earlier habit, and signed
himself with the symbol of Christ, just as the
Christian encompassed with untried dangers is
wont to do. Immediately the specters disap-
peared and their designs were frustrated. The
initiator was at first surprised at this, but when
apprised of the cause of the flight of the demons,
he declared that the act was a profanation ; and
after exhorting the emperor to be courageous and
to have no recourse in deed or thought to anything
connected with the Christian religion, he again

the addition of many details. Oreg. Naz. adv. yuliauum, i. and ii.
Invrctiva; Eunapius, Excerpt, i. i, 2; Excirpt, ii. 1-24; Zos. ii.
45; iii. 2-29, 34. Am. Marcel, xv.-xxiv. Theodoret, H. E. iii. 2, 3,
follows Soz. succinctly. ' Greg. Naz. Or. cont. Julianum, i. 54.
' Greg. Naz. cont. yu'ianum, i inv. 55.


conducted him to the initiation. The zeal of the
king for such matters saddened the Christians not
a little and made them extremely anxious, more
especially as he had been himself formerly a
Christian. He was born of pious parents, had
been initiated in infancy according to the custom
of the Church, and had been brought up in the
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, and was nur-
tured by bishops and men of the Church. He
and Callus were the sons of Constantius, the
brother by the same father of Constantine the
emperor, and of Dalmatius. Dalmatius had a
son of the same name, who was declared Caesar,
and was slain by the soldiery after the death of
Constantine. His fate would have been shared
by Callus and Julian, who were then orphans,
had not Callus been spared on account of a
disease under which he was laboring, and from
which, it was supposed, that he would soon
naturally die ; and Julian, on account of his
extreme youth, for he was but eight years of age.
After this wonderful preservation, a residence
was assigned to the two brothers in a palace
called Macellum, situated in Cappadocia ; this
imperial post was near Mount Argeus, and not
far from Caesarea; it contained a magnificent
palace and was adorned with baths, gardens, and
perennial fountains. Here they were cultured
and educated in a manner corresponding to
the dignity of their birth ; they were taught the
sciences and bodily exercises befitting their age,
by masters of languages and interpreters of the
Holy Scriptures, so that they were enrolled
among the clerg)', and read the ecclesiastical
books to the people. Their habits and actions
indicated no dereliction from piety. They re-
spected the clergy and other good people and
persons zealous for doctrine ; they repaired reg-
ularly to church and rendered due homage to
the tombs of the martyrs.

It is said that they undertook to deposit the
tomb of St. Mammas ' the martyr in a large
edifice, and to divide the labor between them-
selves, and that while they were trying to excel
one another in a rivalry of honor, an event oc-
curred which was so astonishing that it would
indeed be utterly incredible were it not for the
testimony of many who are still among us, who
heard it from those who were eyewitnesses of
the transaction.

The part of the edifice upon which Callus
labored advanced rapidly and according to wish,
but of the section upon which Julian labored, a
part fell into ruin ; another was projected up-
ward from the earth ; a third immediately on
its touching the foundation could not be held

' Under Aurelian, a.d. 274. The Greeks celebrate him Sept. 2;
Latins, Aug. 17. He is said by Greg. Naz. (Orat. 44, 12), and by
Basil (Horn. 23, on St. Mammas) to have been a shepherd and also
a martyr. The miraculous story here related is given also by Greg.
Naz. in his First Oration agaimt Julian, 25, though he aoes not
mention the martyr's name.


V. 2.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


327


upright, but was hurled backward as if some
resistant and strong force from beneath were
pushing against it.

This was universally regarded as a prodigy.
The people, however, drew no conclusion from
it till subsequent events manifested its import.
There were a few who from that moment doubted
the reality of Julian's religion, and suspected that
he only made an outward profession of piety for
fear of displeasing the emperor, who was then
a Christian, and that he concealed his own sen-
timents because it was not safe to divulge them.
It is asserted that he was first secretly led to
renounce the religion of his fathers by his inter-
course with diviners ; for when the resentment
of Constantius against the two brothers was
abated, Callus went to Asia, and took up his
residence in Ephesus, where the greater part of
his property was situated ; and Julian repaired
to Constantinople, and frequented the schools,
where his fine natural abilities and ready attain-
ments in the sciences did not remain concealed.
He appeared in public in the garb of a private
individual, and had much company ; but be-
cause he was related to the emperor and was
capable of conducting affairs and was expected
to become emperor, considerable talk about him
to this effect was prevalent, as is wont to be the
case in a populous and imperial city, he was com-
manded to retire to Nicomedia.

Here he became acquainted with Maximus,
an Ephesian philosopher,^ who instructed him
in philosophy, and inspired him with hatred
towards the Christian religion, and moreover
assured him that the much talked of prophecy
about him was true. Julian, as happens in many
cases, while suffering in anticipation of severe
circumstances, was softened by these favorable
hopes and held Maximus as his friend. As these
occurrences reached the ears of Constantius,
Julian became apprehensive, and accordingly
shaved himself, and adopted externally the
monkish mode of life, while he secretly held to
the other religion.

When he arrived at the age of manhood, he
was more readily infatuated, and yet was anxious
about these tendencies ; and admiring the art
(if there be such an art) of predicting the future,
he thought the knowledge of it necessary ; he
advanced to such experiments as are not lawful
for Christians. From this period he had as his
friends those who followed this art. In this
opinion, he came into Asia from Nicomedia, and
there consorting with men of such practices, he
became more ardent in the pursuit of divination.

When Gallus, his brother, who had been es-
tablished as C?esar, was put to death on being

' See Eunap. V. S. vita Maximi ; Julian wrote four letters to
him, Op. Ep. 15, 16, 38, 39; to be distiaguished from another teacher
of Julian, Maximus of Epirus.


accused of revolution, Constantius also suspected
Julian of cherishing the love of empire, and
therefore put him under the custody of guards.

Eusebia, the wife of Constantius, obtained for
him permission to retire to Athens ; and he ac-
cordingly settled there, under pretext of attend-
ing the pagan exercises and schools ; but as rumor
says, he communed with diviners concerning his
future prospects. Constantius recalled him, and
proclaimed him Csesar, promised him his sister
Constantia - in marriage, and sent him to Gaul ;
for the barbarians whose aid had been hired by
Constantius previously against Magnentius, find-
ing that their services were not required, had por-
tioned out that country. As Julian was very young,
generals, to whom the pnidential affairs were
turned over, were sent with him ; but as these
generals abandoned themselves to pleasure, he
was present as Caesar, and provided for the
war. He confirmed his soldiers in their spirit for
battle, and urged them in other ways to incur
danger ; he also ordered that a fixed reward
should be given to each one who should slay a
barbarian. After he had thus secured the affec-
tions of the soldiery, he wrote to Constantius,
acquainting him with the levity of the generals ;
and when another general had been sent, he
attacked the barbarians, and obtained the vic-
tory. They sent embassies to beg for peace,
and showed the letter in which Constantius had
requested them to enter the Roman dominions.
He purposely delayed to send the ambassador
back ; he attacked a number of the enemy
unexpectedly and conquered them.

Some have said that Constantius, with designed
enmity, committed this campaign to him ; ^ but
this does not appear probable to nie. For, as
it rested with Constantius alone to nominate him
Caesar, why did he confer that title upon him?
Why did he give him his sister in marriage, or
hear his complaints against the inefficient gen-
erals, and send a competent one in their stead
in order to complete the war, if he were not
friendly to Julian ?

But as I conjecture, he conferred on him the
title of Caesar because he was well disposed to
Julian ; but that after Julian had, without his
sanction, been proclaimed emperor, he plotted
against him through the barbarians on the Rhine ;
and this, I think, resulted either from the dread
that Julian would seek revenge for the ill-treat-
ment he and his brother Gallus had experienced
during their youth, or as would be natural, from
jealousy of his attaining similar honor. But
a great variety of opinions are entertained on
this subject.


' Sozomen is mistaken here, as Constantia was married to Gallus
Caesar, the brother of Julian. Soc. iii. i, and Am. Marcel, xv. 8,
18, give Helena as the name of Julian's wife.

' As Eunapius, Exc. ii. 3.


328


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 3-


CHAP. III. JULIAN, ON HIS SKITLEMENT IN THE

EMPIRE, BEGAN QUIETLY TO STIR UP OPPOSITION
TO CHRISTIANIIT, AND TO INTRODUCE PAGANISM
ARTFULLY.

When Julian found himself sole possessor of
the empire,' he commanded that all the pagan
temples should be reopened throughout the East ;
that those which had been neglected should be
repaired ; that those which had fallen into ruins
should be rebuilt, and that the altars should be
restored. He assigned considerable money for
this purpose ; he restored the customs of an-
tiquity and the ancestral ceremonies in the
cities, and the practice of offering sacrifice.

He himself offered libations openly and pub-
licly sacrificed ; bestowed honors on those who
were zealous in the performance of these cere-
monies ; restored the initiators and the priests,
the hierophants and the servants of the images,
to their old privileges ; and confirmed the legisla-
tion of former emperors in their behalf; he con-
ceded exemption from duties and from other
burdens as was their previous right ; he restored
the provisions, which had been abolished, to the
temple guardians, and commanded them to be
pure from meats, and to abstain from whatever
according to pagan saying was befitting him who
had announced his purpose of leading a pure
life.

He also ordered that the nilometer and the
symbols and the former ancestral tablets should
be cared for in the temple of Serapis, instead
of being deposited, according to the regulation,
established by Constantine, in the church. He
wrote frequently to the inhabitants of those
cities in which he knew paganism was nourished,
and urged them to ask what gifts they might
desire. Towards the Christians, on the con-
trary, he openly manifested his aversion, refusing
to honor them with his presence, or to receive
their deputies who were delegated to report about
grievances.

When the inhabitants of Nisibis sent to im-
plore his aid against, the Persians, who were on
the point of invading the Roman territories, he
refused to assist them because they were wholly
Christianized, and would neither reopen their
temples nor resort to the sacred places ; he
threatened that he would not help them, nor
receive their embassy, nor approach to enter
their city before he should hear that they had
returned to paganism.

He likewise accused the inhabitants of Con-
stantia in Palestine, of attachment to Christianity,
and rendered their city tributary to that of
Gaza. Constantia, as we stated before, was
formerly called Majuma, and was used as a
harbor for the vessels of Gaza ; but on hearing

' An independent chapter; cf. Theodoret, //. E. iii. 6, 7.


that the majority of its inhabitants were Chris-
tians, Constantine elevated it to the dignity of a
city, and conferred upon it the name of his own
son, and a separate form of government ; for he
considered that it ought not to be dependent
on Gaza, a city addicted to pagan rites. On
the accession of Julian, the citizens of Gaza
went to law against those of Constantia. The
emperor himself sat as judge, and decided in
favor of Gaza, and commanded that Constantia
should be an appendage to that city, although it
was situated at a distance of twenty stadia.

Its former name having been abolished by
him, it has since been denominated the maritime
region of Gaza. They have now the same city
magistrates, military officers, and public regula-
tions. With respect to ecclesiastical concerns,
however, they may still be regarded as two
cities. They have each their own bishop and
their own clergy ; they celebrate festivals in
honor of their respective martyrs, and in memory
of the priests who successively ruled them ; and
the boundaries of the adjacent fields by which
the altars belonging to the bishops are divided,
are still preserved.

It happened within our own remembrance
that an attempt was made by the bishop of
Gaza, on the death of the president of the
church at Majuma, to unite the clergy of that
town with those under his own jurisdiction ; and
the plea he advanced was, that it was not lawful
for two bishops to preside over one city. The
inhabitants of Majuma opposed this scheme, and
the council of the province took cognizance of
the dispute, and ordained another bishop. The
council decided that it was altogether right for
those who had been deemed worthy of the hon-
ors of a city on account of their piety, not to be
deprived of the privilege conferred upon the
priesthood and rank of their churches, through
the decision of a pagan emperor, who had
taken a different ground of action.

But these events occurred at a later period
than that now under review.


CHAP. IV. JULIAN INFLICTED EVILS UPON THE

INHAIiirAX'l-S OF CtSAREA. BOLD FIDELITY OF
MARIS, BISHOP OF CHALCEDON.

About the same time, the emperor erased
Csesarea,^ the large and wealthy metropolis of
Cappadocia, situated near Mount Argeus, from
the catalogue of cities, and even deprived it of
the name of Csesarea, which had been conferred
upon it during the reign of Claudius Cresar, its
former name having been Mazaca.' He had


5 The record is unique witt. Soz. Cf. the allusion in Greg. Naz.
Or. cotit. Julinnum, 1. 92; and Am. Marcel, xx. 9. i, 2 (Mazaca).

3 Am. Marcel, in quotation .above; and Philo:t. ix. 12, who says
that the original name of Caisarea was Mazaca, from Mosoch, after-
wards changed into Mazaca by inflection.


V.5-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


329


long regarded the inhabitants of this city with
extreme aversion, because they were zealously
attached to Christianity, and had formerly de-
stroyed the temple of the ancestral Apollo and
that of Jupiter, the tutelar deity of the city. The
temple dedicated to Fortune,' the only one re-
maining in the city, was overturned by the Chris-
tians after his accession ; and on hearing of the
deed, he hated the entire city intensely and
could scarce endure it. He also -blamed the
pagans, who were few in number, but who ought,
he said, to have hastened to the temple, and, if
necessary, to have suffered cheerfully for Fortune.
He caused all possessions and money belonging
to the churches of the city and suburbs of Csesarea
to be rigorously sought out and carried away ;
about three hundred pounds of gold, obtained
from this source, were conveyed to the public
treasury. He also commanded that all the clergy
should be enrolled among the troops under the
governor of the province, which is accounted
the most arduous and least honorable service
among the Romans.

He ordered the Christian populace to be
numbered, women and children inclusive, and
imposed taxes upon them as onerous as those to
which villages are subjected.

He further threatened that, unless their
temples were speedily re-erected, his wrath
would not be appeased, but would be visited on
the city, until none of the Galileans remained in
existence ; for this was the name which, in de-
rision, he was wont to give to the Christians.
There is no doubt but that his menaces would
have been fully executed had not death quickly
intervened.

It was not from any feeling of compassion
towards the Christians that he treated them
at first with greater humanity than had been
evinced by former persecutors, but because he
had discovered that paganism had derived no
advantage from their tortures, while Christianity
had been especially increased, and had become
more honored by the fortitude of those who
died in defense of the faith.

It was simply from envy of their glory, that
instead of employing fire and the sword against
them, and maltreating their bodies like former
persecutors, and instead of casting them into
the sea, or burying them alive in order to
compel them to a change of sentiment, he had
recourse to argument and persuasion, and
sought by these means to reduce them to
paganism ; he expected to gain his ends more
easily by abandoning all violent measures, and
by the manifestation of unexpected benevo-
lence. It is said that on one occasion, when he

1 To TvxeCov was the Byzantine term for the temple of the city
genius. This one is mentioned by Greg. Naz. Or. cont. yultanum,
1. 92, as Tuxt; similarly in Or. xviii. 34.


was sacrificing in the temple of Fortune at Con-
stantinople, Maris,^ bishop of Chalcedon, pre-
sented himself before him, and publicly rebuked
him as an irreligous man, an atheist, and an apos-
tate. Julian had nothing in return to reproach
him with except his blindness, for his sight was
impaired by old age, and he was led by a child.
According to his usual custom of uttering blas-
phemies against Christ, Julian afterward added
in derision, " The Galilean, thy God, will not
cure thee." Maris replied, ' I thank God for
my bhndness, since it prevents me from behold-
ing one who has fallen away from our religion."
Julian passed on without giving a reply, for he
considered that paganism would be more ad-
vanced by a personal and unexpected exhibition
of patience and mildness towards Christians.


CHAP. V. JULIAN RESTORES LIBERTY TO THE

CHRISTIANS, IN ORDER TO EXECUTE FURTHER
TROUBLES IN THE CHURCH. THE EVIL TREAT-
MENT OF CHRISTIANS HE DEVISED.

It was from these motives that Julian recalled
from exile ^ all Christians who, during the reign
of Constantius, had been banished on account
of their religious sentiments, and restored to
them their property that had been confiscated
by law. He charged the people not to commit
any act of injustice against the Christians, not to
insult them, and not to constrain them to offer
sacrifice unwillingly. He commanded that if
they should of their own accord desire to draw
near the altars, they were first to appease the
wrath of the demons, whom the pagans regard
as capable of averting evil, and to purify them-
selves by the customary course of expiations.
He deprived the clergy, however, of the immu-
nities, honors, and provisions which Constantine
had conferred;* repealed the laws which had
been enacted in their favor, and reinforced
their statute Uabilities. He even compelled the
virgins and widows, who, on account of their
poverty, were reckoned among the clergy, to
refund the provision which had been assigned
them from public sources. For when Constan-
tine adjusted the temporal concerns of the
Church, he devoted a sufficient portion of the
taxes raised upon every city, to the support of
the clergy everywhere ; and to ensure the stabil-
ity of this arrangement he enacted a law which
has continued in force from the death of Julian
to the present day. They say these transactions
were very cruel and rigorous, as appears by the
receipts given by the receivers of the money to
those from whom it had been extorted, and

' Concerning this Maris, see Soc. iii. 12.
' Soc. iii. 11; Philost. vi. 7, vii. 4.
* Eus. v. C. ii. 30-42.


33^


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 5-


which were designed to show that the property
received in accordance with the law of Constan-
tine had been refunded.

Nothing, however, could diminish the enmity
of the ruler against religion. In the intensity
of his hatred against the faith, he seized every
opportunity to ruin the Church. He deprived
it of its property, votives, and sacred vessels,
and condemned those who had demolished
temples during the reign of Constantine and
Constantius, to rebuild them, or to defray the
expenses of their re-erection. On this ground,
since they were unable to pay the sums and also
on account of the inquisition for sacred money,
many of the priests, clergy, and the other Chris-
tians were cruelly tortured and cast into prison.
It may be concluded from what has been said,
that if Julian shed less blood than preceding
persecutors of the Church, and that if he devised
fewer punishments for the torture of the body,
yet that he was severer in other respects ; for
he appears as inflicting evil upon it in every
way, except that he recalled the priests who had
been condemned to banishment by the Emperor
Constantius ; but it is said he issued this order
in their behalf, not out of mercy, but that through
contention among themselves, the churches might
be involved in fraternal strife, and might fail of
her own rights, or because he wanted to asperse
Constantius ; for he supposed that he could ren-
der the dead monarch odious to almost all his
subjects, by favoring the pagans who were of
the same sentiments as himself, and by showing
compassion to those who had suffered for Christ,
as having been treated unjustly. He expelled
the eunuchs from the palaces, because the late
emperor had been well affected towards them.
He condemned Eusebius, the governor of the
imperial court, to death, from a suspicion he
entertained that it was at his suggestion that
Callus his brother had been slain. He recalled
Aetius, the leader of the Eunomian heresy,' from
the region whither Constantius had banished him,
who had been otherwise suspected on account
of his intimacy with Callus ; and to him Julian
sent letters full of benignity, and furnished him
with public conveyances. For a similar rea-
son he condemned Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus,
under the heaviest penalty, to rebuild, within two
months, and at his own expense, a church be-
longing to the Novatians which he had destroyed
under Constantius. Many other things might
be found which he did from hatred to his pred-
ecessor, either himself effecting these or per-
mitting others to accomplish them.


BEAUTIFUL VIRGIN, REAPPEARS AT IHAT TIME IN
PUBLIC, AND ENTERS THE CHURCH OF ALEXAN-
DRU.

At this period, Athanasius, who had long
remained in concealment, having heard of
the death of Constantius, appeared by night in
the church at Alexandria.'"' His unexpected
appearance excited the greatest astonishment.
He had escaped falling into the hands of the
governor of Egypt, who, at the command of the
emperor, and at the request of the friends of
George, had formed plans to arrest him, as
before stated, and had concealed himself in
the house of a holy virgin in Alexandria. It
is said that she was endowed with such extraor-
dinary beauty, that those who beheld her re-
garded her as a phenomenon of nature ; and that
men who possessed continence and pnidence,
kept aloof from her in order that no blame might
be attached to them by the suspicious. She was
in the very flower of youth and was exceedingly
modest and prudent, qualities which are wont
alone to adorn the body even to a refinement of
beauty when nature may not be helpful with the
gift. For it is not true, as some assert, that
" as is the body, so is the soul." On the contrary,
the habit of the body is imaged forth by the op-
eration of the soul, and any one who is active in
any way whatever will appear to be of that na-
ture as long as he may be thus actively engaged.
This is a truth I think admitted by all who
have accurately investigated the subject. It is
related that Athanasius sought refuge in the
house of this holy virgin by the revelation of
God, who designed to save him in this manner.
When I reflect on the result which ensued, I
cannot doubt but that all the events were
directed by God ; so that the relatives of
Athanasius might not have distress if any one
had attempted to trouble them about him, and
had they been compelled to swear. There was
nothing to excite suspicion of a priest being
concealed in the house of so lovely a virgin.
However, she had the courage to receive him,
and through her prudence preser\'ed his life.
She was his most faithful keeper and assiduous
servant ; for she washed his feet and brought him
food, and she alone served in every other neces-
sity, which nature demands in her exacting uses ;
the books he stood in need of she cared for
through the help of others; during the long
time in which these services were rendered,
none of the inhabitants of Alexandria knew any-
thing about it.


CHAP. VI. — ATHANASIUS, AFTER HAVING BEEN SEVEN
YEARS CONCEALED IN THE HOUSE OF A WISE AND


1 Juliani Op. Ep. 31, a letter from him to Aetius.


CHAP. VII. — VIOLENT DEATH AND TRIUMPH OF
GEORGE, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA. THE RESULT


I Pallad. H. I. 136; cf. Soc.
Festal letters, under a.d. 360.


4; cf. Chronicon pravivm to


V. 8.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


33^


OF CERTAIN OCCURRENCES IN THE TEMPLE OV
MITHRA. LETIER OF JULIAN ON THIS AGGRA-
VATED CIRCUMSTANCE.

After Athanasius had been preserved in this
wise and appeared suddenly in the church, no
one knew whence he came.^ The people of
Alexandria, however, rejoiced at his return, and
restored his churches to him.

The Arians, being thus expelled from the
churches, were compelled to hold their assem-
blies in private houses, and constituted Lucius,
in the place of George, as the bishop of their
heresy. George had been already slain ; for
when the magistrates had announced to the
public the decease of Constantius, and that
[ulian was sole ruler, the pagans of Alexandria
rose up in sedition. They attacked George
with shouts and reproaches as if they would
kill him at once. The repellants of this pre-
cipitate attack, then put him in prison ; a little
while after they rushed, early in the morning,
to the prison, killed him, flung the corpse upon
a camel, and after exposing it to every insult
during the day, burnt it at nightfall. I am not
ignorant that the Arian heretics assert that
George received this cruel treatment from the
followers of Athanasius ; but it seems to me
more probable that the perpetrators of these
deeds were the pagans ; for they had more
cause than any other body of men to hate him,
especially on account of the insults he offered
their images and their temples ; and having,
morever, prohibited them from sacrificing, or
performing the ancestral rites. Besides, the in-
fluence he had acquired in the palaces intensi-
fied the hatred towards him ; and as the people
are wont to feel towards those in power, they
regarded him as unendurable.

A calamity had also taken place at a spot
called Mithrium ; it was originally a desert, and
Constantius had bestowed it on the church of
Alexandria. While George was clearing the
ground, in order to erect a house of prayer, an
adytum was discovered. In it were found idols
and certain instruments for initiation or perfec-
tion which seemed ludicrous and strange to the
beholders. The Christians caused them to be pub-
licly exhibited, and made a procession in order
to nettle the pagans ; but the pagans gathered a
multitude together, and rushed upon and at-
tacked the Christians, after arming themselves
with swords, stones, and whatever weapon came
first to hand. They slew many of the Christians,
and, in derision of their religion, crucified oth-
ers, and they left many wounded.

This led to the abandonment of the work


I Soc. iii. 2-4. Cf. Philost. vii. 2; Am. Marcel, xxii. 11. 3-11;
Athan. £■/. ad. Episc. 7; Hist. Arian. 51,72, 75, etc.; Jtiliani
Op. Epp. 8, 9, 10, 36, 45, 55.


that had been commenced by the Christians,
while the pagans murdered George as soon as
they had heard of the accession of Julian to the
empire. This fact is admitted by that emperor
himself, which he would not have confessed
unless he had been forced by the truth ; for he
would rather, I think, have had the Christians,
whoever they were, than the pagans to be the
murderers of George ; but it could not be con-
cealed. It is apparent in the letter which he
wrote on the subject to the inhabitants of Alex-
andria,'* wherein he expresses severe opinions.
In this epistle he only censures and passes over
the punishment ; for he said that he feared
Serapis, their tutelary divinity, and Alexander
their founder, and Julian, his own uncle, who
formerly was governor of Egypt and of Alexan-
dria. This latter was so favorable to paganism
and hated Christianity so exceedingly, that con-
trary to the wishes of the emperor, he persecuted
the Christians unto death.


CHAP. VIII. CONCERNING THEODORE, THE KEEPER

OF THE SACRED VESSELS OF ANTIOCH. HOW
JULIAN, THE UNCLE OF THE TRAFTOR, ON AC-
COUNT OF THESE VESSELS, FALLS A PREY TO
WORMS.

It is said that when Julian, the uncle of the
emperor,"* was intent upon removing the votive
gifts of the church of Antioch, which were many
and costly, and placing them in the imperial
treasury, and also closing the places of prayer,
all the clergy fled. One presbyter, by name
Theodoritus, alone did not leave the city;
Julian seized him, as the keeper of the treasures,
and as capable of giving information concerning
them, and maltreated him terribly; finally he
ordered him to be slain with the sword, after he
had responded bravely under every torture and
had been well approved by his doctrinal confes-
sions. When Julian had made a booty of the
sacred vessels, he flung them upon the ground
and began to mock ; after blaspheming Christ
as much as he wished, he sat upon the ves-
sels and augmented his insulting acts. Im-
mediately his genitals and rectum were cor-
rupted ; their flesh became putrescent, and was
changed into worms. The disease was be-
yond the skill of the physicians. However, from
reverence and fear for the emperor, they resorted
to experiments with all manner of drugs, and the
most costly and the fattest birds were slain, and
their fat was applied to the corrupted parts, in
the hope that the worms might be thereby at-
tracted to the surface, but this was of no effect ;


2 Text given by Soc. iii. 3: cf. Juliani Op. Ep. 10.
' Philost. vii. 10, variations; Theodoret, iii. 12, 13.
Marcel, xxiii. i. 4-6.


Cf. Am.


332


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 8.


for being deep buried, they crept into the Hving
flesh, and did not cease their gnawing until they
put an end to his life. It seemed that this
calamity was an infliction of Divine wrath, be-
cause the keeper of the imperial treasures, and
other of the chief ofiicers of the court who had
made sport of the Church, died in an extraordi-
nary and dreadful manner,' as if condemned by
Divine wrath.


CHAP. IX. MARTV-RDOM OF THE SAINTS EUSEBIUS,

NESTABIS, AN-D ZFNO IN THE CITY OF GAZA.

As I have advanced thus far in my history,
and have given an account of the death of George
and of Theodoritus, I deem it right to relate
some particulars concerning the death of the
three brethren, Eusebius, Nestabus, and Zeno."
The inhabitants of Oaza, being inflamed with
rage against them, dragged them from their
house, in which they had concealed themselves,
and cast them into prison, and beat them. They
then assembled in the theater, and cried out
loudly against them, declaring that they had com-
mitted sacrilege in their temple, and had used
the past opportunity for the injury and insult of
paganism. By these shouts and by instigating
one another to the murder of the brethren, they
were filled with fury ; and when they had been
mutually incited, as a crowd in revolt is wont to
do, they rushed to the prison. They handled the
men very cruelly ; sometimes with the face and
sometimes with the back upon the ground, the
victims were dragged along, and were dashed
to pieces by the pavement. I have been told
that even women quitted their distaffs and
pierced them with the weaving-spindles, and
that the cooks in the markets snatched from
their stands the boiling pots foaming with hot
water and poured it over the victims, or per-
forated them with spits. When they had torn
the flesh from them and crushed in their skulls,
so that the brain ran out on the ground, their
bodies were dragged out of the city and flung
on the spot generally used as a receptacle for
the carcasses of beasts ; then a large fire was
lighted, and they burned the bodies ; the rem-
nant of the bones not consumed by the fire
was mixed with those of camels and asses, that
they might not be found easily. But they were
not long concealed ; for a Christian woman, who
was an inhabitant, though not a native of Gaza,
collected the bones at night by the direction of
God. She put them in an earthen pot and
gave them to Zeno, their cousin, to keep, for


' Felix and Elpidiiis, oflRcials whom Philost. and Theodoret
assert to have been punished.

» Soz. alone reports this, probably from local martyrology or
from Bishop Zeno.


thus God had informed her in a dream, and
also had indicated to the woman where the man
lived : and before she saw him, he was shown
to her, for she was previously unacquainted with
Zeno ; and when the persecution had been agi-
tated recently he remained concealed. He was
within a little of being seized by the people of
Gaza and being put to death ; but he had
effected his escape while the people were occu-
pied in the murder of his cousins, and had fled
to .Anthedon, a maritime city, about twenty
stadia from Gaza and similarly favorable to
paganism and devoted to idolatry. When the
inhabitants of this city discovered that he was a
Christian, they beat him terribly on the back
with rods and drove him out of the city. He
then fled to the harbor of Gaza and concealed
himself; and here the woman found him and
gave him the remains. He kept them carefully
in his house until the reign of Theodosius, when
he was ordained bishop ; and he erected a
house of prayer beyond the walls of the city,
placed an altar there, and deposited the bones
of the martyrs near those of Nestor, the Con-
fessor. Nestor had been on terms of intimacy
with his cousins, and was seized with them by
the people of Gaza, imprisoned, and scourged.
But those who dragged him through the city were
aff'ected by his personal beauty ; and, struck with
compassion, they cast him, before he was quite
dead, out of the city. Some persons found him,
and carried him to the house of Zeno, where he
expired during the dressing of his cuts and
wounds. When the inhabitants of Gaza began
to reflect on the enormity of their crime, they
trembled lest the einperor should take vengeance
on them.

It was reported thTlt the emperor was filled
with indignation, and had determined upon pun-
ishing the decuria ; but this report was false, and
had no foundation save in the fears and self-accu-
sations of the criminals. Julian, far from evincing
as much anger against them as he had mani-
fested against the .-Mexandrians on the murder
of George, did not even write to rebuke the
people of Gaza. On the contrary, he deposed
the governor of the province, and held him as a
suspect, and represented that clemency alone
l)revented his being put to death. The crime
imputed to him was, that of having arrested
some of the inhabitants of Gaza, who were re-
ported to have begun the sedition and murders,
and of having imprisoned them until judgment
could be passed upon them in accordance with
the laws. " For what right had he," asked the
emperor, " to arrest the citizens merely for re-
taliating on a few Galileans the injuries that had
been inflicted on them and their gods?" This,
it is said, was the fact in the case.


V. lo.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


333


CHAP. X. CONCERNING ST. HILARION AND THE

VIRGIMS IN HELIOPOLIS WHO WERE DESTROYED
BY SWINE. STRANGE MARTYRDOM OF MARK,
BISHOP OF ARETHUSA.


At the same period the inhabitants of Gaza
sought for the monk Hilarion ; but he had fled
to Sicily.' Here he employed himself in collect-
ing wood in the deserts and on the mountains,
which he carried on his shoulders for sale in the
cities, and, by these means, obtained sufficient
food for the support of the body. But as he
was at length recognized by a man of quality
whom he had dispossessed of a demon, he re-
tired to Dalmatia, where, by the power of God,
he performed numerous miracles, and through
prayer, repressed an inundation of the sea and
restored the waves to their proper bounds, and
again departed, for it was no joy to him to live
among those who praised him ; but when he
changed his place of abode, he was desirous of
being unobserved and by frequent migrations
to be rid of the fame which prevailed about him.
Eventually he sailed for the island of Cyprus,
but touched at Paphos, and, at the entreaty of
the bishop of Cyprus, he loved the life there and
practiced philosophy at a place called Charbu-
ris.

Here he only escaped martyrdom by flight ;
for he fled in compliance with the Divine pre-
cept which commands us not to expose ourselves
to persecution ; but that if we fall into the hands
of persecutors, to overcome by our own fortitude
the violence of our oppressors.

The inhabitants of Gaza and of Alexandria
were not the only citizens who exercised such
atrocities against the Christians as those I have
described. The inhabitants of Heliopolis, near
Mount Libanus, and of Arethusa in Syria, seem
to have surpassed them in excess of cruelty.^ The
former were guilty of an act of barbarity which
could scarcely be credited, had it not been cor-
roborated by the testimony of those who wit-
nessed it. They stripped the holy virgins, who
had never been looked upon by the multitude,
of their garments, and exposed them in a state
of nudity as a public spectacle and objects of
insult. After numerous other inflictions they at
last shaved them, ripped them open, and con-
cealed in their viscera the food usually given to
pigs ; and since the swine could not distinguish,
but were impelled by the need of their custo-
mary food, they also tore in pieces the human
flesh.

I am convinced that the citizens of Heliopolis
perpetrated this barbarity against the holy vir-
gins on account of the prohibition of the ancient
custom of yielding up virgins to prostitution with

1 Hieron. Viin Hilarionis (divergent on some points).
* Greg. Naz. Or. cont. Julianuni, i. 86, 87.


any chance comer before being united in mar-
riage to their betrothed. This custom was pro-
hibited by a law enacted by Constantine, after
he had destroyed the temple of Venus at Heli-
opolis, and erected a church upon its ruins.^

Mark, bishop of Arethusa,* an old man and
venerable for his gray hairs and life, was put to
a very cruel death by the inhabitants of that


city, who had long entertained inimical feelings
against him, because, during the reign of Constan-
tine, he had more spiritedly than persuasively
elevated the pagans to Christianity, and had
demolished a most sacred and magnificent tem-
ple. On the accession of Julian he saw that the
people were excited against the bishop ; an
edict was issued commanding the bishop either
to defray the expenses of its re-erection, or to
rebuild the temple. Reflecting that the one was
impossible and the other unlawful for a Christian
and still less for a priest, he at first fled from the
city. On hearing, however, that many were suf-
fering on his account, that some were dragged
before the tribunals and others tortured, he re-
turned, and off'ered to sufi"er whatever the multi-
tude might choose to inflict upon him. The
entire people, instead of admiring him the more
as having manifested a deed befitting a philoso-
pher, conceived that he was actuated by con-
tempt towards them, and rushed upon him,
dragged him through the streets, pressing and
plucking and beating whatever member each one
happened upon. People of each sex and of all
ages joined with alacrity and fury in this atro-
cious proceeding. His ears were severed by
fine ropes ; the boys who frequented the schools
made game of him by tossing him aloft and
rolling him over and over, sending him for-
ward, catching him up, and unsparingly pierc-
ing him with their styles. When his whole
body was covered with wounds, and he never-
theless was still breathing, they anointed him
with honey and a certain mixture, and placing
him in a fish-basket made of woven rushes,
raised him up on an eminence. It is said
that while he was in this position, and the
wasps and bees lit upon him and consumed his
flesh, he told the inhabitants of Arethusa that
he was raised up above them, and could look
down upon them below him, and that this re-
minded him of the diff"erence that would exist
between them in the life to come. It is also re-
lated that the prefect ^ who, although a pagan,
was of such noble conduct that his memory is
still honored in that country, admired the self-
control of Mark, and boldly uttered reproaches
against the emperor for allowing himself to be


3 Eus. V. C. iii. 58.

* Greg. Naz. Or. cont. yulianum, i.


88-go.
5 He means Sallustius, who was at this time pracfectus prsetorio
Orientis, to be distinguished from another Sallustius, who was prx-
fectus prxtorio Galliae.


334


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. lo.


vanquished by an old man, who was exposed to
innumerable tortures; and he added that such
proceedings reflected ridicule on the emperor,
while the names of the persecuted were at the
same time rendered illustrious. Thus did the
blessed one' endure all the torments inflicted
upon him by the inhabitants of Arethusa with
such unshaken fortitude that even the pagans
praised him.


CHAP. XI. — CONCERNING MACEDONIUS, THEODULUS,
GRATIAN, BUSIRIS, BASIL, AND EUPSVCHIUS, WHO
SUFFERED MARTYRDOM IN THOSE TIMES.

About the same period, Macedonius, Theodu-
lus, and Tatian, who were Phrygians by birth,
courageously endured martyrdom.^ A temple
of Misos, a city of Phrygia, having been re-
opened by the governor of the province, after
it had been closed many years, these mar-
tyrs entered therein by night, and destroyed the
images. As other individuals were arrested, and
were on the point of being punished for the
deed, they avowed themselves the actors in the
transaction. They might have escaped all fur-
ther punishment by offering sacrifices to idols ;
but the governor could not persuade them to ac-
cept acquittal on these terms. His persuasions
being ineffectual, he maltreated them in a variety
of forms, and finally extended them on a gridiron,
beneath which a fire had been lighted. While
they were being consumed, they said to the
governor, " Amachus (for that was his name),
" if you desire cooked flesh, give orders that
our bodies may be turned with the other side
to the fire, in order that we may not seem, to
your taste, half cooked." Thus did these men
nobly endure and lay down their life amid the
punishments.

It is said that Busiris also obtained renown at
Ancyra, a city of Galatia, by his brilliant and
most manly confession of religion. He belonged
to the heresy denominated Eucratites ; the gov-
ernor of the province apprehended and designed
to maltreat him for ridiculing the pagans. He
led him forth publicly to the torture chamber
and commanded that he should be elevated.
Busiris raised both hands to his head so as to
leave his sides exposed, and told the governor
that it would be useless for the executioners to
lift him up to the instalment of torture and
afterwards to lower him, as he was ready without
this to yield to the tortures as much as might
be desired. The governor was surprised at this
proposition ; but his astonishment was increased
by what followed, for Busiris remained firm, hold-


ing up both hands and receiving the blows while
his sides were being torn with hooks, according
to the governor's direction. Immediately after-
wards, Busiris was consigned to prison, but was
released not long subsequently, on the announce-
ment of the death of Julian. He lived till
the reign of Theodosius, renounced his former
heresy, and joined the Catholic Church.

It is said that about this period, Basil,'' pres-
byter of the church of Ancyra, and Eupsy-
chius,* a noble of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who
had but just taken to himself a wife and was
still a bridegroom, terminated their lives by
martyrdom. I believe that Eupsychius was con-
demned in consequence of the demolition of
the temple of Fortune, which, as I have already
stated, excited the anger of the emperor against
all the inhabitants of Csesarea. Indeed, all the
actors in this transaction were condemned, some
to death, and others to banishment. Basil had
long manifested great zeal in defense of the
faith, and had opposed the Arians during the
reign of Constantius ; hence the partisans of
Eudoxius had prohibited him from holding public
assemblies. On the accession of Julian, how-
ever, he traveled hither and thither, publicly and
openly exhorting the Christians to cleave to their
own doctrines, and to refrain from defiling them-
selves with pagan sacrifices and libations. He
urged them to account as nothing the honors
which the emperor might bestow upon them^
such honors being but of short duration, and
leading to eternal infamy. His zeal had al-
ready rendered him an object of suspicion and
of hatred to the pagans, when one day he
chanced to pass by and see them offering sac-
rifice. He sighed deeply, and uttered a prayer
to the effect that no Christian might be suf-
fered to fall into similar delusion. He was
seized on the spot, and conveyed to the gov-
ernor of the province. Many tortures were in-
flicted on him ; and in the manly endurance of
this anguish he received the crown of mar-
tyrdom.

Even if these cruelties were perpetrated con-
trary to the will of the emperor, yet they serve
to prove that his reign was signalized by martyrs
neither ignoble nor few.

For the sake of clearness, I have related all
these occurrences collectively, although the
martyrdoms really occurred at different periods.


CHAP. Xn. CONCERNING LUCIFER AND EUSEBIUS,

BISHOPS OF THE WEST. EUSEBIUS WITH ATHANA-
SIUS THE GREAT AND OTHER BISHOPS COLLECT A
COUNCIL AT ALEXANDRIA, AND CONFIRM THE
NICENE FArrH BY DEFINING THE CONSUBSTAN-


• Most likely this was the same Mark, bishop of Arethusa, men-
tioned in iii. lo; iv. 6, 12, «6, 22.
' For the Phrygians, Soc. iii. 15.


' Independent with Soz.

« Basil, M. Ep. c; Greg. Naz. Ep. Iviii.


V. I3-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


335


TIALITY OF THE SPIRIT WITH THE FATHER AND
THE SON. THEIR DECREE CONCERNING SUBSTANCE
AND HYPOSTASIS.

After the return of Athanasius, Lucifer, bishop
of CagUari in Sardinia, and Eusebius, bishop of
Vercelli, a city of Liguria in Italy, returned
from the upper Thebais.' They had been con-
demned by Constantius to perpetual exile in
that country. For the regulation and general
systematizing of ecclesiastical affairs, Eusebius
came to Alexandria, and there, in concert with
Athanasius, to hold a council for the purpose of
confirming the Nicene doctrines.

Lucifer sent a deacon with Eusebius to take
his place in the council, and went himself to
Antioch, to visit the church there in its disturb-
ances.

A schism had been excited by the Arians,
then under the guidance of Euzoius, and by the
followers of Meletius, who, as I have above
stated, were at variance even with those who
held the same opinions as themselves. As
Meletius had not then returned from exile,
Lucifer ordained Paulinus bishop.^

In the meantime, the bishops of many cities
had assembled in Alexandria with Athanasius
and Eusebius, and had confirmed the Nicene
doctrines. They confessed that the Holy Ghost
is of the same substance as the Father and the
Son, and they made use of the term " Trinity."

They declared that the human nature assumed
by God the Word is to be regarded as consisting
of not a perfect body only, but also of a perfect
soul, even as was taught by the ancient Church
philosophers. As the Church had been agitated
by questions concerning the terms " substance "
and " hypostasis," and the contentions and dis-
putes about these words had been frequent, they
decreed, and, as I think, wisely, that these
terms should not henceforth at the beginning
be used in reference to God, except in refuta-
tion of the Sabellian tenet ; lest from the paucity
of terms, one and the same thing might appear
to be called by three names ; but that one might
understand each by its peculiar term in a three-
fold way.

These were the decrees passed by the bishops
convened at Alexandria. Athanasius read in
the council the document about his flight which
he had written in order to justify himself.^


CHAP. XIII. CONCERNING PAULINUS AND MELE-
TIUS, CHIEF-PRIESTS OF aInTIOCH ; HOW EUSEBIUS


1 Athan. Hist. Artan. 33; Apd. de fuga sua, 4. The whole
of the Tomus ad Antioch.; Soc. iii. 5-8; Ruf. H. E. i. 27-30;
Theodoret, H. E. iii. 4, 5.

2 Soc. iii. 6.

' Soc. gives a considerable extract, iii. 8, from Athan. Apol. dt
fuga sua.


AND LUCIFER ANTAGONIZED ONE ANOTHER \ EUSE-
BIUS AND HILARIUS DEFEND THE NICENE FAITH.

On the termination of the council, Eusebius
repaired to Antioch and found dissension pre-
vailing among the people.* Those who were
attached to Meletius would not join Paulinus,
but held their assemblies apart. Eusebius was
much grieved at the state of affairs ; for the
ordination ought not to have taken place with-
out the unanimous consent of the people ; yet,
from respect towards Lucifer, he did not openly
express his dissatisfaction.

He refused to hold communion with either
party, but promised to redress their respective
grievances by means of a council. While he was
thus striving to restore concord and unanimity,
Meletius returned from exile, and, finding that
those who held his sentiments had seceded from
the other party, he held meetings with them be-
yond the walls of the city. Paulinus, in the
meantime, assembled his owti party within the
city ; for his mildness, his virtuous life, and his
advanced age had so far won the respect of
Euzoius, the Arian president, that, instead of
being expelled from the city, a church had been
assigned him for his own use. Eusebius, on
finding all his endeavors for the restoration of
concord frustrated, quitted Antioch. Lucifer
fancied himself injured by him, because he had
refused to approve the ordination of Paulinus ;
and, in displeasure, seceded from communion
with him. As if purely from the desire of con-
tention, Lucifer then began to cast aspersions
on the enactments of the council of Alexandria ;
and in this way he seems to have originated the
heresy which has been called after him, Luci-
ferian.

Those who espoused his cause seceded from
the church ; but, although he was deeply cha-
grined at the aspect affairs had taken, yet, be-
cause he had deputed a deacon to accompany
Eusebius in lieu of himself, he yielded to the
decrees of the council of .Alexandria, and con-
formed to the doctrines of the Catholic Church.
About this period he repaired to Sardinia.

In the meantime Eusebius traversed the East-
em provinces, restored those who had declined
from the faith, and taught them what it was
necessary to believe. After passing through
Illyria, he went to Italy, and there he met with
Hilarius, bishop of Poictiers* in Aquitania.
Hilarius had returned from exile before Euse-
bius, and had taught the Italians and the Gauls
what doctrines they had to receive, and what to
reject ; he expressed himself with great elo-
quence in the Latin tongue, and wrote many

* Ruf. H. E. i. 30, 31; Soc. iii. g, 10. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iii.
4, 5; Sulp. Sev. H. S. ii. 45.

^ Soc. iii. 10, who says his source is Sabinus, iv rjj <rvyaya>yrf

TUV avvoSLKOJV.


36


THE FXCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[v. 13.


admirable works, it is said, in refutation of the
Arian dogmas. Thus did Hilarius and Eusebius
maintain the doctrines of the Nicaean council in
the regions of the West.

CHAP. XIV. THE PARTISANS OF MACEDONIUS DIS-
PUTED WITH THE ARIANS CONCERNING ACA-
CIUS.

At this period the adherents of Macedonius,
among whom were Eleusius, Eustathius, and
Sophronius, who now began openly to be called
Macedonians, as constituting a distinct sect,
adopted the bold measure on the death of
Constantius, of calling together those of their
own sentiments who had been convened at
Seleucia, and of holding several councils. They
condemned the partisans of Acacius and the faith
which had been established at Ariminum, and
confirmed the doctrines which had been set
forth at Antioch, and afterwards approved at
Seleucia.

When interrogated as to the cause of their
dispute with the partisans of Acacius, with whom,
as being of the same sentiments as themselves,
they had formerly held communion, they replied
by the mouth of Sophronius,' a bishop of Paph-
lagonia, that while the Christians in the West
maintained the use of the term "consubstantial,"
the followers of Aetius in the East upheld the
dogma of dissimilarity as to substance ; and that
the former party irregularly wove together into
a unity the distinct persons of the Father and of
the Son, by their use of the term " consubstan-
tial," and that the latter party represented too
great a difference as existing in the relationship
between the nature of the Father and of the
Son ; but that they themselves preserved the
mean between the two extremes, and avoided
both errors, by religiously maintaining that in
hypostasis, the Son is like unto the Father. It
was by such representations as these that the
Macedonians vindicated themselves from blame.


CHAP. XV. ATHANASIUS IS AGAIN BANISHED ; CON-
CERNING ELEUSIUS, BISHOP OF CVZICUS, AND
TITUS, BISHOP OF BOSTRA ; MENTION OF THE
ANCESTORS OF THE AtHHOR.

The emperor,^ on being informed that Atha-
nasius held meetings in the church of Alexandria,
and taught the people boldly, and converted
many pagans to Christianity, commanded him,
under the severest penalties, to depart from
Alexandria.' The pretext made use of for en-

• Soc. iii. 10, gives a direct extract; Soz. leaves out some words
purposely.

' Soc. iii. 13, 14: Ruf. H.E. i. 32-34; all remotely; much new
material in this chapter. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iii. 9; Athan. E^.
Heort., under 363.

^ The edict of Julian, in Juliani Op. Ep. xxvi.


forcing this edict, was that Athanasius, after
having been banished by Constantius, had reas-
sumed his episcopal see without the sanction
of the reigning emperor ; for Julian declared
that he had never contemplated restoring the
bishops who had been exiled, by Constantius to
their ecclesiastical functions, but only to their
native land. On the announcement of the com-
mand enjoining his immediate departure, Atha-
nasius said to the Christian multitudes who
stood weeping around him, " Be of good cour-
age ; it is but a cloud which will speedily be
dispersed." After these words he bade fare-
well ; he then committed the care of the church
to the most zealous of his friends and quitted
Alexandria.

About the same period, the inhabitants of
Cyzicus sent an embassy to the emperor to lay
before him some of their private affairs, and
particularly to entreat the restoration of the
pagan temples. He applauded their forethought,
and promised to grant all their requests. He
expelled Eleusius, the bishop of their city, be-
cause he had destroyed some temples, and dese-
crated the sacred areas with contumely, provided
houses for the support of widows, erected build-
ings for holy virgins, and induced pagans to
abandon their ancestral rites.

The emperor prohibited some foreign Chris-
tians, who had accompanied him, from entering
the city of Cyzicus, from the apprehension, it
appears, that they would, in conjunction with
the Christians within the city, excite a sedition
on account of religion. There were many per-
sons gathered with them who also held like relig-
ious views with the Christians of the city, and who
were engaged in woolen manufactures for the
state, and were coiners of money. They were
numerous, and were divided into two populous
classes ; they had received permission from pre-
ceding emperors to dwell, with their wives and
possessions, in Cyzicus, provided that they
annually handed over to the public treasury a
supply of clothes for the soldiery and of newly
coined money.

Although Julian was anxious to advance
paganism by every means, yet he deemed it
the height of imprudence to employ force or
vengeance against those who refused to sacri-
fice. Besides, there were so many Christians in
every city that it would have been no easy task
for the rulers even to number them. He did
not even forbid them to assemble together for
worship, as he was aware that when freedom
of the will is called into question, constraint is
utterly useless. He expelled the clergy and
presidents of the churches from all the cities, in
order to put an end to these assemblies, saying
truly that by their absence the gatherings of the
people would be effectually dissolved, if indeed


V. i6.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


337


there were none to convene the churches, and
none to teach or to dispense the mysteries,
reHgion itself would, in the course of time, fall
into oblivion. The pretext which he advanced
for these proceedings was, that the clergy were
the leaders of sedition among the people. Under
this plea, he expelled Eleusius and his friends
from Cyzicus, although there was not even a
symptom nor expectation of sedition in that
city. He also publicly called upon the citizens
of Bostra ' to expel Titus, their bishop. It ap-
pears that the emperor had threatened to im-
peach Titus and the other clergy as the authors
of any sedition that might arise among the
people, and that Titus had thereupon written,
stating to him that although the Christians were
near the pagans in number, yet that, in accord-
ance with his exhortations, they were disposed
to remain quiet, and were not likely to rise up
in sedition. Julian, with the view of not exciting
the enmity of the inhabitants of Bostra against
Titus, represented, in a letter which hcaddressed
to them, that their bishop had advanced a cal-
umny against them, by stating that it was in
accordance with his exhortations rather than
with their own inclination that they refrained
from sedition ; and Julian exhorted them to
expel him from their city as a public enemy.

It appears that the Christians were subjected
to similar injustice in other places ; sometimes
by the command of the emperor, and some-
times by the wrath and impetuosity of the popu-
lace. The blame of these transactions may be
justly imputed to the ruler ; for he did not bring
under the force of law the transgressors of law,
but out of his hatred to the Christian religion,
he only visited the perpetrators of such deeds
with verbal rebukes, while, by his actions, he
urged them on in the same course. Hence
although not absolutely persecuted by the em-
peror, the Christians were obliged to flee from
city to city and village to village. My grand-
father and many of my ancestors were com-
pelled to flee in this manner. My grandfather
was of pagan parentage ; and, with his own family
and that of Alaphion, had been the first to em-
brace Christianity in Bethelia, a populous town
near Gaza, in which there are temples highly
reverenced by the people of the country, on
account of their antiquity and structural excel-
lence. The most celebrated of these temples is
the Pantheon, built on an artificial eminence com-
manding a view of the whole town. The con-
jecture is that the place received its name from
the temple, that the original name given to this
temple was in the Syriac language, and that this
name was afterwards rendered into Greek and


' Juliani Op. Ep. lii. Julianus Bostrenis.


expressed by a word which signifies that the
temple is the residence of all the gods.

It is said that the above-mentioned families
were converted through the instrumentality of
the monk Hilarion. Alaphion, it appears, was
possessed of a devil ; and neither the pagans
nor the Jews could, by any incantations and en-
chantments, deliver him from this affliction ;
but Hilarion, by simply calling on the name of
Christ, expelled the demon, and Alaphion, with
his whole family, immediately embraced Chris-
tianity.

My grandfather was endowed with great natu-
ral ability, which he applied with success to the
explanation of the Sacred Scriptures ; he had
made some attainments in general knowledge,
and was not ignorant of arithmetic. He was
much beloved by the Christians of Ascalon, of
Gaza, and of the surrounding country ; and
was regarded as necessary to religion, on ac-
count of his gift in expounding the doubtful
points of Scripture. No one can speak in ade-
quate terms of the virtues of the other- family.
The first churches and monasteries erected
in that country were founded by members of
this family and supported by their power and
beneficence towards strangers and the needy.
Some good men belonging to this family have
flourished even in our own days ; and in my
youth I saw some of them, but they were then
very aged. I shall have occasion to say more
concerning them in the course of my history.''

CHAP. XVI. EFFORTS OF JULIAN TO ESTABLISH

PAGANISM AND TO ABOLISH OUR USAGES. THE
EPISTLE WHICH HE SENT TO THE PAGAN HIGH-
PRIESTS.

The emperor* was deeply grieved at finding
that all his efforts to secure the predominance
of paganism were utterly ineffectual, and at see-
ing Christianity excelling in repute ; for although
the gates of the temples were kept open, although
sacrifices were offered, and the observance of
ancient festivals restored in all the cities, yet he
was far from being satisfied ; for he could plainly
foresee that, on the withdrawal of his influence,
a change in the whole aspect of affairs would
speedily take place. He was particularly cha-
grined on discovering that the wives, children,
and servants of many of the pagan priests had
been converted to Christianity. On reflecting
that one main support of the Christian religion
was the life and behavior of its professors, he
determined to introduce into the pagan temples
the order and discipline of Christianity, to insti-


2 He probably means that of Alaphion.

•'' He means Salamines, Phuscon, Malachion, and Crispion, whom
he mentions below, vi. 32.
* Independent with Soz.


33^


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 1 6.


tute various orders and degrees of ministry, to
appoint teachers and readers to give instruction
in pagan doctrines and exhortations, and to com-
mand that prayers should be offered on certain
days at stated hours. He moreover resolved to
found monasteries for the accommodation of
men and women who desired to live in philo-
sophical retirement, as likewise hospitals for the
relief of strangers and of the poor and for other
philanthropical purposes. He wished to intro-
duce among the pagans the Christian system
of penance for voluntary and involuntary trans-
gressions ; but the point of ecclesiastical disci-
pline which he chiefly admired, and desired to
establish among the pagans, was the custom
among the bishops to give letters of recommend-
ation to those who traveled to foreign lands,
wherein they commended them to the hospitahty
and kindness of other bishops, in all places, and
under all contingencies. In this way did Julian
strive to ingraft the customs of Christianity upon
paganism. But if what I have stated appears
to be incredible, I need not go far in search
of proofs to corroborate my assertions ; for I
can produce a letter written by the emperor him-
self on the subject. He writes as follows : ^ —

"To Arsacius, High- Priest of Galatia. Pagan-
ism has not yet reached the degree of prosperity
that might be desired, owing to the conduct of
its votaries. The worship of the gods, however,
is conducted on the grandest and most magnifi-
cent scale, so far exceeding our very prayer and
hope ; let our Adrastea be propitious to these
words, for no one could have dared to look for
so extensive and so surprising a change as that
which we have witnessed within a very short
space of time. But are we to rest satisfied with
what has been already effected ? Ought we not
rather to consider that the progress of Atheism
has been principally owing to the humanity
evinced by Christians towards strangers, to the
reverence they have manifested towards the
dead, and to the delusive gravity which they
have assumed in their life? It is requisite that
each of us should be diligent in the discharge of
duty : I do not refer to you alone, as that would
not suffice, but to all the priests of Galatia.

" You must either put them to shame, or try
the power of persuasion, or else deprive them
of their sacerdotal offices, if they do not with
their wives, their children, and their servants join
in the service of the gods, or if they support
the servants, sons, or wives of the Galileans in
treating the gods impiously and in preferring
Atheism to piety. Then exhort the priests not
to frequent theaters, not to drink at taverns, and
not to engage in any trade, or practice any
nefarious art.

> Juliani Op. Ep. xlix.


" Honor those who yield to your remon-
strances, and expel those who disregard them.
Establish hostelries in every city, so that stran-
gers from neighboring and foreign countries may
reap the benefit of our philanthropy, according
to their respective need.

" I have provided means to meet the necessary
expenditure, and have issued directions through-
out the whole of Galatia, that you should be
furnished annually with thirty thousand bushels
of corn and sixty thousand measures of wine, of
which the fifth part is to be devoted to the sup-
port of the poor who attend upon the priests ;
and the rest to be distributed among strangers
and our own poor. For, while there are no
persons in need among the Jews, and while even
the impious Galileans provide not only for those
of their own party who are in want, but also for
those who hold with us, it would indeed be dis-
graceful if we were to allow our own people to
suffer from poverty.

" Teach the pagans to co-operate m this work
of benevolence, and let the first-fruits of the
pagan towns be offered to the gods.

" Habituate the pagans to the exercise of this
liberality, by showing them how such conduct is
sanctioned by the practice of remote antiquity ;
for Homer^ represents Eumaeus as saying, —

' My guest ! I should offend, treating with scorn
The stranger, though a poorer should arrive
Than even thyself ; for all the poor that are,
And all the strangers are the care of Jc^ve.'

" Let us not permit others to excel us in good
deeds ; let us not dishonor ourselves by violence,
,but rather let us be foremost in piety towards
the gods. If I hear that you act according to
my directions, I shall be full of joy. Do not
often visit the governors at their own houses,
but write to them frequently. When they enter
the city, let no priest go to meet them ; and let
not the priest accompany them further than the
vestibule when they repair to the temple of the
gods ; neither let any soldiers march before
them on such occasions ; but let those follow
them who will. For as soon as they have
entered within the sacred bounds, they are but
private individuals ; for there it is your duty, as
you well know, to preside, according to the
divine decree. Those who humbly conform to
this law manifest that they possess true religion ;
whereas those who contemn it are proud and
vainglorious.

" I am ready to render assistance to the inhab-
itants of Pessinus, provided that they will pro-
pitiate the mother of the gods ; but if they
neglect this duty, they will incur my utmost
displeasure.


* Odyis. xiv. 56.


V. 17-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


339


' I should myself transgress,
Receiving here, and giving conduct hence
To one detested by the gods as these.' ^

" Convince them, therefore, that if they desire
my assistance, they must offer up supplications
to the mother of the gods."


CHAP. XVII. IN ORDER THAT HE MIGHT NOT BE

THOUGHT TYRANNICAL, JULIAN PROCEEDS ART-
FULLY AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS. ABOLITION
OK THE SIGN OF THE CROSS. HE MAKES THE
SOLDIERY SACRIFICE, ALTHOUGH THEY WERE
UNWILLING.

When JuHan acted and wrote in the manner
aforesaid, he expected that he would by these
means easily induce his subjects to change
their religious opinions.^ Although he earnestly
desired to abolish the Christian religion, yet he
plainly was ashamed to employ violent measures,
lest he should be accounted tyrannical. He
used every means, however, that could possibly
be devised to lead his subjects back to pagan-
ism ; and he was more especfally urgent with
the soldiery, whom he sometimes addressed
individually and sometimes through the medium
of their ofificers. To habituate them in all things
to the worship of the gods, he restored the
ancient form of the standard of the Roman
armies,^ which, as we have already stated, Con-
stantine had, at the command of God, converted
into the sign of the cross. Julian also'* caused
to be painted, in juxtaposition with his own
figure, on the public pictures, a representation
either of Jupiter coming out of heaven and pre-
senting to him the symbols of imperial power, a
crown or a purple robe, or else of Mars, or of
Mercury, with their eyes intently fixed upon
him, as if to express their admiration of his
eloquence and military skill. He placed the
pictures of the gods in juxtaposition with his
own, in order that the people might secretly be
led to worship them under the pretext of ren-
dering due honor to him ; he abused ancient
usages, and endeavored to conceal his purpose
fronj his subjects. He considered that if they
would yield obedience on this point, they would
be the more ready to obey him on every other
occasion ; but that if they ventured to refuse
obedience, he would have reason to punish
them, as infringers of the Roman customs and
offenders against the emperor and the state.
There were but very few (and the law had its
course against them) who, seeing through his
designs, refused to render the customary homage

' Odyss. X. 74.

* Soc. iii 13; Riif. H. E. i. 32; Greg. Naz. cont. Jul. i. 66,
80, 84; Theodoret, //. E. iii. 16, 17

3 Greg. Naz. Or. cont. Jul. i. 66. * Id. 80, 81.


to his pictures ; but the multitude, through
ignorance or simplicity, confurmed as usual to
the ancient regulation, and thoughtlessly paid
homage to his image. The emperor derived
but little advantage from this artifice ; yet he
did not cease from his efforts to effect a change
in religion.

The next machination to which he had re-
course was less subtle and more violent than
the former one ; and the fortitude of many sol-
diers attached to the court was thereby tested.
When the stated day came round for giving
money to the troops,* which day generally fell
upon the anniversary of some festival among the
Romans, such as that of the birth of the em-
peror, or the foundation of some royal city, Julian
reflected that soldiers are naturally thoughtless
and simple, and disposed to be covetous of
money, and therefore concluded that it would
be a favorable opportunity to seduce them to
the worship of the gods. Accordingly, as each
soldier approached to receive the money, he was
commanded to offer sacrifice, fire and incense
having been previously placed for this purpose
near the emperor, according to an ancient
Roman custom. Some of the soldiers had the
courage to refuse to offer sacrifice and receive
the gold ; others were so habituated to the ob-
servance of the law and custom that they con-
formed to it, without imagining that they were
committing sin. Others, again, deluded by the
luster of the gold, or compelled by fear and
consideration on account of the test which was
immediately in sight, complied with the pagan
rite, and suffered themselves to fall into the
temptation from wbich they ought to have fled.

It is related that, as some of them who had
ignorantly fallen into this sin were seated at
table, and drinking to each other, one among
them happened to mention the name of Christ
over the cups. Another of the guests immedi-
ately exclaimed : " It is extraordinary that you
should call upon Christ, when, but a short time
ago, you denied him for the sake of the em-
peror's gift, by throwing incense into the fire."
On hearing this observation, they all became
suddenly conscious of the sin they had com-
mitted ; they rose from table and rushed into the
public streets, where they screamed and wept
and called upon all men to witness that they
were and would remain Christians, and that they
had offered incense unawares, and with the hand
alone, and not with the assent of the judgment.
They then presented themselves before the em-
peror, threw back his gold, and courageously
asked him to take back his own gift, and be-
sought him to put them to death, protesting
that they would never renounce their sentiments.


6 Greg. Naz. Or. cont. Jul. i. 82-84; Theodoret, H. E. iii. 17:
the variations.


340


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 17.


whatever torments might, in consequence of the
sin committed by their hand, be inflicted on the
other parts of their body for the sake of Christ.
Whatever displeasure the emperor might have
felt against them, he refrained from slaying them,
lest they should enjoy the honor of martyrdom ;
he therefore merely deprived them of their mili-
tary commission and dismissed them from the
palace.


CHAP. XVm. — HE PROHIBITED THE CHRISTIANS
FROM THE MARKETS AND FROM THE JUDICIAL
SEATS AND FROM SHARING IN GREEK EDUCA-
TION. RESISTANCE OF BASIL THE GREAT, GREG-
ORV THE THEOLOGIAN, AND APOLINARIUS TO
THIS DECREE. THEY RAPIDLY TRANSLATE THE
SCRIPTURE INTO GREEK MODES OF EXPRESSION.
APOLIN'ARIUS AND GREGORY NAZIANZEN DO THIS
MORE THAN BASIL, THE ONE IN A RHETORICAL
VEIN, THE OTHER IN EPIC S'lTLE AND IN IMITA-
TION OF EVERY POET.

Julian entertained the same sentiments as
those above described towards all Christians, as
he manifested whenever an opportunity was
offered. Those who refused to sacrifice to the
gods, although perfectly blameless in other re-
spects, were deprived of the rights of citizen-
ship,^ and of the privilege of participating in
assemblies, and in the forum ; and he would not
allow them to be judges or magistrates, or to
share in offices.

He forbade the children of Christians from
frequenting the public schools, and from being
instructed in the writings of the Greek poets
and authors.- He entertained great resentment
against .Apolinarius the Syrian, a man of mani-
fold knowledge and philological attainments,
against Basil and Gregory, natives of Cappado-
cia, the most celebrated orators of the time,
and against other learned and eloquent men, of
whom some were attached to the Nicene doc-
trines, and others to the dogmas of Arius. His
sole motive for excluding the children of
Christian parents from instruction in the learn-
ing of the Greeks, was because he considered
such studies conducive to the acquisition of
argumentative and persuasive power. Apolina-
rius, therefore, employed his great learning and
ingenuity in the production of a heroic epic on
the antiquities of the Hebrews to the reign of
Saul, as a substitute for the poem of Homer.
He divided this work into twenty-four parts, to
each of which he appended the name of one of
the letters of the Greek alphabet, according to
their number and order. He also wrote come-
dies in imitation of Menander, tragedies resem-

• Juliani op. F.p. xlii. : Soc. iii. 13.

* Greg. Naz. Or. con/. Jul. i. 101-134; Ruf. H. E. i. 3a: The-
odaret. ft. E. iii. 8.


bling those of Euripides, and odes on the model
of Pindar. In short, taking themes of the entire
circle of knowledge from the Scriptures, he pro-
duced within a very brief space of time, a set of
works which in manner, expression, character,
and arrangement are well approved as similar to
the Greek literatures and which were equal in
number and in force, ^^'ere it not for the ex-
treme partiality with which the productions of
antiquity are regarded, I doubt not but that the
writings of Apolinarius would be held in as
much estimation as those of the ancients.^

The comprehensiveness of his intellect is
more especially to be admired ; for he excelled
in every branch of literature, whereas ancient
writers were proficient only in one. He wrote
a very remarkable work entitled " The Truth " *
against the emperor and the pagan philosophers,
in which he clearly proved, without any appeal
to the authority of Scripture, that they were far
from having attained right opinions of God.
The emperor, for the purpose of casting ridicule
on works of this nature, wrote to the bishops in
the following words : " I have read, I have un-
derstood, and I have condemned."^ To this
they sent the following reply, " You have read,
but you have not understood ; for, had you un-
derstood, you would not have condemned."

Some have attributed this letter to Basil, the
president of the church in Cappadocia, and
perhaps not without reason ; but whether dic-
tated by him or by another, it fully displays the
magnanimity and learning of the writer.

CHAP. XIX. WORK WRHTEN BY JULIAN ENTITLED

"aversion to BEARDS." DAPHNE IN ANTIOCH,
A FULL DESCRIPTION OF IT. TRANSLATION OF
THE REMAINS OF BABYLAS, THE HOLY MARTYR.

JuLUN,* having determined upon undertaking
a war against Persia, repaired to Antioch in
Syria. The people loudly complained, that,
although provisions were very abundant the
price affixed to them was very high. Accord-
ingly, the emperor, from liberality, as I believe,
towards the people, reduced the price of pro-
visions to so low a scale that the vendors fled
the city.

A scarcity in consequence ensued, for which
the people blamed the emperor ; and their re-
sentment found vent in ridiculing the length of
his beard, and the bulls which he had had
stamped upon his coins ; and they satirically

' The question about the nature of Christian culture has Socrates
on the side of the humanities, iii. 16, where there is an extended
argument in defense of a return to the study of Greek literature.
Sozomen is somewhat on the fence, but inclining towards the oppo-
site view.

* Apolinarius (Apollinaris), bishop of Hierapolis, also wrote a
treatise with the same name. See Euseb. H. E. iv. 27, and Phot.
BibL, Cod. 145.

* Ep. 77, formerly falsely ascribed to Julian.

* Soc. iii. 17, 18; Ruf. H. E. i. 35; Philost. vii. 8; Theodoret,
iii. 10; Am. Marcel, xxii. 14. 1-3.


V. 19.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


341


remarked, that he upset the world in the same
way that his priests, when offering sacrifice,
threw down the victims.

At first his displeasure was excited, and he
threatened to punish them and prepared to de-
part for Tarsus. Afterwards, however, he sup-
pressed his feelings of indignation, and repaid
their ridicule by words alone ; he composed a
very elegant work under the title of " Aversion
to Beards," which he sent to them. He treated
the Christians of the city precisely in the same
manner as at other places, and endeavored, as
far as possible, to promote the extension of
paganism.

I shall here recount some of the details con-
nected with the tomb of Babylas, the martyr,
and certain occurrences which took place about
this period in the temple of Apollo at Daphne.

Daphne is a suburb of Antioch, and is planted
with cypresses and other trees, beneath which
all kinds of flowers flourish in their season. The
branches of these trees are so thick and inter-
laced that they may be said to form a roof rather
than merely to afford shade, and the rays of the
sun can never pierce through them to the soil
beneath. It is made delicious and exceedingly
lovely by the richness and beauty of the waters,
the temperateness of the air, and the breath of
friendly winds. The Greeks invent the myth
that Daphne, the daughter of the river Ladon,
was here changed into a tree which bears her
name, while she was fleeing from Arcadia, to
evade the love of Apollo. The passion of Apollo
was not diminished, they say, by this trans-
formation ; he made a crown of the leaves of
his beloved and embraced the tree. He after-
wards often fixed his residence on this spot, as
being dearer to him than any other place.

Men of grave temperament, however, con-
sidered it disgraceful to approach this suburb ;
for the position and nature of the place seemed
to excite voluptuous feelings ; and the substance
of the fable itself being erotic, afforded a meas-
urable impulse and redoubled the passions
among corrupt youths. They, who furnished
this myth as an excuse, were greatly inflamed
and gave way without constraint to profligate
deeds, incapable of being continent themselves,
or of enduring the presence of those who were
continent. Any one who dwelt at Daphne without
a mistress was regarded as callous and ungracious,
and was shunned as an abominable and abhor-
rent thing. The pagans likewise manifested
great reverence for this place on account of a
very beautiful statue of the Daphnic Apollo
which stood here, as also a magnificent and
costly temple, supposed to have been built by
Seleucus, the father of Antiochus, who gave his
name to the city of Antioch. Those who attach
credit to fables of this kind believe that a stream


flows from the fountain Castalia which confers
the power of predicting the future, and which is
similar in its name and powers to the fountain
of Delphi. It is related that Adrian here received
intimation of his future greatness, when he was
but a private individual ; and that he dipped a
leaf of the laurel into the water and found written
thereon an account of his destiny. When he
became emperor, it is said, he commanded the
fountain to be closed, in order that no one
might be enabled to pry into the knowledge of
the future. But I leave this subject to those
who are more accurately acquainted with my-
thology than I am.

When Gallus, the brother of Julian, had been
declared Caesar by Constantius, and had fixed
his residence at Antioch, his zeal for the Chris-
tian religion and his veneration for the memory
of the martyrs determined him to purge the
place of the pagan superstition and the out-
rages of profligates. He considered that the
readiest method of effecting this object would
be to erect a house of prayer in the temple and
to transfer thither the tomb of Babylas, the
martyr, who had, with great reputation to him-
self, presided over the church of Antioch, and
suffered martyrdohi. It is said that from the
time of this translation, the demon ceased to
utter oracles. This silence was at first attributed
to the neglect into which his service was allowed
to fall and to the omission of the former cult ;
but results proved that it was occasioned solely
by the presence of the holy martyr. The silence
continued unbroken even when Julian was the
sole ruler of the Roman Empire, although liba-
tions, incense, and victims were offered in
abundance to the demon ; for when eventually
the oracle itself spoke and indicated the cause
of its previous silence, the emperor himself en-
tered the temple for the purpose of consulting
the oracle, and offering up gifts and sacrifices
with entreaties to grant a reply. The demon
did not openly admit that the hindrance was
occasioned by the tomb of Babylas, the martyr,
but he stated that the place was filled with dead
bodies, and that this prevented the oracle from
speaking.

Although many interments had taken place at
Daphne, the emperor perceived that it was the
presence of Babylas, the martyr, alone which
had silenced the oracle, and he commanded his
tomb to be removed. The Christians, therefore,
assembled together and conveyed the coffin to
the city, about forty stadia distant, and deposited
it in the place where it is still preserved, and to
which the name of the martyr has been given.
It is said that men and women, young men
and maidens, old men and children drew the
casket, and encouraged one another by singing
psalms as they went along the road, apparently


342


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 19.


for the purpose of lightening their labor, but in
truth because they were transported by zeal and
spirit for their kindred religious belief, which the
emperor had opposed. The best singers sang
first, and the multitude replied in chorus, and the
following was the burden of their song : " Con-
founded are all they who worship graven images,
who boast themselves in idols."


CHAP. XX. — IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE TRANS-
LATION, MANY OF THE CHRISTIANS ARE ILL-
TREATED. THEODORE THE CONFESSOR, TEMPLE
OF APOLLO AT DAPHNE DESTROYED BY FIRE
FALLING FROM HEAVEN.

The transaction above related ^ excited the
indignation of the emperor as much as if an
insult had been offered him, and he determined
upon punishing the Christians ; but Sallust, a
praetorian prefect, although a pagan, tried to
dissuade him from this measure. The em-
peror, however, could not be appeased, and
Sallust was compelled to execute his mandate,
and arrest and imprison many Christians. One
of the first whom he arrested was a young
man named Theodore, who was immediately
stretched upon the rack ; but although his
flesh was lacerated by the application of the
nails, he addressed no supplication to Sallust,
nor did he implore a diminution of his torments ;
on the contrary, he seemed as insensible to pain
as if he had been merely a spectator of the suf-
ferings of another, and bravely received the
wounds ; and he sang the same psalm which he
had joined in singing the day before, to show
that he did not repent of the act for which he
had been condemned. The prefect, struck with
admiration at the fortitude of the young man,
went to the emperor and told him that, unless he
would desist speedily from the measure he had
undertaken, he and his party would be exposed
to ridicule while the Christians would acquire
more glory. This representation produced its
effect, and the Christians who had been arrested
were set at liberty. It is said^ that Theodore
was afterwards asked whether he had been
sensible of any pain while on the rack ; and
that he replied that he had not been entirely
free from suffering, but had his pains assuaged
by the attentions of a young man who had
stood by him, and who had wiped off the per-
spiration with the finest linen cloth, and sup-
plied him with coolest water by which he
eased the inflammation and refreshed his labors.
I am convinced that no man, whatever niag-


' Ruf. H. E. i. 36; Soc. iii. 19; Theodoret, H. E. iii. 11; Am.
Marcel, xxii. 13.

> Rufinus saw Theodore at Antioch, and asked him this question,
Ruf. i. 36; and Soc. shows the source from which he borrowed the
story by affirming that Rufinus, author of an ecclesiastical history
in Latin, had this interview with Theodore.


nanimity he may possess, is capable, without the
special assistance of Divine Power, of manifest-
ing such entire indifference about the bodv.

The body of the martyr Babylas was, for the
reasons aforesaid, removed to Daphne, and was
subsequently conveyed elsewhere. Soon after
it had been taken away, fire suddenly fell upon
the temple of the Daphnic Apollo, the roof and
the very statue of the god were burned, and the
naked walls, with the columns on which the por-
tico and the back part of the edifice had rested,
alone escaped the conflagration.'' The Chris-
tians believed that the prayers of the martyr had
drawn down fire from heaven upon the demon ;
but the pagans reported the Christians as having
set fire to the place. This suspicion gained
ground ; and the priest of Apollo was brought
before the tribunal of justice to render up the
names of those who had dared the incendiary
act ; but though bound and subjected to the
most cruel tortures, he did not name any one.

Hence the Christians were more fully con-
vinced than before, that it was not by the deed
of man, but by the wrath of God, that fire was
poured down from heaven upon the temple.
Such were the occurrences which then took
place. The emperor, as I conjecture, on hear-
ing that the calamity at Daphne had been occa-
sioned by the martyr Babylas, and on being
further informed that the honored remains of
the martyrs were preserved in several houses of
prayer near the temple of the Apollo Didymus,
which is situated close to the city of Miletus,
wrote to the governor of Caria, commanding
him to destroy with fire all such edifices as were
fiirnished with a roof and an altar, and to throw
down from their very foundations the houses of
prayer which were incomplete in these respects.

CHAP. XXI. — OF THE STATUE OF CHRIST IN
PANEAS WHICH JULIAN OVERTHREW AND MADE
VALUELESS ; HE ERECTED HIS OWN STATUE ;
THIS WAS OVERTHROWN BY A THUNDER-BOLT
AND DESTROYED. FOUNTAIN OF EMMAUS IN
WHICH CHRIST WASHED HIS FEET. CONCERN-
ING THE TREE PERSIS, WHICH WORSHIPED
CHRIST IN EGYPT, AND THE WONDERS WROUGHT
THROUGH IT.

Among so many remarkable events which
occurred during the reign of Julian, I must not
omit to mention one which affords a sign of the
power of Christ, and proof of the Divine wrath
against the emperor.'*

Having heard that at Caesarea Philippi, other-
wise called Paneas, a city of Phoenicia, there
was a celebrated statue of Christ which had
been erected by a woman whom the Lord had

* Am. Marcel, xxii. 13. 1-3.

* Philosl. vii. 3, who was eyewitness.


V. 22.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


343


cured of a flow of blood/ Julian commanded it to
be taken down and a statue of himself erected
in its place ; but a violent fire from heaven fell
upon it and broke off the parts contiguous to
the breast ; the head and neck were thrown
prostrate, and it was transfixed to the ground
with the face downwards at the point where the
fracture of the bust was ; and it has stood in
that fashion from that day until now, full of
the rust of the lightning. The statue of Christ
was dragged around the city and mutilated by
the pagans ; but the Christians recovered the
fragments, and deposited the statue in the
church in which it is still preserved. Eusebius
relates, that at the base of this statue grew an
herb which was unknown to the physicians and
empirics, but was efficacious in the cure of all
disorders. It does not appear a matter of as-
tonishment to me, that, after God had vouch-
safed to dwell with men, he should condescend
to bestow benefits upon them.

It appears that innumerable other miracles
were wrought in different cities and villages ;
accounts have been accurately preserved by the
inhabitants of these places only, because they
learned them from ancestral tradition ; and how
true this is, I will at once show. There is a city
.now called Nicopolis, in Palestine, which was
formerly only a village, and which was mentioned
by the divine book of the Gospel under the
name of Emmaus.^ The name of Nicoplis was
given to this place by the Romans after the con-
quest of Jerusalem and the victory over the
Jews. Just beyond the city where three roads
meet, is the spot where Christ, after His resur-
rection, said farewell to Cleopas and his compan-
ion, as if he were going to another village ; and
here is a healing fountain in which men and
other living creatures afflicted with different
diseases wash away their sufferings ; for it is said
that when Christ together with His disciples
came from a journey to this fountain, they
bathed their feet therein, and, from that time
the water became a cure for disorders.

At Hermopolis, in the Thebais, is a tree called
Persis, of which the branches, the leaves, and the
least portion of the bark, are said to heal dis-
eases, when touched by the sick ; for it is
related by the Egyptians that when Joseph fled
with Christ and Mary, the holy mother of God,
from the wrath of Herod, they went to Hermopo-
lis ; when entering at the gate, this largest tree, as
if not enduring the advent of Christ, inclined to
the ground and worshiped Him. I relate pre-
cisely what I have heard from many sources
concerning this tree. I think that this phenom-
enon was a sign of the presence of God in the
city ; or perhaps, as seems most probable, the


1 Eus. H. E. vii. i8.


- Luke xxiv. 13,


tree, which had been worshiped by the inhabi-
tants, after the pagan custom, was shaken, be-
cause the demon, who had been an object of
worship, started up at sight of Him who was
manifested for purification from such agen-
cies. It was moved of its own accord ; for at
the presence of Christ the idols of Egypt were
shaken, even as Isaiah' the prophet had foretold.
On the expulsion of the demon, the tree was
permitted to remain as a monument of what had
occurred, and was endued with the property of
healing those who believed.

The inhabitants of Egypt and of Palestine
testify to the truth of these events, which took
place among themselves.

CHAP. XXII. FROM AVERSION TO THE CHRISTIANS,

JULIAN GRANTED PERMISSION TO THE JEWS TO
REBUILD THE TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM ; IN EVERY
ENDEAVOR TO PUT THEIR HANDS TO THE WORK,
FIRE SPRANG UPWARD AND KILLED MANY.
ABOUT THE SIGN OF THE CROSS WHICH APPEARED
ON THE CLOTHING OF THOSE WHO HAD EXERTED
THEMSELVES IN THIS WORK.

Though the emperor* hated and opressed the
Christians, he manifested benevolence and hu-
manity towards the Jews. He wrote ^ to the
Jewish patriarchs and leaders, as well as to the
people, requesting them to pray for him, and
for the prosperity of the empire. In taking this
step he was not actuated, I am convinced, by
any respect for their religion ; for he was aware
that it is, so to speak, the mother of the
Christian religion, and he knew that both relig-
ions rest upon the authority of the patriarchs
and the prophets ; but he thought to grieve the
Christians by favoring the Jews, who are their
most inveterate enemies. But perhaps he also
calculated upon persuading the Jews to embrace
paganism and sacrifices ; for they were only ac-
quainted with the mere letter of Scripture, and
could not, like the Christians and a few of the
wisest among the Hebrews, discern the hidden
meaning.

Events proved that this was his real motive ;
for he sent for some of the chiefs of the race
and exhorted them to return to the observance
of the laws of Moses and the customs of their
fathers. On their replying that because the
temple in Jerusalem was overturned, it was
neither lawful nor ancestral to do this in another
place than the metropolis out of which they had
been cast, he gave them public money, com-
manded them to rebuild the temple, and to
practice the cult similar to that of their ances-


' Ch. xix. I.

* Ruf. H . E. i. 37-39; Philost. vii. 14; Soc. iii. 20; Theodoret,
H. E. iii. 20; Greg. Naz. Or. cont. yul. ii. 3, 4; and particularly
Am. Marcel, xxiii. i. 1-3.

"" Juliani Op. Ep. xxv., ad Judctorum nationem.


344


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[V. 22.


tors, by sacrificing after the ancient way. The
Jews entered upon the undertaking, without re-
flecting that, according to the prediction of the
holy prophets, it could not be accomplished.
They sought for the most skillful artisans, col-
lected materials, cleared the ground, and en-
tered so earnestly upon the task, that even the
women carried heaps of earth, and brought their
necklaces and other female ornaments towards
defraying the expense. The emperor, the other
pagans, and all the Jews, regarded every other
undertaking as secondary in importance to this.
Although the pagans were not well-disposed
towards the Jews, yet 'they assisted them in this
enterprise, because they reckoned upon its ulti-
mate success, and hoped by this means to falsify
the prophecies of Christ. Besides this motive,
the Jews themselves were impelled by the con-
sideration that the time had arrived for rebuild-
ing their temple. When they had removed the
ruins of the former building, they dug up the
ground and cleared away its foundation ; it is
said that on the following day when they were
about to lay the first foundation, a great earth-
quake occurred, and by the violent agitation of
the earth, stones were thrown up from the
depths, by which those of the Jews who were
engaged in the work were wounded, as likewise
those who were merely looking on. The houses
and public porticos, near the site of the temple,
in which they had diverted themselves, were sud-
denly thrown down ; many were caught thereby,
some perished immediately, others were found
half dead and mutilated of hands or legs, others
were injured in other parts of the body. When
God caused the earthquake to cease, the work-
man who survived again returned to their task,
partly because such was the edict of the em-
peror, and partly because they were themselves
interested in the undertaking. Men often, in
endeavoring to gratify their own passions, seek
what is injurious to them, reject what would be


truly advantageous, and are deluded by the idea
that nothing is really useful except what is
agreeable to them. When once led astray by
this error, they are no longer able to act in a
manner conducive to their own" interests, or to
take warning by the calamities which are visited
upon them.

The Jews, I believe, were just in this state ;
for, instead of regarding this unexpected earth-
quake as a manifest indication that God was
opposed to the re-erection of their temple, they
proceeded to recommence the work. But all
parties relate, that they had scarcely returned to
the undertaking, when fire burst suddenly from
the foundations of the temple, and consumed
several of the workmen.

This fact is fearlessly stated, and beheved by
all ; the only discrepancy in the narrative is
that some maintain that flame burst from the
interior of the temple, as the workmen were
striving to force an entrance, while others say
that the fire proceeded directly from the earth.
In whichever way the phenomenon might have
occurred, it is equally wonderful. A more tan-
gible and still more extraordinary prodigy en-
sued ; suddenly the sign of the cross appeared
spontaneously on the garments of the persons
engaged in the undertaking. These crosses
were disposed like stars, and appeared the work
of art. Many were hence led to confess that
Christ is God, and that the rebuilding of the tem-
ple was not pleasing to Him ; others presented
themselves in the church, were initiated, and
besought Christ, with hymns and supplications,
to pardon their transgression. If any one does
not feel disposed to believe my narrative, let
him go and be convinced by those who heard
the facts I have related from the eyewitnesses
of them, for they are still alive. Let him in-
quire, also, of the Jews and pagans who left the
work in an incomplete state, or who, to speak
more accurately, v/ere able to commence it.


BOOK VI.


CHAP. I. EXPEDITION OF JULIAN INTO PERSIA;

HE WAS WORSTED AND BROKE OFF HIS LIFE
MISERABLY. LETIER WRITTEN BY LIBANIUS, DE-
SCRIBING HIS DEATH.

I HAVE narrated in the preceding book the
occurrences which took place in the Church,
during the reign of Juhan.^ This emperor, hav-
ing determined to carry on the war with Persia,
made a rapid transit across the Euphrates in the
beginning of spring, and, passing by Edessa
from hatred to the inhabitants, who had long
professed Christianity, he went on to Carrae,
where there was a temple of Jupiter, in which
he offered up sacrifice and prayer. He then
selected twenty thousand armed men from
among his troops, and sent them towards the
Tigris, in order that they might guard those
regions, and also be ready to join him, in case
he should require their assistance. He then
wrote to Arsacius, king of Armenia, one of the
Roman allies, to bespeak his aid in the war.
In this letter Julian manifested the most un-
bounded arrogance ; he boasted of the high
qualities which had, he said, rendered him
worthy of the empire, and acceptable to the
gods for whom he cared ; he reviled Con-
stantius, his predecessor, as an effeminate and
impious emperor, and threatened Arsacius in a
grossly insulting way ; and since he understood
that he was a Christian, he intensified his in-
sults, or eagerly and largely uttered unlawful
blasphemies against Christ, for he was wont to
dare this in every case. He told Arsacius that
unless he acted according to his directions, the
God in whom he trusted would not be able to
defend him from his vengeance. When he con-
sidered that all his arrangements had been duly
made, he led his army through Assyria.

He took a great many towns and fortresses,
either through treachery or by battle, and
thoughtlessly proceeded onwards, without re-
flecting that he would have to return by the
same route. He pillaged every place he ap-
proached, and pulled down or burnt the grana-
ries and storehouses. As he was journeying up
the Euphrates, he arrived at Ctesiphon, a very

' Philost. vii. 15; Eiitrop. Brev. hist. rout. x. 16; Eunap. Fr.

ii. 15-19; Am. Marcel, xxiii. and xxiv. ; Riif. i. 36; .Snc. iii. 21;
Greg. Naz. Or. cont. Jul. ii. 8-15; Zos. iii. 12-30; Orosius, vii. 30.


large city, whither the Persian monarchs have
now transferred their residence from Babylon.
The Tigris flows near this spot. As he was
prevented from reaching the city with his ships,
by a part of the land which separated it from
the river, he judged that either he must pursue
his journey by water, or quit his ships and go
to Ctesiphon by land ; and he interrogated the
prisoners on the subject. Having ascertained
from them that there was a canal which had
been blocked up in the course of time, he caused
it to be cleared out, and, having thus effected a
communication between the Euphrates and the
Tigris, he proceeded towards the city, his ships
floating along by the side of his army. But the
Persians appeared on the banks of the Tigris
with a formidable display of horse and many
armed troops, of elephants, and of horses ; and
JuUan became conscious that his army was be-
sieged between two great rivers, and was in
danger of perishing, either by remaining in its
present position, or by retreating through the
cities and villages which he had so utterly devas-
tated that no provisions were attainable ; there-
fore he summoned the soldiers to see horse-races,
and proposed rewards to the fleetest racers. In
the meantime he commanded the officers of the
ships to throw over the provisions and baggage
of the army, so that the soldiers, seeing them-
selves in danger by the want of necessaries,
might turn about boldly and fight their enemies
more desperately. After supper he sent for the
generals and tribunes and commanded the em-
barkation of the troops. They sailed along the
Tigris during the night and came at once to
the opposite banks and disembarked ; but their
departure was perceived by some of the Per-
sians, who e.xhorted one another to oppose them,
but those still asleep the Romans readily over-
came.

At daybreak, the two armies engaged in bat-
tle ; and after much bloodshed on both sides,
the Romans returned by the river, and encamped
near Ctesiphon. The emperor, being no longer
desirous of proceeding further, burnt his vessels,
as he considered that they required too many
soldiers to guard them ; and he then commenced
his retreat along the Tigris, which was to his
left. The prisoners, who acted as guides to the
Romans, led them to a fertile country where


346


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. I.


they found abundance of provisions. Soon after,
an old man who had resolved to die for the
liberty of Persia, allowed himself to be taken
prisoner, and was brought before the emperor.
On being questioned as to the route, and
seeming to speak the truth, he persuaded them
to follow him as capable of transporting the
army very speedily to the Roman frontiers. He
observed that for the space of three or four
days' journey this road would be difficult, and
that it would be necessary to carry provisions
during that time, as the surrounding country was
sterile. The emperor was deceived by the dis-
course of this wise old man, and approved the
march by this route. On advancing further,
after the lapse of three days, they were cast
upon an uncultivated region. The old prisoner
-was put to torture. He confessed that he had
■exposed himself v^oluntarily to death for the sake
of his country, and was therefore prepared to
endure any sufferings that could be inflicted on
him.

The Roman troops were now worn out by the
length of the journey and the scarcity of provis-
ions, and the Persians chose this moment to
attack them.

In the heat of the conflict which ensued, a
violent wind arose ; and the sky and the sun were
totally concealed by the clouds, while the air was
at the same time mixed with dust. During the
darkness which was thus produced, a horseman,
riding at full gallop, directed his lance against
the emperor, and wounded him mortally. After
throwing Julian from his horse, the unknown as-
sailant secretly went away. Some conjectured
that he was a Persian ; others, that he was a
Saracen. There are those who insist that he
who struck the blow was a Roman soldier, who
was indignant at the imprudence and temerity
which the emperor had manifested in exposing
his army to such peril. Libanius,' the sophist,
a native of Syria, the most intimate friend of
Julian, expressed himself in the following terms
concerning the person who had committed the
deed : " You desire to know by whom the em-
peror was slain. I know not his name. We have
a proof, however, that the murderer was not one
of the enemies ; for no one came forward to
claim the reward, although the king of Persia
caused proclamation to be made, by a herald,
of the honors to be awarded to him who had
performed the deed. We are surely beholden
to the enemy for not arrogating to themselves
the glory of the action, but for leaving it to us
to seek the slayer among ourselves.

"Those who sought his death were those who
lived in habitual transgression of the laws, and
who had formerly conspired against him, and

> Libanii Op. vol. ti. p. 614, ed. Reisk. Cf. ScK. iii. 22, 23; a
summary and refutation of Libanius.


who therefore perpetrated the deed as soon as
they could find an opportunity. They were
impelled by the desire of obtaining a greater
degree of freedom from all control than they
could enjoy under his government ; and they
were, perhaps, mainly stimulated by their indig-
nation at the attachment of the emperor to the
service of the gods, to which they were averse."

CHAP. II. — HE PERISHED UNDER DIVINE WRATH.
VISIONS OF THE EMPEROR'S DEATH SEEN BY
VARIOUS INDIVIDUALS. REPLY OF THE CARPEN-
TER'S SON ; JULIAN TOSSED HIS BLOOD ALOFT
TO CHRIST. CALAMITIES WHICH JULIAN EN-
TAILED UPON THE ROMANS.

In the document above quoted, Libanius
clearly states that the emperor fell by the hand
of a Christian ; and this, probably, was the
truth. ^ It is not unlikely that some of the sol-
diers who then served in the Roman army might
have conceived the idea, since Greeks and all
men until this day have praised tyrannicides for
exposing themselves to death in the cause of
liberty, and spiritedly standing by their country,
their families, and their friends. Still less is he
deserving of blame, who, for the sake of God
and of religion, performed so bold a deed.
Beyond this I know nothing accurately concern-
ing the men who committed this murder besides
what I have narrated. All men, however, con-
cur in receiving the account which has been
handed down to us, and which evidences his
death to have been the result of Divine wrath.
A proof of this is the Divine vision which one of
his friends had, which I will now proceed to
describe. He had, it is related, traveled into
Persia, with the intention of joining the emperor.
While on the road, he found himself so far from
any habitation that he was obliged, on one
night, to sleep in a church. He saw, during
that night, either in a dream or a vision, all the
apostles and prophets assembled together, and
complaining of the injuries which the emperor
had inflicted on the Church, and consulting con-
cerning the best measures to be adopted. After
much deliberation and embarrassment two in-
dividuals arose in the midst of the assembly,
desired the others to be of good cheer, and left
the company hastily, as if to deprive Julian of
the imperial power. He who was the spec-
tator of this marvel did not attempt to pursue
his journey, but awaited, in horrible suspense,
the conclusion of this revelation. He laid him-
self down to sleep again, in the same place, and
again he saw the same assembly ; the two indi-
viduals who had appeared to depart the pre-
ceding night to effect their purpose against

» Independent chapter. Cf. Ephr. Syr. Carmina adv. Julia-
uum, ed. Overbcck.


VI. 3]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


347


Julian, suddenly returned and announced his
death to the others.

On the same day a vision was sent to Didy-
mus, an ecclesiastical philosopher, who dwelt at
Alexandria ; and. who, being deeply grieved
at the errors of Julian and his persecution of
the churches, fasted and offered up supplica-
tions to God continually on this account. From
the effects of anxiety and want of food during the
previous night, he fell asleep while sitting in his
chair. Then being, as it were, in an ecstasy, he
beheld white horses traversing the air, and heard
a voice saying to those who were riding thereon,
*' Go and tell Didymus that Julian has been slain
just at this hour ; let him communicate this intel-
ligence to Athanasius, the bishop, and let him
arise and eat." I have been credibly informed
that the friend of Julian and the philosopher
beheld those things. Results proved that neither
of them were far from having witnessed the
truth. But if these instances do not suffice to
prove that the death of Julian was the effect
of Divine wrath on account of his persecution of
the Church, let the prediction of one of the
ecclesiastics be called to mind.* When Julian
was preparing to enter upon the war against
the Persians, he threatened that on the termina-
tion of the war he would treat the Christians
with severity, and boasted that the Son of the
Carpenter would be unable to aid them ; the
ecclesiastic above mentioned thereupon re-
joined, that the Son of the Carpenter was then
preparing him a wooden coffin in view of his
death.

Julian himself was well aware whence the
mortal stroke proceeded, and what was the cause
of its infliction ; for, it is said, when he was
wounded, he took some of the blood that flowed
from the wound, and threw it up into the air, as
if he had seen Jesus Christ appearing, and
intended to throw it at him, in order to re-
proach him with his slaughter. Others say
that he was angry with the sun because it had
favored the Persians, and had not rescued him,
although, according to the doctrine of the as-
tronomers, it had presided at his birth ; and
that it was to express his indignation against
this luminary that he took blood in his hand and
flung it upwards in the air.-

I know not whether, on the approach of death,
as is wont to be the case when the soul is in the
act of being separated from the body and when
it is enabled to behold diviner spectacles than
are allotted to men, and so Julian might have
beheld Christ. Few allusions have been made
to this subject, and yet I dare not reject this
hypothesis as absolutely false ; for God often
suffers still more improbable and astonishing


* Theodoret, H. E. iii. 23 (a pedagogue).

* Cf. version by Philost. vii. 15.


events to take place in order to prove that the
religion named after Christ is not sustained by
human energy. It is, however, very obvious
that, throughout the reign of this emperor, God
gave manifest tokens of His displeasure, and
permitted many calamities to befall several of
the provinces of the Roman Empire. He visited
the earth with such fearful earthquakes, that the
buildings were shaken, and no more safety could
be found within the houses than in the open
air. From what I have heard, I conjecture that
it was during the reign of this emperor, or, at
least, when he occupied the second place in the
government, that a great calamity occurred near
Alexandria in Egypt,'* when the sea receded and
again passed beyond its boundaries from the re-
flux waves, and deluged a great deal of the land,
so that on the retreat of the waters, the sea-skiffs
were found lodged on the roofs of the houses.
The anniversary of this inundation, which they
call the birthday of an earthquake, is still com-
memorated at Alexandria by a yearly festival ;
a general illumination is made throughout the
city ; they offer thankful prayers to God, and
celebrate the day very brilliantly and piously.
An excessive drought also occurred during this
reign ; the plants perished and the air was cor-
rupted ; and for want of proper sustenance,
men were obliged to have recourse to the food
usually eaten by other animals.

The famine introduced peculiar diseases, by
which many lives were lost. Such was the state
of the empire during the administration of
Julian.

CHAP. III. THE REIGN OF JOVIAN; HE INTRO-
DUCED MANY LAWS WHICH HE CARRIED OUl' IN
HIS GOVERNMENT.

After the decease of Julian, the government
of the empire was, by the unanimous consent
of the troops, tendered to Jovian.* When the
army was about to proclaim him emperor, he
announced himself to be a Christian and refused
the sovereignty, nor would he receive the sym-
bols of empire ; but when the soldiers discovered
the cause of his refusal, they loudly proclaimed
that they were themselves Christians.

The dangerous and disturbed condition in
which affairs had been left by Julian's strategy,
and the sufferings of the army from famine in
an enemy's country, compelled Jovian to con-
clude a peace with the Persians, and to cede to
them some territories which had been formerly
tributary to the Romans. Having learned from
experience that the impietv of his predecessor

' A mistake; it occurred under Valentian and Valens. Am.
Marcel, xxvi. 10. 15-19. Idatius: Dtscr. Consulum, under a.d,
385 (July 21).

■• Soc. iii 22; Ruf. H. E. ii. 1 ; Philost. viii. i, 5. Cf. Theodoret,
iv. I, 2, 4; Eutrop. Brev. hist. rom. x. 17, i8; Zos. iii. 30-35;
Am. Marcel, xxv. 5. 4-10.


348


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 3-


had excited the wrath of God, and given rise to
pubUc calamities, he wrote without delay to the
governors of the provinces, directing that \he
people should assemble together without fear in
the churches, that they should serve God with
reverence, and that they should receive the
Christian faith as the only tnie religion. He
restored to the churches and the clergy, to the
widows and the virgins, the same immunities
and every former dotation for the advantage and
honor of religion, which had been granted by
Constantine and his sons, and afterwards with-
drawn by Julian. He commanded Secundus,'
who was then a praetorian prefect, to constitute
it a capital crime to marry any of the holy vir-
gins, or even to regard them with unchaste
desires and to carry them off.

He enacted this law- on account of the
wickedness which had prevailed during the reign
of Julian ; for many had taken wives from among
the holy virgins, and, either by force or guile,
had completely corrupted them ; and thence
had proceeded that indulgence of disgraceful
lusts with impunity, which always occur when
religion is abused.

CH-\P. IV. — TROUBLES AGAIN ARISE IN THE
CHURCHES ; SYNOD OF ANTIOCH, IN WHICH THE
NICENE FAITH IS CONFIRMED ; THE POINTS
WHICH THIS IMPORTANT SYNOD WROTE ABOUT
TO JOVIAN.

The presidents of the churches now resumed
the agitation of doctrinal questions and dis-
cussions." They had remained quiet during the
reign of Julian when Christianity itself was en-
dangered, and had unanimously offered up their
supplications for the mercy of God. It is thus
that men, when attacked by foreign enemies,
remain in accord among themselves ; but, when
external troubles are removed, then internal dis-
sensions creep in ; this, however, is not a proper
place for the citation of the numerous examples
in governments and nations which history affords
of this fact.

At this period Basil, bishop of .Ancyra, Sil-
vanus, bishop of Tarsus, Sophronius, bishop of
Pompeiopolis, and others of their party who
regarded the heresy of the .Anomians, so-called,
with the utmost aversion, and received the term
" similar as to substance," instead of the term
" consubstantial," wrote a treatise to the em-
peror ; and after expressing their thankfulness to
God for his accession to the empire, besought him
to confirm the decrees issued at .Ariminum and Se-


1 This is Sallustius, the prefectus prztorio of the Oriens, who
bore the name Scciindus.

' This con-ititiition of Jovian is extant in Cfd. Tlieod. ix. 25; de
raptu^ vel matritiionio sanctimonialiiiin virginum ftl vidua-
rum, 2.

' Soc. iii. 24, 25; Philost. viii. 5; Theodoret, //. E. iv. 2, 4.


leucia, and to annul what had been established
merely by the zeal and power ofcertain individuals.

They also entreated that, if division, which
existed on account of the Synods, should still
prevail in the churches, the bishops from every
region might be convened alone in some place
indicated by the emperor, and not be permitted
to assemble elsewhere and issue decrees at vari-
ance with each other, as had been done during
the reign of Constantius. They added that they
had not gone to visit him at his camp, be-
cause they were fearful of being burdensome
to him ; but that if he desired to see them,
they would gladly repair to him, and defray all
the expenses attendant on the journey them-
selves. Such was the document written to the
Emperor Jovian.

At this juncture a council was convened at
.Antioch in Syria ; the form of belief established
by the council of Nicsea was confirmed ; and it
was decided that the Son is incontrovertibly of
the same substance as the Father. Meletius,
who then governed the church of Antioch ;
Eusebius, bishop of Samosata ; Pelagius, bishop
of Laodicer. in Syria ; Acacius, bishop of
Caesarea'in Palestine ; Irenius, bishop of Gaza;
and Athanasius, bishop of Ancyra, took part in
this council.

On the termination of the council they ac-
quainted the emperor with the transactions that
had taken place, by dispatching the following
letter ■} —

" To the most religious and God-beloved
Augustus, our Sovereign Jovian, the Conqueror,
from the bishops assembled from divers regions,
at Antioch.

" We know, O emperor, well-beloved of God,
that your piety is fully intent upon maintaining
peace and concord in the Church ; neither are
we ignorant that you have well received the
impress of the chief point of such unity, viz.,
the true and orthodox faith.

" Lest, therefore, we should be reckoned
among those who assail these doctrines of truth,
we attest to your piety that we receive and
maintain the form of belief which was anciently
set forth by the holy council of Nicaea. Now,
although the term ' consubstantial ' appears
strange to some persons, yet it was safely inter-
preted by the Fathers, and signifies that the Son
was begotten of the substance of the Father,
This term does not convey the idea of unbroken
generation ; neither does it coincide with the
use which the Greeks make of the word ' sub-
stance,' but it is calculated to withstand the
impious and rash allegation of .Arius, that the
Son proceeded from what had had no previous
existence. The Anomians who have just sprung

♦ From Sabinus, according to Soc. iv. 25, who also gives the text.


VI. 6.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


349


up have the shameless boldness to maintain this
word to the grief of the concord of the Church.
We subjoin to this letter a copy of the formu-
lary of faith adopted by the bishops assembled
at Nic.nea, which we also cherish."

Such were the decisions formed by the priests
convened at Antioch ; and they appended to
their letter a copy of the Nicene formulary of
faith.

CHAP. V. ATHANASIUS THE GREAT IS VERY HIGHLY

ESTEEMED BY THE EMPEROR, AND RULES OVER
THE CHURCHES OF EGYPT. VISION OF ANTONY
THE GREAT.

At this period/ Athanasius, who governed the
see of Alexandria, and some of his friends,
deemed it requisite, as the emperor was a Chris-
tian, to repair to his court. ^ Accordingly Atha-
nasius went to Antioch, and laid such matters
before the emperor as he deemed expedient.
Others, however, say that the emperor sent for
him in order to consult him concerning the
affairs relative to religion and the right tenet.
When the business of the Church had as far as
possible been transacted, Athanasius began to
think of returning.

Euzoius, bishop of the Arian heresy in Antioch,
endeavored to install Probatius, a eunuch who
held the same sentiments as himself, in Alexan-
dria. The whole party of Euzoius conspired
with him to effect this design ; and Lucius, a
citizen of Alexandria, who had been ordained
presbyter by George, endeavored to prejudice
the emperor against Athanasius, by representing '
that he had been accused of divers crimes and
had been condemned to perpetual banishment
by preceding emperors, as the author of the
dissensions and troubles of the Church concern-
ing the Divine Being. Lucius likewise besought
Jovian to appoint another bishop over the
church of Alexandria. The emperor, since he
knew the plots which had happened against
Athanasius, attached no credit to the calumny,
and with threatening, commanded Lucius to
retire quiedy ; he also ordered Probatius and
the other eunuchs belonging to his palace, whom
he regarded as the originators of these troubles,
to act more advisedly. From that period Jo-
vian manifested the greatest friendship towards
Athanasius, and sent him back to Egypt, with
directions to govern the churches and people of
that country as he might think fit. It is also
said that he passed commendations on the
virtue of the bishop, on his life, his intellectual
endowments, and his eloquence.

' A largely independent chapter. Cf. Soc. iii. 24; Philost. viii. 6.

2 This may have a connection with Theodoret, iv. 2, 3; Athanas.
Ep. ad yovianum imf., where several petitions and interlocutions
of the Arians with Jovian against Athanasius are given.

" The accusations made by the Arians, Lucius and Bernicianus.
See preceding reference to Ep. ad Jovianum, 4.


Thus, after having been exposed to opposi-
tion for a long while, as has been narrated in the
former books, was the Nicene faith fully re-
established under the present government ; but
further embarrassment awaited it within a very
short period. For, as it appeared afterwards,
the whole of the prediction of Antony the Monk
was not fulfilled by the occurrences which befell
the Church during the reign of Constantius ;
part thereof was not accomplished until the
reign of Valens. It is said that before the Arians
got control of the churches during the reign of
Constantius, Antony had a dream in which he
saw mules kicking the altar with their hoofs and
overturning the holy table. On awakening, he
immediately predicted that the Church would
be troubled by the introduction of spurious and
mixed doctrines, and by the rebellion of the
heterodox. The truth of this prediction was
evidenced by the events which occurred before
and after the period now under review.


CHAP. VI. DEATH OF JOVIAN ; lllE LIFE OF VALEN-

TINIAN, AND HIS CONFIDENCE IN GOD ; HOW HE
WAS ADVANCED TO THE THRONE AND SELECTED
HIS BROTHER VALENS TO REIGN WITH HIM ; THE
DIFFERENCES OF BOTH.

After Jovian had reigned about eight months,
he died suddenly at Dadastana, a town of
Bithynia, while on his road to Constantinople.*
Some say that his death was occasioned by eat-
ing too plentiful a supper ; others attribute it to
the dampness of the chamber in which he slept ;
for it had been recently plastered with unslaked
lime, and quantities of coals had been burnt in
it during the winter for a preventive ; the walls
had become damp and were exceedingly moist.

On the arrival of the troops at Nicaea in
Bithynia, they ]iroclaimed Valentinian emperor.
He was a gootl man and capable of holding the
reins of the empire. He had not long returned
from banishment ; for it is said that Julian, im-
mediately on his accession to the empire, erased
the name of Valentinian from the Jovian legions,
as they were called, and condemned him to
perpetual banishment, under the pretext that he
had failed in his duty of leading out the soldiers
under his command against the enemy. The
true reason of his condemnation, however, was
the following : When Julian was in (laul, he
went one day to a temple to offer incense.
Valentinian^ accompanied him, according to an
ancient Roman law, which still prevails, and
which enacted that the leader of the Jovians and


< Philost. viii. 8; Soc. iii. 26; iv. i ; Ruf. ii. 1,2. Cf Theodoret,
H. E. iv. 5, 6; Eudox. Brev. hist. roin. x. 18; Zos. iii. 35, 36;
Am. Marcel, xxv. 10, 12-17; Jovian, xxvi. 1-4, accession of Valen-
tinian and choice of V^alens.

^ Philost. vii. 7; Theodoret, //. £. iii. 16.


350


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN. [Vi. 6.


the Herculeans (that is to say, the legions of
soldiers who have received this appellation in
honor of Jupiter and of Hercules) should always
attend the emperor as his body-guard. When
they were about to enter the temple, the priest,
in accordance with the pagan custom, sprinkled
water upon them with the branch of a tree. A
drop fell upon the robe of Valentinian ; he
scarcely could restrain himself, for he was a
Christian, and he rebuked his asperser ; it is
even said that he cut off, in view of the em-
peror, the portion of the garment on which the
water had fallen, and flung it from him. From
that moment Julian entertained inimical feel-
ings against him, and soon after banished him
to^Melitine in Armenia, under the plea of mis-
conduct in military affairs ; for he would not have
religion regarded as the cause of the decree, lest
Valentinian should be accounted a martyr or a
confessor. Julian treated other Christians, as
we have already stated, in the same manner;
for, as was said before, he perceived that to sub-
ject them to hazards only added to their repu-
tation, and tended to the consolidation of their
religion. As soon as Jovian succeeded to the
throne, Valentinian was recalled from banishment
to NicKa ; but the death of the emperor in the
meantime took place, and Valentinian, by the
unanimous consent of the troops and those who
held the chief positions in the government, was
appointed his successor. When he was invested
with the symbols of imperial power, the soldiers
cried out that it was necessary to elect some
one to share the burden of government. To
this proposition, Valentinian made the following
reply : " It depended on you alone, O soldiers,
to proclaim me emperor ; but now that you have
elected me, it depends not upon you, but upon
me, to perform what you demand. Remain quiet,
as subjects ought to do, and leave me to act as
an emperor in attending to the public affairs."

Not long after this refusal to comply with the
demand of the soldiery, he repaired to Constan-
tinople, and proclaimed his brother emperor.
He gave him the East as his share of the empire,
and reserved to himself the regions along the
Western Ocean, from Illyria to the furthest coasts
of Libya. Both the brothers were Christians, but
they differed in opinion and disposition. For
Valens, when he was baptized, employed Eudoxius
as his initiator, and was zealously attached to the
doctrines of Arius, anil would readily have com-
pelled all mankind by force to yield to them.
Valentinian, on the other hand, maintained the
faith of the council of Nicaea, and fivoved those
who upheld the same sentiments, without molest-
ing those who entertained other opinions.


CHAP. VTI. TROUBLE.S AGAIN ARISK IN THE

CHURCHES, AND THE SYNOD OF LAMPSACUS IS


HELD. THE ARIANS WHO SUPPORTED EUDOXIUS
PREVAIL AND EJECT THE ORTHODOX FROM THE
CHURCHES. AMONG THE EJECIED IS MELETIUS
OF ANTIOCH.

When Valentinian was journeying from Con-
stantinople to Rome,' he had to pass through
Thrace ; and the bishops of Hellespontus and
of Bithynia, with others, who maintained that
the Son is consubstantial with the Father, dis-
patched Hypatian, bishop of Heraclea in Pe-
rinthus, to meet him, and to request permission
to assemble themselves together for deliberation
on questions of doctrine.

When Hypatian had delivered the message
with which he was intrusted, Valentinian made
the following reply : " I am but one of the laity,
and have therefore no right to interfere in these
transactions ; let the priests, to whom such mat-
ters appertain, assemble where they please.
On receiving this answer through Hypatian,
their deputy, the bishops assembled at Lamp-

sacus.

After having conferred together for the space
of two months, they annulled all that had been
decreed at Constantinople, through the machi-
nations of the partisans of Eudoxius and Acacius.
They likewise declared null and void the formu-
lary of faith which had been circulated under
the false assertion that it was the compilation of
the Western bishops, and to which the signatures
of many bishops had been obtained, by the
promise that the dogma of dissimilarity as to
substance should be condemned, — a promise
which had never been performed.

They decreed that the doctrine of the Son
being in substance like unto the Father, should
have the ascendancy ; for they said that it was
necessary to resort to the use of the term " like '
as indicative of the hypostases of the Godhead.
They agreed that the form of belief which had
been confessed at Seleucia, and set forth at the
dedication of the church of Antioch, should be
maintained by all the churches.

They directed that all the bishops who had
been deposed by those who hold that the Son is
dissimilar from the Father, should forthwith be
reinstated in their sees, as having been un-
justly ejected from their churches. They declared
that if any wished to bring accusations against
them they would be permitted to do so, but
under the penalty of incurring the same P"n'sh-
ment as that due to the alleged crime, should
the accusation prove to be false. The orthodox
bishops of the province and of the neighboring
countries were to preside as judges, and to
assemble in the church, with the witnesses who
were to make the depositions.

After making these decisions, the bishops


1 Soc. iv. 2, 4. Soz. is much fuller; probably from Sabinus.


VI. 9-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


351


summoned the partisans of Eudoxius, and ex-
horted them to repentance ; but as they would
give no heed to these remonstrances, the decrees
enacted by the council were sent to all the
churches. Judging that Eudoxius would be
likely to encieavor to persuade the emperor to
side with him, and would calumniate them, they
determined to be beforehand with him, and to
send an account of their proceedings in Lamp-
sacus to the court.

Their deputies met the Emperor Valens as he
was returning from Heraclea to Thrace, where
he had been traveling in company with his
brother, who had gone on to Old Rome.

Eudoxius, however, had previously gained
over the emperor and his courtiers to his own
sentiments ; so that when the deputies of the
council of Lampsacus presented themselves
before Valens, he merely exhorted them not to
be at variance with Eudoxius. The deputies
replied by reminding him of the artifices to
which Eudoxius had resorted at Constantinople,
and of his machinations to annul the decrees of
the council of Seleucia ; and these representa-
tions kindled the wrath of Valens to such a
pitch, that he condemned the deputies to ban-
ishment, and made over the churches to the
partisans of Eudoxius. He then passed over
into Syria, for he feared lest the Persians should
break the truce which they had concluded with
Jovian for thirty years. On finding, however,
that the Persians were not disposed to insurrec-
tion, he fixed his residence at Antioch. He
sent Meletius, the bishop, into banishment, but
spared Paul, because he admired the sanctity of
his life. Those who were not in communion with
Euzoius were either ejected from the churches,
or maltreated and harassed in some other form.


CHAP. VIII. REVOLT AND EXTRAORDINARY DEATH

OF PROCOPIUS. ELEUSIUS, BISHOP OF CYZICUS,
AND EUNOMIUS, THE HERETIC. EUNOMIUS SUC-
CEEDS ELEUSIUS.

It is probable that a severe persecution might
have ensued at this juncture, had not Procopius
commenced a civil war.' As he began to play
the tyrant at Constantinople, he soon collected
a large, army, and marched against Valens.

The latter quitted Syria, and met Procopius
near Nacolia, a city of Phrygia, and captured
him alive through the treachery of Agelon and
Gomarius, two of his generals.

Valens put him and his betrayers to a cruel
death ; and although it is said that he had sworn
to show favor to the two generals, he caused
them to be sawn asunder.


1 Soc. iv. 5-7; Philost. ix. 5; Eunap. Fr. i. 5; ii. 28; Am.
Marcel, xxvi. 5-10; Zos. iv. 4-8.


He commanded Procopius to be fastened by
the legs to two trees which had been bent to
the ground, and he allowetl these to spring up ;
when the trees were left to resume their natural
position, the victim was torn in twain.

On the termination of this war, Valens retired
to Nic0ea, and finding himself in possession of
profound tranquillity, he again began to molest
those who differed from him in opinion concern-
ing the Divine nature.

His anger was unbounded against the bishops
of the council of Lampsacus, because they had
condemned the Arian bishops and the formu-
lary of faith set forth at Ariminum.

While under the influence of these resentful
feelings, he summoned Eleusius from Syria, and
having called together a Synod of bishops who
held his own sentiments, he endeavored to com-
pel him to assent to their doctrines. Eleu-
sius at first manfully refused compliance. But
afterwards, from the dread of exile and de-
privation of his property, as was threatened
by the emperor, he yielded to the mandate.
He soon repented of his weakness, and on his
return to Cyzicus he made a .public confession
of his fault in the church, and urged the people
to choose another bishop, for he said that he
could not discharge the duties of a priesthood
after having been a traitor to his own doctrine.
The citizens respected his conduct and were
especially well-disposed to him, so that they did
not choose to have another bishop. Eudoxius,
president of the Arians in Constantinople, how-
ever, ordained Eunomius as bishop of Cyzicus ;
for he expected that by his great powers of
eloquence Eunomius would easily draw the
people of Cyzicus over to his own sentiments.
On his arrival at that city he expelled Eleusius,
for he was furnished with an imperial edict to
that effect, and took possession of the churches
himself.

The followers of Eleusius built a house of
prayer without the walls of the city, and here
they held their assemblies. I shall soon again
have occasion to revert to Eunomius and the
heresy which bears his name.

CHAP. IX. SUFFERINGS OF THOSE WHO MAIN-
TAINED THE nice;ne faith. agelius, the

RULER OF THE NOVATIANS.

The Christians who represented the Nicene
doctrines and the followers of the Novatian
views ^ were treated with equal severity in the
city of Constantinople.

They were all ultimately expelled from the
city ; and the churches of the Novatians were
closed by order of the emperor. The other
party had no churches to be closed, having been

■' Soc. iv. 9, the source.


352


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 9.


deprived of them all during the reign of Con-
stantius.

At this period, Agelius who, from the time of
Constantius, had governed the church of the
Novatians at Constantinople, was condemned to
banishment. It is said that he was especially
remarkable for his course of life according to
the ecclesiastical laws. With respect" to his
mode of life, he had attained to the highest
degree of philosophy, namely, freedom from
worldly possessions ; thie was evidenced by his
daily conduct ; he had but one tunic, and always
walked barefooted. Not long after his banish-
ment, he was recalled, received the churches
under him, and boldly convened churches
through the influence of Marcian, a man of ex-
traordinary virtue and eloquence, who had
formerly been enrolled among the troops of the
palace, but at this period was a presbyter of
the Novatian heresy, and the teacher of grammar
to Anastasia and Carosa,' the daughters of the
emperor. There are still baths at Constantinople
which bear the names of these princesses. It
was for the sake of Marcian alone that the
privilege above-mentioned was conceded to the
Novatians.

CHAP. X. — CONCERNING VALENTINIAN THE YOUNGER
AND GRATIAN. PERSECUTION UNDER VALENS.
THE HOMOOUSIANS, BEING OPPRESSED BY THE
ARIANS AND MACEDONIANS, SEND AN E.MBASSY TO
ROME.^

About this period, a son was born to Valen-
tinian in the West, to whom the emperor gave
his own name. Not long after, he proclaimed
his son Gratian emperor ; this prince was born
before his father held the government.

In the meantime, although hailstones of ex-
traordinary magnitude fell in various places,
and although many cities, particularly Nicasa in
Bithynia, were shaken by earthquakes, yet
Valens, the emperor, and Eudoxius, the bishop,
paused not in their career, but continued to
persecute all Christians who differed from them
in opinion. They succeeded to the utmost of
their expectations in their machinations against
those who adhered to the Nicene doctrines ; for
throughout the greater time of Valens' rule,
particularly in Thrace, Bithynia, and the Helles-
pont, and still further beyond, these Christians
had neither churches nor priests. Valens and
Eudoxius then directed their resentment against


' According to Am. Marcel, xxvi. 6, 14, the Anastasian baths
were so called after a sister of Constantine. But Soz. supposes that
there were baths in his day named after the sisters, not the one,
but both. Soc. says only Anastasia. Cf. Idatius, Desc. Cess. s.
A.D. 375. His cons. thermsE Carosianx dedicatz sunt agenle prac-
fecio V. C. Vendalonis Magno.

' Valesius remarks that the title of this chapter is incorrect, and
that it was the Macedonians, and not the orthodox Christians, who
sent the embassy to Rome.


the Macedonians, who were more in number
than the Christians above mentioned in that
region, and persecuted them without measure.

The Macedonians, in apprehension of further
sufferings, sent deputies to various cities, and
finally agreed to have recourse to Valentinian
and to the bishop of Rome rather than share in
the faith of Eudoxius and Valens and their
followers ; and when this seemed favorable for
execution, they selected three of their own num-
ber, — Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste ; Silvanus,
bishop of Tarsus ; and Theophilus, bishop of
Castabalis, — and sent them to the Emperor
Valentinian ; they likewise intrusted them with
a letter, addressed to Liberius, bishop of Rome,
and to the other priests of the West, in which
they entreated them as prelates who had adhered
to the faith approved and confirmed by the
apostles, and who before others ought to watch
over religion, to receive their deputies with all
confirmation, and to confer with them about
what should be done in the interval until the
affairs of the Church could be approvedly set in
order.

When the deputies arrived in Italy, they found
that the emperor was in Gaul, engaged in war
against the barbarians. As they considered that
it would be perilous to visit the seat of war in
Gaul, they delivered their letter to Liberius.^
After having conferred with him concerning
the objects of their embassy, they condemned
Arius and those who held and taught his doc-
trines ; they renounced all heresies opposed to
the faith established at Nicrea ; and received the
term " consubstantial," as being a word that
conveys the same signification as the expression
" like in siibstance." When they had presented
a confession of faith, analogous to the above, to
Liberius, he received them into communion with
himself, and wrote to the bishops of the East,
commending the orthodoxy of their faith, and
detailing what had passed in the conference he
had held with them. The confession of faith
made by Eustathius and his companions was as
follows : —


CHAP. XI. THE CONFF.SSION OF EUSTATHIUS, SILVA-
NUS, AND THEOPHILUS, THE DEPUTIES OF THE
MACEDONIANS, TO LIBERIUS, BISHOP OF R0ME.

"To Liberius, our Lord and Brother, and
Fellow-minister — Eustathius, Silvanus, and The-
ophilus send greeting in the Lord.*

" On account of the mad opinions of the
heretics who do not cease to keep on sowing
scandals for the Catholic churches, we who nul-


' Soc. iv. 10, II, 12, from whom Soz. seems to have compressed.
* Soc. iv. 12. Soz. has only half of the document with a number
of variations.


VI. 12.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


353


lify their every attack confess the Synod which was
held at Lampsacus, the one at Smyrna and the
councils held in other places, by the orthodox
bishops. We have furnished letters and sent on an
embassy to your Goodness, as likewise to all the
other bishops of Italy and of the West, to con-
firm and preserve the Catholic faith, which was
established at the holy council of Nicaea, by the
blessed Constantine and three hundred and
eighteen God-fearing fathers.

" This remains, by an unmixed and immovable
settlement, until now, and will remain perpetually ;
in which the term ' consubstantial ' is fixed in all
holiness and piety in testimony against the per-
verseness of Arius. We confess, each with his
own hand, that we with' the aforesaid have always
held this same faith, that we still hold it, and
that we shall adhere to it to the last. We
condemn Arius, his impious dogmas, and his dis-
ciples. We also condemn the heresies of Patro-
pasianus,* of Photinus, of Marcellus, of Paul of
Samosata, and all who maintain such doctrines
themselves. We anathematize all heresies op-
posed to the aforesaid faith established by the
saintly fathers at Nic?ea. We anathematize Arius
especially, and condemn all such decrees as were
enacted at Ariminum, in opposition to the afore-
said faith established by the holy council of
Nicsea. We were formerly deluded by the guile
and perjury of certain parties, and subscribed
to these decrees when they were transmitted to
Constantinople from Nicsea, a city of Thrace."

After this confession they subjoined a copy
of the entire formulary of Nicsea to their own
creed, and, having received from Liberius a
written account of all that they had transacted,
they sailed to Sicily.

CHAP. XII. — COUNCILS OF SICILY AND OF TV ANA.
THE SYNOD WHICH WAS EXPECTED TO BE HELD
IN CILICIA IS DISSOLVED BY VALENS. THE PER-
SECUTION AT THAT TIME. ATHANASIUS THE GREAT
FLEES AGAIN, AND IS IN CONCEALMENT ; BY THE
LETTER OF VALENS HE REAPPEARS, AND GOVERNS
THE CHURCHES IN EGYPT.

A COUNCIL was convened at Sicily ; ^ and after
the same doctrines had been confirmed as those
set forth in the confession of the deputies, the
assembly was dissolved.

At the same time, a council was held at Tyana ;
and Eusebius, bishop of Csesarea in Cappadocia,
Athanasius, bishop of Ancyra, Pelagius, bishop
of Laodicea, Zeno, bishop of Tyre, Paul, bishop
of Emesa, Otreus, bishop of Melitene, and
Gregory, bishop of Nazianzen, were present
with many others, who, during the reign of

* A curious blunder.

* Soc. iv. 12, 13, 20. Soz. has much more acts and details.
Sabinus is probably a chief source, though not the only one. Soc.
iv. 12, at end.


Jovian, had assembled at Antioch, and deter-
mined to maintain the doctrine of the Son being
consubstantial with the Father. The letters of
Liberius and the Western bishops were read at
this council. These letters afforded high satis-
faction to the members of the council ; and they
wrote to all the churches, desiring them to peruse
the decrees of the bishops in Asia,- and the doc-
uments written by Liberius and the bishops of
Italy, of Africa, of. Gaul, and of Sicily, which
had been intrusted to the deputies of the council
of Lampsacus. They urged them to reflect on
the great number of persons by whom these
documents had been drawn up, and who were
far more in number than the members of the
council of Ariminum, and exhorted them to be
of one mind, and to enter into communion with
them, to signify the same by writing, and finally
to assemble together at Tarsus in Cilicia before
the end of the spring. On a fixed date which
they prescribed, they urged one another to con-
vene. On the approach of the appointed day,
when the Synod was on the point of assembling
at Tarsus, about thirty-four of the Asiatic bishops
came together in Cafia, in the province of Asia,
commended the design of establishing uniformity
of belief in the Church, but objected to the term
" consubstantial," and insisted that the formula-
ries of faith set forth by the councils of Antioch
and Seleucia, and maintained by Lucian, the
martyr, and by many of their predecessors,
with dangers and tensions, ought to obtain the
ascendancy over all others.

The emperor, at the instigation of Eudoxius,
prevented by letter the council from being con-
vened in Cilicia, and even prphibited it under
severe penalties. He also wrote to the gov-
ernors of the provinces, commanding them to
eject all bishops from their churches who had
been banished by Constantine^ and who had
again taken up their priesthood under the Em-
peror Julian. On account of this order, those
who were at the head of the government of
Egypt were anxious to deprive Athanasius of his
bishopric and expel him from the city ; for no
light punishment was inserted in the imperial
letters ; for unless the injunctions were fulfilled,
all the magistrates equally, and the soldiers under
them, and counselors were condemned to the
payment of much money and also threatened
with bodily maltreatment.''

The majority of Christians of the city, how-
ever, assembled and besought the governor
not to banish Athanasius without further con-
sideration of the terms of the imperial letter,
which merely specified all bishops who had been

2 Text reads afi ttji' 'Ao-iai-; it is wrong to substitute iva-iv.

3 Obviously an error in the text, for Constantius. See below,
where the name is given correctly.

* Cf. Chrotiicon, prefacing the Festal letters of Athan. from
A.D. 365 on.


354


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 12.


banished by Constantius and recalled by Julian ;
and it was manifest that Athanasius was not of
this number, inasmuch as he had been recalled
by Constantius and had resumed his bishopric ;
but Julian, at the very time that all the other
bishops had been recalled, persecuted him, and
finally Jovian recalled him. The governor was
by no means convinced by these arguments ;
nevertheless, he restrained himself and did not
give way to the use of force. The people ran
together from every quarter ; there was much
commotion and perturbation throughout the
city ; an insurrection was expected ; he there-
fore advised the emperor of the facts and allowed
the bishop to remain in the city. Some days
afterwards, when the popular excitement had
seemingly abated, Athanasius secredy quitted
the city at dusk, and concealed himself some-
where. The very same night, the governor of
Egypt and the military chief took possession
of the church in which Athanasius generally
dwelt, and sought him in every part of the edi-
fice, and even on the roof, but in vain ; for they
had calculated upon seizing the moment when
the popular commotion had partially subsided,
and when the whole city was wrapt in sleep, to
execute the mandate of the emperor, and to
transport Athanasius quietly from the city.

Not to have found Athanasius naturally ex-
cited universal astonishment. Some attributed
his escape to a special revelation from above ;
others to the advice of some of his followers ;
both had the same result ; but more than human
prudence seems to have been requisite to fore-
see and to avoid such a plot. Some say, that
as soon as the people gave indications of being
disposed to sedition, he concealed himself among
the tombs of his ancestors, being apprehensive
lest he should be regarded as the cause of any
disturbances that might ensue ; and that he after-
wards retreated to some other place of conceal-
ment.

The Emperor Valens, soon after, wrote to
grant permission for him to return and hold his
church. It is very doubtful, whether, in making
this concession, Valens acted according to his
own inclination. I rather imagine that, on re-
flecting on the esteem in which Athanasius was
universally held, he feared to excite the dis-
pleasure of the Emperor Valentinian, who was
well-known to be attached to the Nicene doc-
trines ; or perhaps he was apprehensive of a
commotion on the part of the many admirers of
the bishop, lest some innovation might injure the
public affairs.

I also believe that the Arian presidents did
not, on this occasion, plead' very vehemently
against Athanasius ; for they considered that, if
he were ejected from the city, he would proba-
bly traduce them to the emperors and then


would have an occasion for conference with
respect to them, and might possibly succeed in
persuading Valens to adopt his own sentiments,
and in arousing the anger of the like-minded
Valentinian against themselves.

They were greatly troubled by the evidences
of the virtue and courage of Athanasius, which
had been aflbrded by the events which had
transpired during the reign of Constantius. He
had, in fact, so skilfully evaded the plots of his
enemies, that they had been constrained to con-
sent to his reinstallation in the government of
the churches of Egypt ; and yet he could scarcely
be induced to return from Italy, although letters
had been dispatched by Constantius to that
effect.

I am convinced that it was solely from these
reasons that Athanasius was not expelled from
his church like the other bishops, who were
subjected to as cruel a persecution as ever was
inflicted by pagans.

Those who would not change their doctrinal
tenets were banished ; their houses of prayer
were taken from them, and placed in the pos-
session of those who held opposite sentiments.
Egypt alone was, during the Hfe of Athanasius,
exempted from this persecution.

CHAP. XIII. — DEMOPHILUS, AN ARIAN, BECAME.
BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE AFTER EUDOXIUS.
THE PIOUS ELECT EVAGRIUS. ACCOUNT OF THE
PERSECUTION WHICH ENSUED.

About this time the Emperor Valens went to
Antioch on the Orontes ; while he was on his
journey Eudoxius died, after having governed
the churches of Constantinople during the space
of eleven years.' Demophilus was immediately
ordained as his successor by the Arian bishops.
The followers of the Nicene doctrines, believing
that the course of events was in their power,
elected Evagrius as their bishop. He had been
ordained by Eustathius, who had formerly gov-
erned the church of Antioch in Syria, and who
having been recalled from banishment by Jovian,
lived in a private manner at Constantinople, and
devoted himself to the instruction of those who
held his sentiments, exhorting them to perse-
verance in their view of the Divine Being. The
Arian heretics were stirred to revolt, and com-
menced a violent persecution against those who
had participated in the ordination of Evagrius.
The Emperor Valens, who was then at Nicome-
dia, on being apprised of the occurrences that
had taken place in Constantinople since the
death of Eudoxius, was fearful lest any interest
of the city should suffier by sedition, and there-
fore sent thither as many troops as he thought
requisite to preserve tranquillity.

■ Soc. iv. 13-15; Philost. ix. 4-10.


VI. i6.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


355


Eustathius was arrested by his command and
banished to Bizya, a city of Thrace, and Eva-
grius was exiled to some other region. And
such was the manner of this event.

CHAP. XIV. — ACCOUNT OF THE EIGHTY PIOUS DELE-
GATES IN NICOMEDIA, WHOM VALENS BURNED
WITH THE VESSEL IN MID-SEA.

The Arians, as is customary with the prosper-
ous, because more insolent,^ persecuted unmer-
cifully all Christians whose religious sentiments
were opposed to their own.

These Christians being exposed to bodily
injuries, and betrayed to magistrates and prisons,
and finding themselves moreover gradually im-
poverished by the frequent fines, were at length
compelled to appeal for redress to the emperor.
Although exceedingly angry, the emperor did
not openly manifest any wrath, but secretly com-
manded the prefect to seize and slay the whole
deputation. But the prefect, being apprehensive
that a whole popular insurrection would be
excited if he were to put so many good and
religious men to death without any of the forms
of justice, pretended that they were to be sent
into exile, and under this pretext compelled
them to embark on board a ship, to which they
assented with the most perfect resignation.
When they had sailed to about the center of
the bay, which was called Astacius, the sailors,
according to the orders they had received,, set
fire to the vessel and leaped into the tender.
A wind arising, the ship was blown along to
Dacibiza, a place on the sea-coast of Bithynia ;
but no sooner had it neared the shore, than it
was utterly consumed with all the men on board.


chap. XV. DISPUTES BETWEEN EUSEBIUS, BISHOP

OF C^SAREA, AND BASIL THE GREAT. HENCE
THE ARIANS TOOK COURAGE AND CAME TO
C^SAREA, AND WERE REPULSED.

When Valens quitted Nicomedia, he went on
to Antioch ; ^ and in passing through Cappa-
docia he did all in his power, according to cus-
tom, to injure the orthodox and to deliver up
the churches to the Arians. He thought to ac-
compUsh his designs the more easily on account
of a dispute ^ which was then pending between
Basil and Eusebius, who then governed the
church of Caesarea. This dissension had been
the cause of Basil's departing from Pontus,
where he lived conjointly with some monks who
pursued the philosophy. The people and some
of the most powerful and the wisest men in

' Soc. iv. i6. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iv. 24.

2 Independent chapter.

3 Concerning this difference, see Greg. Naz. Or. xliii. 2-j-yj, in
praise of Basil.


the city began to regard Eusebius with suspicion,
particularly as they considered him the cause of
the withdrawal of one who was equally cele-
brated for his piety and his eloquence ; and
they accordingly began to plan a secession and
the holding of separate church. In the mean-
time Basil, fearing to be a source of further
trouble to the Church, which was already rent
by the dissensions of heretics, remained in re-
tirement in the monasteries at Pontus. The
emperor and the bishops of the Arian heresy,
who were always attached to his suite, were
more inspirited in their designs by the absence
of Basil and the hatred of the people towards
Eusebius. But the event was contrary to their
judgment. On the first intelligence of the in-
tention of the emperor to pass through Cap-
padocia, Basil quitted Pontus and returned to
Caesarea, where he effected a reconciliation with
Eusebius, and by his eloquence he opportunely
aided the Church. The projects of Valens were
thus defeated, and he returned with his bishops
without having accomplished any of his designs.


CHAP. XVI. BASIL BECOMES BISHOP OF CAESAREA

AFTER EUSEBIUS; HIS BOLDNESS TOWARDS THE
EMPEROR AND THE PREFECT.

Some time after, the emperor again visited
Cappadocia, and found that Basil was adminis-
tering the churches there after the death of
Eusebius.* He thought of expelling him, but
was unwillingly restrained from his intention.
It is said that the night after he had formed his
plans his wife was disturbed by a frightful dream,
and that his only son Galates was cut off by a
rapid disease. The death of this son was uni-
versally attributed to the vengeance of God as a
punishment of his parents for the machinations
that had been carried on against Basil. Valens
himself was of this opinion, and, after the death
of his son, offered no further molestation to the
bishop.

When the prince was sinking under the
disease, and at the point of death, the emperor
sent for Basil and requested him to pray to God
for his son's recovery. For as soon as Valens
had arrived at Caesarea, the prefect had sent
for Basil and commanded him to embrace
the religious sentiments of the emperor, menac-
ing him with death in case of non-compliance.
Basil replied that it would be great gain to him and
the grant of the highest favor to be delivered as
quickly as possible from the bondage of the body.
The prefect gave him the rest of the day and
the approaching night for deliberation, and
advised him not to rush imprudently into

* Greg. Naz. Or. xliii. 44-57; Greg. Nyss. contra Eunomium,
ii. 290-295; Ruf. ii. 9; Soc. iv. 26. Cf. Theodoret, iv. 19.


356


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 1 6.


obvious danger, but that he should come on the
day after and declare his opinion. " I do not
require to deliberate," replied Basil. " My
determination will be the same to-morrow as it
is to-day ; for since I am a creature I can never
be induced to worship that which is similar to
myself and worship it as God ; neither will I
conform to your religion, nor to that of the
emperor. Although your distinction may be
great, and although you have the honor of rul-
ing no inconsiderable portion of the empire, yet
I ought not on these accounts to seek to please
men, and, at the same time, belittle that Divine
faith which neither loss of goods, nor exile, nor
condemnation to death would ever impel me to
betray. Inflictions of this nature have never
excited in my mind one pang of sorrow. I
possess nothing but a cloak and a few books.
I dwell on the earth as a traveler. The body
through its weakness would have the better of
all sensation and torture after the first blow."

The prefect admired the courage evinced in
this bold reply, and communicated the circum-
stance to tl>e emperor. On the festival of the
Epiphany, the emperor repaired to the church,
with the rulers and his guards, presented gifts at
the holy table, and held a conference with Basil,
whose wisdom and whose order and arrangement
in the conduct of the priesthood and the church
elicited his praise.

Not long after, however, the calumny of his
enemies prevailed, and Basil was condemned to
banishment. The night for the execution of the
edict was at hand ; the son of the emperor sud-
denly fell ill with a pressing and dangerous fever.
The father prostrated himself on the earth and
wept over the son who was still alive, and not
knowing what other measures to take towards
effecting the recovery of his son, he dispatched
some of his attendants to Basil to come and visit
the prostrate child ; because he himself feared
to summon the bishop, on account of the injury
just inflicted upon him. Immediately on the
arrival of Basil, the boy began to rally ; so that
many maintain that his recovery would have
been complete, had not some heretics been
summoned to pray with Basil for the restora-
tion of the boy. It is said that the prefect,
likewise, fell ill ; but that on his repentance, and
on prayer being offered to God, he was restored
to health. The instances above adduced are
quite inadequate to convey an idea of the won-
derful endowments of Basil ; his extreme ad-
diction to the philosophic life and astonishing
powers of eloquence attracted great celebrity.

CHAP. XVII. FRIENDSHIP OF BASIL AND OF GREG-
ORY, THE THEOLOGIAN ; BEING PEERS IN WISDOM,
THEY DEFEND THE NICENE DOCTRINES.

Basil and Gregory were contemporaries, and


they were recognized to be equally intent, so to
speak, upon the cultivation of the virtues.*
They ^ had both studied in their youth at Athens,
under Himerius and Proaeresius, the most ap-
proved sophists of the age ; and afterwards at
Antioch, under Libanius, the Syrian. But as
they subsequently conceived a contempt for
sophistry and the study of the law, they deter-
mined to study philosophy according to the law
of the Church. After having spent some time
in the pursuit of the sciences, taught by pagan
philosophers, they entered upon the study of
the commentaries which Origen and the best
approved authors who lived before and after his
time, have written in explanation of the Sacred
Scriptures.

They rendered great assistance to those who,
like themselves, maintained the Nicene doc-
trines, for they manfully opposed the dogmas
of the Arians, proving that these heretics did
not rightly understand either the data upon
which they proceeded, nor the opinions of Ori-
gen, upon which they mainly depended. These
two holy men divided the perils of their under-
taking, either by mutual agreement, or, as I have
been informed, by lot. The cities in the neigh-
borhood of Pontus fell to the lot of Basil ; and
here he founded numerous monasteries, and, by
teaching the people, he persuaded them to hold
like views with himself. After the death of his
father, Gregory acted as bishop of the small city
of Nazianzus,'' but resided on that account in a
variety of places, and especially at Constantino-
ple. Not long after he was appointed by the
vote of many priests to act as president of the
people there ; for there was then neither bishop
nor church in Constantinople, and the doctrines
of the council of Nicaea were almost extinct.


CHAP. XVIII. — THE PERSECUTION WHICH OCCURRED
AT ANTIOCH, ON THE ORONTES. THE PLACE OF
PRAYER IN EDESSA, CALLED AFTER THE APOSTLE
THOMAS ; THE ASSEMBLY THERE, AND CONFES-
SION OF THE INHABITANTS OF EDESSA.

The emperor went to Antioch, and entirely
ejected from the churches of that city and of
the neighboring cities all those who adhered to
the Nicene doctrines;* moreover, he oppressed
them with manifold punishments ; as some
affirm, he commanded many to be put to death
in various ways, and caused others to be cast
into the river Orontes. Having heard that there
was a magnificent oratory at Edessa, named after


' Chrysostom, de Sncerdotio, i. 1-7.

- Snc. iv. 26; Ruf. ii. 9. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iv. ;jo.

' He h.id been coadjutor bishop during his father's lifetime.

♦ Ruf. ii. 5; Soc. iv. 17, 18. Soz. resembles Soc. in both inci-
dents. Soc. re<;embles Ruf in the Edessa story, neither mention
the prefect's name, as does Soz. Philost. ix. 11; Theodoret, //. E.
iv. 17.


VI. 20.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


357


the Apostle Thomas, he went to see it. He be-
held the members of the Catholic Church assem-
bled for worship in the plain before the walls of
the city ; for there, too, they had been deprived
of their houses of prayer. It is said that the
emperor reproached the prefect thoroughly and
struck him on the jaw with his fist for having
permitted these congregations contrary to his
edict. Modestus (for this was the name of the
prefect), although he was himself a heretic,
secretly warned the people of Edessa not to
meet for prayer on the accustomed spot the
next day ; for he had received orders from the
emperor to punish all who should be seized. He
uttered such threats with the forethought that
none, or at least but a few, would incur danger,
and with the desire to appease the wrath of the
monarch. But the people of Edessa, totally dis-
regarding the threat, ran together with more
than their customary zeal, and filled the usual
place of meeting.

Modestus, on being apprised of their proceed-
ings, was undecided as to what measures ought
to be adopted, and repaired in embarrassment
to the plain with the throng. A woman, leading
a child by the hand, and trailing her mantle in a
way unbefitting the decency of women, forced
her way through the files of the soldiers who
were conducted by the prefect, as if bent upon
some affair of importance. Modestus remarked
her conduct, ordered her to be arrested, and
summoned her into his presence, to, inquire the
cause of her running. She replied that she was
hastening to the plain where the members of
the Catholic Church were assembled. " Know
you not," replied Modestus, "that the prefect
is on his way thither for the purpose of con-
demning to death all who are found on the
spot?" "I have heard so," replied she, "and
this is the very reason of my haste ; for I am
fearful of arriving too late, and thus losing the
honor of martyrdom for God." The governor
having asked her why she took her child with
her, she replied, " In order that he may share
in the common suffering, and participate in the
same reward." Modestus, struck with astonish-
ment at the courage of this woman, went to the
emperor, and, acquainting him with what had
occurred, persuaded him not to carry out a
design which he showed to be disgraceful and
disastrous. Thus was the Christian faith con-
fessed by the whole city of Edessa.


CHAP. XIX. DEATH OF THE GREAT ATHANASIUS ;

THE ELEVATION OF LUCIUS, WHO WAS ARIAN-
MINDED, TO THE SEE ; THE NUMEROUS CALAMI-
TIES HE BROUGHT UPON THE CHURCHES IN EGYPT ;
PETER, WHO SERVED AFTER ATHANASIUS, PASSED
OVER TO ROME.


ATHANASIUS, bishop of the church of Alexan-
dria, died about this period, after having com-
pleted his high-priesthood in about forty-six
years.' The Arians having received early intel-
ligence of his death, Euzoius, president of the
Arians at Antioch, and Magnus, the chief treas-
urer, were sent by the emperor, and lost no time
in seizing and imprisoning Peter, whom Atha-
nasius had appointed to succeed him in the
bishopric ; and they forthwith transferred the
government of the church to Lucius.

Hence those in Egypt suffered more griev-
ously than those in other places, and misfortunes
piled upon misfortunes oppressed the members
of the Catholic Church ; for as soon as Lucius
settled in Alexandria, he attempted to take pos-
session of the churches ; he met with opposition
from the people, and the clergy and holy virgins
were accused as originators of the sedition.
Some made their escape as if the city had
fallen into the hands of an enemy ; others were
seized and imprisoned. Some of the prisoners
were afterwards dragged from the dungeons
to be torn with hooks and thongs, while others
were burned by means of flaming torches. It
seemed wonderful how they could possibly sur-
vive the tortures to which they were subjected.
Banishment or even death itself would have
been preferable to such sufferings. Peter,
the bishop, made his escape from prison ; .and
embarking on board a ship, proceeded to
Rome, the bishop of which church held the
same sentiments as himself. Thus the Arians,
although not many in number, remained in pos-
session of the churches. At the same time, an
edict was issued by the emperor, enacting that
as many of the followers of the Nicene doc-
trines should be ejected from Alexandria and
the rest of Egypt, as might be directed by
Lucius. Euzoius, having thus accomplished all
his designs, returned to Antioch.

CHAP. XX. — PERSECUTION OF THE EGYPTIAN MJNKS,
AND OF THE DISCIPLES OF ST. ANTONY. THEY
WERE ENCLOSED IN A CERTAIN ISLAND ON AC-
COUNT OF THEIR ORTHODOXY ; THE MIRACLES
WHICH THEY WROUGHT.

Lucius went with the general of the soldiers
in Egypt, against the monks in the desert;^ for
he imagined that if he could overcome their op-
position by interrupting the tranquillity which

1 Ruf. ii. V, Soc. iv. 20-22. In c. 22 he mentions a letter of
Peter to the churches, giving an account of the persecutions; and
that Sabinus records none of these things. Cf. Theodoret, H. E.
iv. 20-22. In c. 22 a part of Peter's letter is given. Hieron. de
vir. illust. Ixxxvii.; Greg. Naz. Or. xxi. in laudem Magni Atha-
tiasii episcopi A lexandrini.

^ Ruf. ii. 3, 4; Soc. iv. 22, 24; Theodoret, ff. E. iv. 21, 22;
Chronicon pmvt'um to the Vestal letters, from a.d. 367 to 373,
and Chronicon acephalum, 15-19; Greg. Na2. Or. xxv. 11-14,
xxxiv. 3; Cod. Theod. xvi. i, 2; Pcemata, 12, de stipso tt de
episcopis.


358


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 20.


they loved, he would meet with fewer obstacles
in drawing over to his party the Christians who
inhabited the cities. The monasteries of this
country were governed by several individuals of
eminent sanctity, who were strenuously opposed
to the heresy of Arius. The people, who were
neither willing nor competent to enter upon the
investigation of doctrinal questions, received
their opinions from them, and thought with
them ; for they were persuaded that men whose
virtue was manifested by their deeds were in
possession of truth. We have heard that the
leaders of these Egyptian ascetics were two men
of the name of Macarius, of whom mention has
already been made,^ Pambo and Heraclides, and
other disciples of Antony.

On reflecting that the Arians could never suc-
ceed in establishing an ascendency over the
Catholic Church, unless the monks could be
drawn over to their party, Lucius determined to
have recourse to force to compel the monks to
side with him, since he was unable to persuade
them. But here again his scheme failed ; for
the monks were prepared to subject their necks
to the sword rather than to swerve from the
Nicene doctrines. It is related that, at the very
time that the soldiers were about to attack them,
a man whose hmbs were withered and who was
unable to stand on his feet was carried to them ;
and that when they had anointed him with
oil, and commanded him in the name of
Christ, whom Lucius persecuted, to arise and
go to his house, he suddenly became whole.
This miraculous cure openly manifested the
necessity of adopting the sentiments of those to
whom God himself had testified as possessing
the truth, while Lucius was condemned, in that
God heard their prayers and had healed the sick.

But the plotters against the monks were not led
to repentance by this miracle ; on the contrary,
they arrested these holy men by night, and con-
veyed them to an island of Egypt, concealed in
the swamps. The inhabitants of this island had
never heard of the Christian faith, and were
devoted to the service of demons : the island
contained a temple of great antiquity which was
held in great reverence. It is said that when
the monks landed on the island, the daughter
of the priest, who was possessed of a devil,
went to them. The girl ran screaming towards
them ; and the people of the island, astonished
at her sudden and strange conduct, followed.
When she drew near the ship in which were
the holy messengers, she flung herself pleadingly
upon the ground, and exclaimed supplicatingly
in a loud voice, " Wherefore are you come to us,
O servants of the great God ? for we have long
dwelt in this island as our residence ; we have

' In iii. 14; Pallad. H. L. xix., xx.


troubled no one. Unknown to men, we have
concealed ourselves here, and are everywhere
surrounded by these marshes. If, however, it
please you, accept our possessions, and fix your
abode here ; we will quit the island."

Such were her utterances. Macarius and his
companions rebuked the demon, and the girl
became sane. Her father and all her house,
with the inhabitants of the island, immediately
embraced Christianity, and after demolishing
their temple, they transformed it into a church.
On these occurrences being reported at Alexan-
dria, Lucius was overcome with immoderate
grief; and, fearing lest he should incur the hatred
of his own partisans, and be accused of warring
against God, and not against man, he sent secret
orders for Macarius and his companions to be
re-conveyed to their own dwellings in the wil-
dejness. Thus did Lucius occasion troubles
and commotions in Egypt.

About the same period, Didymus the philoso-
pher and several other illustrious men acquired
great renown. Struck by their virtue, and by
that of the monks, the people followed their
doctrines and opposed those of the partisans of
Lucius.

The Arians, though not so strong in point of
numbers as the other party, grievously perse-
cuted the church of Egypt.


CHAP. XXI. — LIST OF THE PLACES IN WHICH THE
NICENE DOCTRINES WERE REPRESENTED ; FAHH
MANIFESTED BY THE SCYTHIANS ; VETR.\NIO, THE
LEADER OF THIS RACE.

Arunism met with similar opposition at the
same period in Osroene ; but in the Cappado-
cias, Providence allotted such a divine and most
educated pair of men, — Basil, the bishop of
Caesarea in that country, and Gregory, bishop
of Nazianzen.^ Syria and the neighboring prov-
inces, and more especially the city of Antioch,
were plunged into confusion and disorder ; for the
Arians were very numerous in these parts, and
had possession of the churches. The members
of the Catholic Church were not, however, few
in number. They were called Eustathians and
Paulinists, and were under the guidance of Pauli-
nus and Meletius, as has been before stated. It
was through their instrumentality that the church
of Antioch was preserved from the encroach-
ments of the Arians, and enabled to resist the
zeal of the emperor and of those in power about
him. Indeed, it appears that in all the churches
which were governed by brave men, the people
did not deviate from their former opinions.

It is said that this was the cause of the firm-
ness with which the Scythians adhered to their

' This is an independent chapter. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iv. 35.


VI. 23.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


359


faith. There are in this country a great num-
ber of cities, villages, and fortresses. The
metropolis is called Tomi ; it is a large and
populous city, and lies on the sea-shore to the
left of one sailing to the sea, called the Euxine.

According to an ancient custom which still
prevails, all the churches of the whole country
are under the sway of one bishop.'

Vetranio ruled over these churches at the
period that the emperor visited Tomi. Valens
repaired to the church, and strove, according to
his usual custom, to gain over the bishop to the
heresy of Arius ; but this latter manfully op-
posed his arguments, and after a courageous
defense of the Nicene doctrines, quitted the
emperor and proceeded to another church,
■whither he was followed by the people. Al-
most the entire city had crowded to see the
•emperor, for they expected that something ex-
traordinary would result from this interview with
the bishop.

Valens was extremely offended at being left
alone in the church with his attendants, and in
resentment, condemned Vetranio to banishment.
Not long after, however, he recalled him, be-
cause, I believe, he apprehended an insurrection ;
for the Scythians were offended at the absence
of their bishop.

He well knew that the Scythians were a cour-
ageous nation, and that their country, by the
position of its places, possessed many natural
advantages which rendered it necessary to the
Roman Empire, for it served as a barrier to
ward off the barbarians.

Thus was the intention of the ruler openly
frustrated by Vetranio. The Scythians them-
selves testify that he was good in all other re-
spects and eminent for the virtue of his Hfe.

The resentment of the emperor was visited
upon all the clergy except those of the Western
churches ; for Valentinian, who reigned over the
Western regions, was an admirer of the Nicene
doctrines, and was imbued with so much rever-
ence for religion, that he never imposed any
commands upon the priests, nor ever attempted
to introduce any alteration for better or for
worse in ecclesiastical regulations. Although
he had become one of the best of emperors,
and had shown his capacity to rule affairs, he
considered that ecclesiastical matters were
beyond the range of his jurisdiction.

CHAP. XXII. AT THAT TIME, THE DOCTRINE OF

THE HOLY GHOST WAS AGITATED, AND IT WAS
DECIDED THAT HE IS TO BE CONSIDERED CON-
SUBSTANTIAL WITH THE FATHER AND THE SON.

A QUESTION was renewed at this juncture

' Sozomen repeats this below, in vii. ig, where he recounts the
various local customs prevailing in the ecclesiastical system.


which had previously excited much inquiry and
now more ; namely, whether the Holy Ghost is
or is not to be considered consubstantial with
the Father and the Son.'

Many contentions and debates ensued on
this subject, similar to those which had been
held concerning the nature of God the Word,
Those who asserted that the Son is dissimilar
from the Father, and those who insisted that He
is similar in substance to the Father, came to
one common opinion concerning the Holy
(ihost ; for both parties maintained that the
Holy Ghost differs in substance, and that He is
but the Minister and the third in point of order,
honor, and substance. Those, on the contrary,
who believed that the Son is consubstantial with
the Father, held also the same view about the
Spirit. This doctrine was nobly maintained in
Syria by Apolinarius, bishop of Laodicea ; in
Egypt by Athanasius,'' the bishop ; and in
Cappadocia and in the churches of Pontus by
Basil* and Gregory.^ The bishop of Rome, on
learning that this question was agitated with
great acrimony, and that it of course was aug-
mented daily by controversies, wrote to the
churches of the East and urged them to receive
the doctrine upheld by the Western clergy ;
namely, that the three Persons of the Trinity
are of the same substance and of equal dignity.
The question having been thus decided by the
Roman churches, peace was restored, and the
inquiry appeared to have an end.

CHAP. XXIII. DEATH OF LIBERIUS, BISHOP OF

ROME. HE IS SUCCEEDED BY DAMASUS AND
SYRICIUS.^ ORTHODOX DOCTRINES PREVAIL EVERY-
WHERE THROUGHOUT THE WEST, EXCEPT AT
MILAN, WHERE AUXENTIUS IS THE HIGK-PRIEST.
SYNOD HELD AT ROME, BY WHICH AUXENTIUS IS
DEPOSED ; THE DEFINITION WHICH IT SENT BY
LETTER.

About this period Liberius died,^ and Damasus
succeeded to the see of Rome.* A deacon
named Ursicius, who had obtained some votes
in his favor, but could not endure the defeat,
therefore caused himself to be clandestinely
ordained by some bishops of little note, and
endeavored to create a division among the
people and to hold a separate church. He
succeeded in effecting this division, and some
of the people respected him as bishop, while
the rest adhered to Damasus. This gave rise

2 This chapter seems curiously out of place after the history of
the Macedonians and that of the Synod of Alexandria. Cf. Soc. ii.
45. iu- 7-

' Athan. Epp. i., iii., iv., ad Serapionem, contra illos qui blasphe-
mant et dicunt spiritum sanctum rem creatam esse.

* Bas. adv. Eunoniium, iii., v.; Lib. de Spiritu Sancto.

^ Greg. Naz. Or. xxxi., xxxiv., xli.

" For Ursicius.

'' A.D. 366, Sept. 24.

' Soc. iv. 29; Ruf. //. E. ii. 10. Soz. omits the name of the
prefect.


36o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 23.


to much contention and revolt among the
people, which at length proceeded to the evil
of wounds and murder. The prefect of Rome
was obliged to interfere, and to punish many of
the people and of the clergy ; and he put an
end to the attempt of Ursicius.^

With respect to doctrine, however, no dissen-
sion arose either at Rome or in any other of the
Western churches. The people unanimously
adhered to the form of belief established at
Nicaea, and regarded the three persons of the
Trinity as equal in dignity and in power.

Auxentius and his followers diftered from the
others in opinion ; he was then president of the
church in Milan, and, in conjunction with a few
partisans, was intent upon the introduction of
innovations, and the maintenance of the Arian
dogma of the dissimilarity of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, according to the inquiry which had
last sprang up, in opposition to the unanimous
agreement of the Western priests. The bishops
of Gaul and of Venetia having reported that
similar attempts to disturb the peace of the
Church were being made by others among them,
the bishops of several provinces assembled not
long after at Rome, and decreed that Auxentius
and those who held his sentiments should be
aliens from their communion. They confirmed
the traditional faith established by the council
of Nicaea, and annulled all the decrees that had
been issued at Ariminum contrary to that faith,
under the plea that these decrees had not re-
ceived the assent of the bishop of Rome, nor of
other bishops who agreed with them, and that
many who had been present at the Synod, had
disapproved of the enactments there made by
them. That such was the decision really formed
by the Synod is testified by the epistle^ ad-
dressed by Damasus, the Roman bishop, and
the rest of the assembly, to the bishops of Illy-
ria. It is as follows :^ —

" Damasus, Valerius,* and the other bishops
of the holy assembly convened at Rome to the
dearly beloved brethren settled in Illyria, greet-
ing in the Lord.

" We believe that you uphold and teach to the
people our holy faith, which is founded on the
doctrine of the apostles. This faith differs in
no respect from that defined by the Fathers ;
neither is it allowable for the priests of God,
whose right it is to instruct the wise, to have
any other thought. We have, however, been
informed by some of our brethren of (iaul and
of Venice, that certain individuals are bent upon
the introduction of heresy.

" All bishops should diligendy guard against

' Cf. Am. Marcel, xxvii. 3. 12-15.

' This epistle is first given by Soz. : it is repeated in Theodoret,
//. E. ii. 22. The Synod was held a.d. 369.

' All these prefatory details are unique with Soz.

' He was bishop of Aquileia. Theodoret calls him Valerianus,


this evil, lest some of their flock should be led
by inexperience, and others by simplicity, to
oppose the proper interpretations.

" Those who devise strange doctrines ought
not to be followed ; but the opinions of our
fathers ought to be retained, whatever may be
the diversity of judgment around us.

" Hence Auxentius, bishop of Milan, has been
publicly declared to be condemned pre-eminently
in this matter. It is right, therefore, that all the
teachers of the Roman world should be of one
mind, and not pollute the faith by divers con-
flicting doctrines.

" For when the malice of the heretics first
began to mature itself, as the blasphemy of the
Arians has even now done, — may it be far
from us, — our fathers to the number of three
hundred and eighteen elect, after making an
investigation in Nicaea, erected the wall against
the weapons of the devil, and repelled the deadly
poison by this antidote.

" This antidote consists in the belief, that the
Father and the Son have one Godhead, one
virtue, and one substance (xprjf^)- It is also
requisite to believe that the Holy Ghost is of
the same hypostasis. We have decreed that
those who hold any other doctrines are to be
aliens from our communion.

" Some have decreed to discolor this saving
definition and adorable view ; but in the very
beginning, some of the persons who made the
innovation at the council of Ariminum, or who
were compelled to vote for the change, have
since, in some measure, made amends by con-
fessing that they were deceived by certain spe-
cious arguments, which did not appear to them
to be contrary to the principles laid down by
our fathers at Nicaea. The number of individ-
uals congregated at the council of Ariminum
proves nothing in prejudice of orthodox doc-
trines ; for the council was held without the
sanction of the bishops at Rome, whose opinion,
before that of all others, ought to have been
received, and without the assent either of Vin-
centius, who during a very long series of years
guarded the episcopate without spot, or of many
other bishops who agreed with those last men-
tioned.

" Besides, as has been before stated, those very
persons who seemed inclined to something illu-
sory, testified their disapprobation of their own
proceedings as soon as they made use of a
better judgment. Therefore your purity must
see that this alone is the faith which was estab-
lished at Nicaea upon the authority of the apos-
tles, and which must ever be retained inviolate,
and that all bishops, whether of the East, or of
the West, who profess the Catholic religion,
ought to consider it an honor to be in commun-
ion with us. We believe that it will not be long


VI. 25.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


361


before those who mamtain other sentiments will
be excluded from communion, and deprived of
the name and dignity of bishop ; so that the
people who are now oppressed by the yoke of
those pernicious and deceitful principles, may
have liberty to breathe. For it is not in the
power of these bishops to rectify the error of
the people, inasmuch as they are themselves
held by error. Let, therefore, the opinion of
your honor also be in accord with all the priests
of God, in which we believe you to be holy and
firm. That we ought so to believe along with
you will be proved by the exchange of letters
with your love."

CHAP. XXIV. CONCERNING ST. AMBROSE AND HIS

ELEVATION TO THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD ; HOW
HE PERSUADED THE PEOPLE TO PRACTICE PIETY.
THE NOVATIANS OF PHRYGIA AND THE PASSOVER.

The clergy of the West having thus antici-
pated the designs of those who sought to intro-
duce innovations among them,^ carefully con-
tinued to preserve the inviolability of the faith
which had from the beginning been handed
down to them. With the soUtary exception of
Auxentius and his partisans, there were no indi-
viduals among them who entertained heterodox
opinions. Auxentius, however, did not live long
after this period. At his death a sedition arose
among the people concerning the choice of a
bishop for the church of Milan, and the city was
in danger. Those who had aspired to the bish-
opric, and been defeated in their expectations,
were loud in their menaces, as is usual in such
commotions.

Ambrosius, who was then the governor of the
province, being fearful of the movement of the
people, went to the church, and exhorted
the people to cease from contention, to remem-
ber the laws, and to re-establish concord and the
prosperity which springs from peace. Before he
had ceased speaking, all his auditors at once
suppressed the angry feelings by which they had
been mutually agitated against each other, and
directed the vote of the bishopric upon him, as
a fulfillment of his counsel to harmony. They
exhorted him to be baptized, for he was still
uninitiated, and begged him to receive the
priesthood. After he had refused and declined,
and unfeignedly fled the business, the people
still insisted, and declared that the contention
would never be appeased unless he would ac-
cede to their wishes ; and at length intelligence
of these transactions was conveyed to the court.
It is said that the Emperor Valentinian prayed,
and returned thanks to God that the very man
whom he had appointed governor had been


6,7.


1 Ruf. H. E. ii. 11; Soc. iv. 28, 30. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. iv.


chosen to fill a priestly office. When he was
informed of the earnest desires of the people
and the refusal of Ambrosius, he inferred that
events had been so ordered by God for the pur-
pose of restoring peace to the church of Milan,
and commanded that Ambrosius should be or-
dained as quickly as possible.^ He was initiated
and ordained at the same time, and forthwith
proceeded to bring the church under his sway
to unanimity of opinion concerning the Divine
nature ; for, while under the guidance of Auxen-
tius, it had long been rent by dissensions on this
subject. We shall hereafter have occasion to
speak of the conduct of Ambrosius after his
ordination, and of the courageous and holy man-
ner in which he discharged the functions of the
priesthood.

About this period, the Novatians of Phrygia,
contrary to their ancient custom, began to cele-
brate the festival of the Passover on the same
day as the Jews. Novatius, the originator of
their heresy, refused to receive those who re-
pented of their sins into communion, and it was
in this respect alone that he innovated upon the
estabhshed doctrine. But he and those who
succeeded him celebrated the feast of the Pass-
over after the vernal equinox, according to the
custom of the Roman church. Some Novatian
bishops, however, assembled about this time at
Pazi, a town of Phrygia, near the source of the
river Sangarus, and agreeing not to follow, in
this point of discipHne, the practice of those who
differed in doctrine from them, established a
new law ; they determined upon keeping the
feast of unleavened bread, and upon celebrating
the Passover on the same days as the Jews.
Agelius, the bishop of the Novatians at Con-
stantinople, and the bishops of the Novatians at
Nicaea, Nicomedia, and Cotyaeum, a noted city
of Phrygia, did not take part in this Synod,
although the Novatians consider them to be
lords and colophons, so to speak, of the trans-
actions affecting their heresy and their churches.
How for this reason, these innovators advanced
into divergence, and having cut themselves off,
formed a separate church, I will speak of at the
right time.

CHAP. XXV. CONCERNING APOLINARIUS : FATHER

AND SON OF THAT NAME. VITALIANUS, THE
PRESBYTER. ON BEING DISLODGED FROM ONE
KIND OF HERESY, THEY INCLINE TO OTHERS.

About this period, Apolinarius openly de-
vised a heresy, to which his name has since
been given.^ He induced many persons to
secede from the Church, and formed separate

' A.D. 374, December.

3 Ruf. H. E. ii. 20; Soc. ii. 46, iii. 16. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. v.
3, 4. Soz. has much independent material.


362


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 25.


assemblies. Vitalius, a presbyter of Antioch,
and one of the priests of Meletius, concurred
with him in the confirmation of his peculiar
opinion. In other respects, Vitalius was con-
spicuous in life and conduct, and was zealous
in watching over those committed to his pastoral
superintendence ; hence he was greatly revered
by the people. He seceded from communion
with Meletius, joined Apolinarius and presided
over those at Antioch who had embraced the
same opinions ; by the sanctity of his life he
attracted a great number of followers, who are
still called Vitalians by the citizens of Antioch.
It is said he was led to secede from the Church
from resentment at the contempt that was mani-
fested towards him by Flavian, then one of his
fellow-presbyters, but who was afterwards raised
to the bishopric of Antioch. Flavian having
prevented him from holding his customary
interview with the bishop, he fancied him-
self despised and entered into communion
with Apolinarius. and held him as his friend.
From that period the members of this sect
have formed separate churches in various
cities, under their own bishops, and have
established laws differing from those of the
Catholic Church. Besides the customary sacred
order, they sang some metrical songs com-
posed by Apolinarius ; for, in addition to his
other learning he was a poet, and skilled in a
great variety of meters, and by their sweetness
he induced many to cleave to him. Men sang
his strains at convivial meetings and at their
daily labor, and women sang them while en-
gaged at the loom. But, whether his tender
poems were adapted for holidays, festivals, or
other occasions, they were all alike to the praise
and glory of God. Damasus, bishop of Rome,
and Peter, bishop of Alexandria, were the first
to learn that the heresy was creeping among the
people, and at a council held at Rome ' they
voted it to be foreign to the Catholic Church.
It is said that it was as much from narrowness of
mind as from any other cause that Apolinarius
made an innovation in doctrine. For when
Athanasius, who administered the church of
Alexandria, was on his road back to Egypt from
the place whither he had been banished by Con-
stantine, he had to pass through Laodicea, and
that while in that city he formed an intimacy
with Apolinarius, which terminated in the strict-
est friendship. As, however, the heterodox con-
sidered it disgraceful to hold communion with
Athanasius, George, the bishop of the Arians in
that city, ejected Apolinarius in a very insulting
manner from the church, under the plea that he
had received Athanasius contrary to the canons
and holy laws. The bishop did not rest here, but

> Held A.D. 377 (Rade), 374 (Hefele). The letters of Damasus,
" lUud sane miramur," " non nobis quidquam," refer to this subject.


reproached him with crimes which he had com-
mitted and repented of at a remote period. For
when Theodotus, the predecessor of George, reg-
ulated the church of Laodicea, Epiphanius, the
sophist, recited a hymn which he had composed
in honor of Dionysus. Apolinarius, who was then
a youth and a pupil of Epiphanius, went to hear
the recitation, accompanied by his father, whose
name also was Apolinarius, and who was a noted
grammarian. After the exordium, Epiphanius,
according to the custom always observed at the
public recitation of hymns, directed the unini-
tiated and the profane to go out of doors. But
neither Apolinarius the younger nor the elder,
nor, indeed, any of the Christians who were
present, left the audience. When Theodotus, the
bishop, heard that they had been present during
the recitation, he was exceedingly displeased ;
he, however, pardoned the laymen who had
committed this error, after they had received a
moderate reproof. With respect to Apolinarius,
father and son, he convicted them both publicly
of their sin, and ejected them from the church ;
for they both belonged to the clergy, the father
being a presbyter, and the son a reader of the
Holy Scriptures. After some time had elapsed,
and when the father and son had evinced by
tears and fasting a degree of repentance ade-
quate to their transgression, Theodotus restored
them to their offices in the church. When George
received the same bishopric, he excommuni-
cated Apolinarius, and treated him as alien to
the Church on account of his having, as before
stated, received Athanasius into communion. It
is said that Apolinarius besought him repeatedly
to restore him to communion, but that he was
inexorable. Apolinarius, overcome with grief,
disturbed the Church, and by innovations in
doctrines introduced the aforesaid heresy;^ and
he thought by means of his eloquence to revenge
himself on his enemy by proving that George
had deposed one who was more deeply ac-
quainted with the Sacred Scriptures than him-
self. Thus do the private animosities of the
clergy from time to time greatly injure the
Church, and divide religion into many heresies.
And this is a proof; for had George, like Theo-
dotus, received Apolinarius on his repentance
into communion, I believe that we should never
have heard of the heresy that bears his name.
Men are prone, when loaded with opprobrium
and contempt, to resort to rivalries and innova-
tions ; whereas when treated with justice, they
become moderate, and remain in the same posi-
tion.

CHAP. XXVI. — EUNOMIUS AND HIS TEACHER AETIUS,
THEIR AFFAIRS AND DOCTRINES. THEY WERE

' Athan. Tomus ad Antioch. 7, 8; Ep. ad Epictetutn ; De in-
carnatione Dotnini nostri Jisu Christi contra Apollinariutn,


VI. 26.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


363


THE FIRST WHO BROACHED ONE IMMERSION FOR
THE BAFFISM.

About this time, Eunomius/ who had held the
church in Cyzicus in place of Eleusius, and who
presided over the Arian heresy, devised another
heresy besides this, which some have called by
his name, but which is sometimes denominated
the Anomian heresy. Some assert that Eunomius
was the first who ventured to maintain that divine
baptism ought to be performed by one immer-
sion, and to corrupt, in this manner, the apos-
tolical tradition which has been carefully handed
down to the present day. He invented, it is
said, a mode of discipline contrary to that of
the Church, and disguised the innovation under
gravity and greater severity. He was an artist
in words and contentions, and delighted in argu-
ments. The generality of those who entertain
his sentiments have the same predilections. They
do not applaud a good course of life or manner,
or mercy towards the needy, unless exhibited
by persons of their own sect, so much as skill
in disputation and the power of triumphing in
debates. Persons possessed of these accom-
plishments are accounted pious above all others
among them. Others assert, I believe more
truthfully, that Theophronius, a native of Cap-
padocia, and Eutychius, both zealous propa-
gators of this heresy, seceded from communion
with Eunomius during the succeeding reign,
and innovated about the other doctrines of
Eunomius and about the divine baptism. They
asserted that baptism ought not to be admin-
istered in the name of the Trinity, but in the
name of the death of Christ. It appears that
Eunomius broached no new opinion on the
subject, but was from the beginning firmly
attached to the sentiments of Arius, and
remained so. After his elevation to the bishop-
ric of Cyzicus, he was accused by his own
clergy of introducing innovations in doctrine.
Eudoxius, ruler of the Arian heresy at Constan-
tinople, summoned him and obliged him to give
an account of his doctrines to the people ; find-
ing, however, no fault in him, Eudoxius exhorted
him to return to Cyzicus. Eunomius, however,
replied, that he could not remain with people
who regarded him with suspicion ; and, it is said,
seized the opportunity for secession, although
it seems that, in taking this step he was really
actuated by the resentment he felt at the refusal
which Aetius, his teacher, had met with, of being
received into communion. Eunomius, it is
added, dwelt with Aetius, and never deviated
from his original sentiments. Such are the

1 Philost. many sections, especially from vi. to x. 4; he says in
iii. 21, that he had written an encomium of Eunomius. Soc. iv. 7,
13, V. 24. The many opinions gathered up by Soz. were probably
contributed by Sabinus. There is more original judgment in this
chapter than in any other. Cf. the great treatises of Basil and Greg.
Nyssa against Eunomius.


conflicting accounts of various individuals ; some
narrate the circumstances in one way, and some
in another. But whether it was Eunomius, or
any other person, who first made these innova-
tions upon the tradition of baptism, it seems to
me that such innovators, whoever they may
have been, were alone in danger, according to
their own representation, of quitting this life
without having received the divine baptism ; for
if, after they had been baptized according to
the mode recommended from the beginning,
they found it impossible to rebaptize themselves,
it must be admitted that they introduced a
practice to which they had not themselves sub-
mitted, and thus undertook to administer to
others what had never been administered to them
by themselves nor by others. Thus, after having
laid down the dogma by some non-existent
principle and private assumption, they proceeded
to bestow upon others what they had not them-
selves received. The absurdity of this assump-
tion is manifest from their own confession ; for
they admit that the uninitiated have not the
power to baptize others. Now, according to
their opinion, he who has not been baptized in
conformity with their tradition is unbaptized as
one not properly initiated, and they confirm this
opinion by their practice, inasmuch as they
rebaptize all those who join their sect, although
previously initiated according to the tradition of
the Catholic Church. These varying dogmas
are the sources of innumerable troubles to relig-
ion ; and many are deterred from embracing
Christianity by the diversity of opinion which
prevails in matters of doctrine.

The disputes daily became stronger, and, as
in the beginning of heresies, they grew ; for they
had leaders who were not deficient in zeal or
power of words ; indeed, it appears that the
greater part of the Catholic Church would have
been subverted by this heresy, had it not found
opponents in Basil and Gregory, the Cappado-
cians. The reign of Theodosius began a htde
while after ; he banished the founders of heretical
sects from the populous parts of the empire to
the more desert regions.

But, lest those who read my history should be
ignorant of the precise nature of the two heresies
to which I have more especially alluded, I think
it necessary to state that Aetius, the Syrian, was
the originator of the heresy usually attributed to
Eunomius ; and that, like Arius, he maintained
that the Son is dissimilar from the Father, that He
is a created being, and was created out of what had
no previous existence. Those who held these
views were formerly called Aetians ; but after-
wards, during the reign of Constantius, when, as
we have stated, some parties maintained that the
Son is consubstantial with the Father, and others
that He is like in substance to the Father, and


364


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HLSTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 26.


when the council of Ariminum had decreed that
the Son is only to be considered like unto the
Father, Aetius was condemned to banishment,
as guilty of impiety and blasphemy against God.
For some time subsequently his heresy seemed
to have been suppressed ; for neither any other
man of note, nor even Eunomius, ventured openly
upon undertaking its defense. _ But when Eu-
nomius was raised to the church of Cyzicus in
place of Eleusius, he could no longer quietly
restrain himself, and in open debate he brought
forward again the tenets of Aetius. Hence, as
it often happens that the names of the original
founders of heretical sects pass into oblivion, the
followers of Eunomius were designated by his
own name, although he merely renewed the her-
esy of Aetius, and promulgated it with greater
boldness than was done by him who first handed
it down.

CHAP. XXVn. — ACCOUNT GIVEN, BY GREGORY THE
THEOLOGIAN, OF APOLINARIUS AND EUNOMIUS,
IN A LETTER TO NECTARIUS. THEIR HERESY
WAS DISTINGUISHED BY THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE
MONKS WHO WERE THEN LIVING, FOR THE HERESY
OF THESE TAVO HELD NEARLY THE ENTIRE EAST.

It is obvious that Eunomius and Aetius held
the same opinions. In several passages of his
writings, Eunomius boasts and frequently testi-
fies that Aetius was his instructor. Gregory,
bishop of Nazianzen, speaks in the following
terms of Apolinarius in a letter addressed to
Nectarius, the leader of the church in Constan-
tinople : ^ " Eunomius, who is a constant source
of trouble among us, is not content with being
a burden to us himself, but would consider him-
self to blame if he did not strive to drag every
one with him to the destruction whither he is
hastening. Such conduct, however, may be tol-
erated in some degree. The most grievous cal-
amity against which the Church has now to
struggle arises from the audacity of the Apoli-
narians. I know not how your Holiness could
have agreed that they should be as free to hold
meetings as we ourselves. You have been fully
instructed by the grace of God, in the Divine
mysteries, and not only understand the defense
of the Word of God, but also whatever inno-
vations have been made by heretics against the
sound faith ; yet it may not be amiss for your
revered Excellency to hear from our narrowness,
that a book written by Apolinarius has fallen
into my hands, in which the proposition sur-
passes all forms of heretical pravity. He affirms
that the flesh assumed for the transformation of
our nature, under the dispensation of the only
begotten Son of God was not acquired for this

' Greg. Naz. Ep. ccii., quoted in part.


end ; but that this carnal nature existed in the
Son from the beginning. He substantiates this
evil hypothesis by a misapplication of the fol-
lowing words of Scripture : ' No man hath
ascended up into heaven.'^' He alleges from
this text, that Christ was the Son of man
before He descended from heaven, and that
when He did descend, He brought with Him
His own flesh which He had already possessed
in heaven which was before the ages and essen-
tially united. He also states another apostolic
saying: 'The second man is from heaven.''
He, moreover, maintains that the man who
came down from heaven was destitute of intel-
lect (vows), but that the Deity of the only be-
gotten Son fulfilled the nature of intellect, and
constituted the third part of the human com-
pound. The body and soul (i/'^x^) formed two
parts, as in other men, but there was no intellect,
but the Word of God filled the place of intel-
lect. Nor does this end the awful spectacle ;
for the most grievous point of the heresy is,
that he asserts that the only-begotten God,
the Judge of all men, the Giver of life, and
the Destroyer of death, is Himself subject to
death ; that He suffered in His own Godhead,
and that in the resurrection of the body in the
third day, the Godhead also was raised from
the dead with the body ; and that it was raised
again from the dead by the Father. It would
take too long to recount all the other ex-
travagant doctrines propounded by these her-
etics." What I have said may, I think, suffice
to show the nature of the sentiments maintained
by Apolinarius and Eunomius. If any one de-
sire more detailed information, I can only refer
him to the works on the subject written either
by them or by others concerning these men. I
do not profess easily to understand or to ex-
pound these matters, as it seems to me the fact
that these dogmas did not prevail and make
further advance is to be attributed, in addition
to the causes mentioned, especially to the
monks of that period ; for all those philosophers
in Syria, Cappadocia, and the neighboring prov-
inces, were sincerely attached to the Nicene
faith. The eastern regions, however, from Cili-
cia to Phoenicia, were endangered by the heresy
of Apolinarius. The heresy of Eunomius was
spread from Cilicia and the mountains of Tau-
rus as far as the Hellespont and Constantinople.
These two heretics found it easy to attract to
their respective parties the persons among
whom they dwelt, and those of the neighbor-
hood. But the same fate awaited them that had
been experienced by the Arians ; for the people
admired the monks who manifested their virtue
by works and believed that they held right opin-


' John iii. 13.


' I Cor. XV. 47.


VI. 29-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


365


ions, while they turned away from those who
held other opinions, as impious and as holding
spurious doctrines. In the same way the Egyp-
tians were led by the monks to oppose the
Arians.

CHAP. XXVIII, — OF THE HOLY MEN WHO FLOUR-
ISHED AT THIS PERIOD IN EGYPT. JOHN, OR,
AMON,^ BENUS, THEONAS, COPRES, HELLES,
ELUS, APELLES, ISIDORE, SERAPION, DIOSCORUS,
AND EULOGIUS.

As this period was distinguished by many
holy men,^ who devoted themselves to a life of
philosophy, it seems requisite to give some
account of them, for in that time there flourished
a very great abundance of men beloved of God.
There was not, it appears, a more celebrated
man in Egypt than John. He had received
from God the power of discerning the future
and the most hidden things as clearly as the
ancient prophets, and he had, moreover, the
gift of healing those who suffered with incurable
afflictions and diseases. Or was another emi-
nent man of this period ; he had lived in soli-
tude from his earliest youth, occupying himself
continually in singing the praises of God. He
subsisted on herbs and roots, and his drink was
water, when he could find it. In his old age he
went, by the command of God, to Thebais,
where he presided over several monasteries, nor
was he without part in divine works. By means
of prayer alone he expelled diseases and devils.
He knew nothing of letters, nor did he need
books to support his memory ; for whatever he
received into his mind was never afterwards
forgotten.

Ammon, the leader of the monks called
Tabennesiotians, dwelt in the same region, and
was followed by about three thousand disciples.
Benus and Theonas likewise presided over
monastic orders, and possessed the gift of fore-
knowledge and of prophecy. It is said that
though Theonas was versed in all the learning
of the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans,
he practiced silence for the space of thirty years.
Benus was never seen to manifest any signs of
anger, and never heard to swear, or to utter a
false, a vain, a rash, or a useless word.

Copres, Helles, and Elias also flourished at
this period. It is said that Copres had received
from God the power of healing sickness and
divers diseases, and of overcoming demons.
Helles had from his youth upwards been trained
in the monastic life, and he wrought many
wonderful works. He could carry fire in his
bosom without burning his clothes. He excited

' Ammon in the text.

- This chapter is probably built on Timothy, bishop of Alexan-
dria's collection; see next chapter. Cf. Ruf. //. .1/., with wliose
order it agrees better than with the series in Palladius, H. L.; cf.
Ruf. H. E. ii. 8.


his fellow-monks to the practice of virtue by
representing that with a good conduct, the
display of miracles would follow. Elias, who
practiced philosophy near the city of Antinoiis,
was at this period about a hundred and ten
years of age ; before this he said he had passed
seventy years alone in the desert. Notwith-
standing his advanced age, he was unremitting
in the practice of fasting and courageous
discipline.

Apelles flourished at the same period, and
performed numerous miracles in the Egyptian
monasteries, near the city of Acoris. He at one
time worked as a smith, for this was his trade ;
and one night the devil undertook to tempt him
to incontinence, by appearing before him in the
form of a beautiful woman ; Apelles, however,
seized the iron which was heating in the furnace,
and burnt the face of the devil, who screamed
like a wild bird and ran away.

Isidore, Serapion, and Dioscorus, at this
period, were among the most celebrated fathers
of the monks. Isidore caused his monastery to
be closed, so that no one could obtain egress
or ingress, and supplied the wants of those
within the walls. Serapion lived in the neighbor-
hood of Arsenoites, and had about a thousand
monks under his guidance. He taught all to
earn their provisions by their labors and to pro-
vide for others who were poor. During harvest-
time they busied themselves in reaping for pay ;
they set aside sufficient corn for their own use,
and shared it with the rest of the monks. Dios-
corus had not more than a hundred disciples ;
he was a presbyter, and applied himself with
great exactness to the duties of his priesthood ;
he examined and carefully questioned those who
presented themselves as candidates for participa-
tion in the holy mysteries, so that they might
purify their minds and not be without a con-
sciousness of any evil they might have com-
mitted. The presbyter Eulogius was still more
scrupulous in the dispensation of the Divine
mysteries. It is said that, when he was officiat-
ing in the priestly office, he could discern what
was in the minds of those who came to him, so
that he could clearly detect sin, and the secret
thoughts of each one of his audience. He ex-
cluded from the altar all who had perpetrated
crime or formed evil resolutions, and publicly
convicted them of sin ; but, on their purifying
themselves by repentance, he again received
them into communion.


CHAP. XXIX. CONCERNING THE MONKS OF THE-
BAIS : 'APOLLOS, DOROTHEUS ; CONCERNING PLVM-
MON, JOHN, MARK, MACARIUS, APOLLODORUS,
MOSES, PAUL, WHO WAS IN FERMA, PACHO,
STEPHEN, AND PIOR.


366


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 29.


Apollos flourished about the same period in
Thebai's. He early devoted himself to a life of
philosophy ; and after having passed forty years
in the desert, he shut himself up, by the com-
mand of God, in a cave formed at the foot of
a mountain, near a very populous district. By
the multitude of his miracles, he soon became
distinguished, and was the head of many monks ;
for he directed them profitably by his instruc-
tions. Timothy, who conducted the church of
Alexandria, has given us a history of his method
of discipline and of what divine and marvelous
deeds he was a worker ; he also narrates the
lives of other approved monks, many of whom
I have mentioned.^

In that time many good monks, to the number
of about two thousand, preached philosophy in
the neighborhood of Alexandria ; some in a
district called the Hermitage, and others more
towards Mareotis and Libya. Dorotheus, a
native of Thebes, was among the most celebrated
of these monks. He spent the day in collecting
stones upon the seashore, which he used in
erecting cells to be given to those who were
unable to build them. During the night, he
employed himself in weaving baskets of palm
leaves ; and these he sold, to obtain the means
of subsistence. He ate six ounces of bread
with a few vegetables daily, and drank nothing
but water. Having accustomed himself to this
extreme abstinence from his youth, he continued
to observe it in old age. He was never seen to
recline on a mat or a bed, nor even to place his
limbs in an easy attitude, or willingly to suri-ender
himself to sleep. Sometimes, from natural lassi-
tude, his eyes would involuntarily close when he
was at his daily labor or his meals ; and when
nodding during his eating, the food would fall
from his mouth. One day, being utterly over-
come by drowsiness, he fell down on the mat ;
he was displeased at finding himself in this
position, and said, in an undertone of voice, " If
angels are persuaded to sleep, you will persuade
also the zealous." Perhaps he might have said
this to himself, or perhaps to the demon who
had become an impediment to his zealous exer-
cises. He was once asked by a person who
came to him while he was exhausting himself,
why he destroyed his body. " Because it de-
stroys me," was his reply.

Piammon and John presided over two cele-
brated Egyptian monasteries near Diolcus.
They were presbyters who discharged their
priesthood very carefully and reverently. It is
said that one day, when Piammon was officiating
as priest, he beheld an angel standing near the


1 Here we learn that Timothy furnished the storehouse for this
monastic biopraphy. The stories of this chapter are probably also
borrowed from him, at least in part. There is a more conspicuous
divergence from Palladius and Rufinus.


holy table and writing down in a book the names
of the monks who were present, while he erased
the names of those who were absent. John had
received from God such power over sufferings
and diseases, that he healed the gouty and
restored the paralytic.

A very old man, named Benjamin, was prac-
ticing philosophy very brilliantly about this
period, in the desert near Scetis. God had be-
stowed upon him the power of relieving the sick
of every disease without medicine, by the touch
only of his hand, or by means of a little oil con-
secrated by prayer. The story is, that he was
attacked by a dropsy, and his body was swollen
to such a size that it became necessary, in order
to carry him from his cell, to enlarge the door.
As his malady would not admit of his lying in a
recumbent posture, he remained, during eight
months, seated on a very large skin, and con-
tinued to heal the sick, without regretting that
his own recovery was not effected. He com-
forted those who came to visit him, and requested
them to pray for his soul ; adding that he cared
Htde for his body, for it had been of no service
to him when in health, and could not, now that
it was diseased, be of any injury to him.

.•\bout the same time the celebrated Mark,
Marcarius the younger, Apollonius, and Moses,
an Egyptian, dwelt at Scetis. It is said that
Mark was, from his youth upwards, distinguished
by extreme mildness and prudence ; he com-
mitted the Sacred Scriptures to memory, and
manifested such eminent piety that Macarius
himself, the presbyter of Celliae,^ declared that
he had never given to him what priests present
to the initiated at the holy table, but that an
angel administered it to him whose hand up to
the forearm he declares himself to have seen.

Macarius had received from God the power of
dispelling demons. A murder which he had
unintentionally committed was the original cause
of his embracing a life of philosophy. He was
a shepherd, and led his flock to graze on the
banks of Lake Mareotis, when in sport he slew
one of his companions. Fearful of being de-
livered up to justice, he fled to the desert.
Here he concealed himself during three years,
and afterwards erected a small dwelling on the
spot, in which he dwelt twenty-five years. He
was accustomed to say that he owed much to
the calamity that had befallen him in early life,
and even called the unintentional murder he had
committed a salutary deed, inasmuch as it had
been the cause of his embracing philosophy
and a blessed mode of life.

Apollonius, after passing his life in the pur-
suits of commerce, retired in his old age to
Scetis. On reflecting that he was too old to

^ Ruf. H. M. 23; the place was thus named from the number of
cells located there.


VI. 29.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


Z^7


learn writing or any other art, he purchased with
his own money a supply of every kind of drug,
and of food suited for the sick, some of which
he carried until the ninth hour to the door of
every monastery, for the relief of those who were
suffering from disease. Finding this practice
advantageous to himself, he adopted this mode
of life ; and when he felt death approaching he
delivered his drugs to one whom he exhorted
to go and do as he had done.

Moses was originally a slave, but was driven
from his master's house on account of his im-
morality. He joined some robbers, and became
leader of the band. After having perpetrated
many evil deeds and dared some murders, by
some sudden conversion he embraced the mo-
nastic life, and attained the highest point of phil-
osophy. As the healthful and vigorous habit of
body which had been induced by his former
avocations acted as a stimulus to his imagination
and excited a desire for pleasure, he resorted to
every possible means of macerating his body ;
thus, he subsisted on a httle bread without
cooked food, subjected himself to severe labor,
and prayed fifty times daily ; he prayed stand-
ing, without bending his knees or closing his
eyes in sleep. He sometimes went during the
night to the cells of the monks and secretly
filled their pitchers with water, and this was very
laborious, for he had sometimes to go ten, some-
times twenty, and sometimes thirty and more,
stadia in quest of water. Notwithstanding all
his efforts to macerate his body, it was long
before he could subdue his natural vigor of
constitution. It is reported that robbers once
broke into the dwelling where he was practicing
philosophy ; he seized and bound them, threw
the four men across his shoulders, and bore
them to the church, that the monks who were
there assembled might deal with them as they
thought fit, for he did not consider himself au-
thorized to punish any one. For they say so sud-
den a conversion from vice to virtue was never
before witnessed, nor such rapid attainments in
monastical philosophy. Hence God rendered
him an object of dread to the demons, and he
was ordained presbyter over the monks at Sce-
tis. After a life spent in this manner, he died
at the age of seventy-five, leaving behind him
numerous eminent disciples.

Paul, Pachon, Stephen, and Moses, of whom
the two latter were Libyans, and Pior, who was
an Egyptian, flourished during this reign. Paul
dwelt at Ferme, a mountain of Scetis, and pre-
sided over five hundred ascetics. He did not
labor with his hands, neither did he receive alms
of any one, except such food as was necessary
for his subsistence. He did nothing but pray,
and daily offered up to God three hundred pray-
ers. He placed three hundred pebbles in his


bosom, for fear of omitting any of these prayers ;
and, at the conclusion of each, he took away
one of the pebbles. When there were no peb-
bles remaining, he knew that he had gone through
the whole course of his prescribed prayers.

Pachon also flourished during this period at
Scetis. He followed this career from youth to
extreme old age, without ever being found un-
manly in self-control by the appetites of the
body, the passions of the soul, or a demon, —
in short, in all those things which the philosopher
should conquer.

Stephen dwelt at Mareotis near Marmarica.
During sixty years, through exactness, he attained
the perfection of asceticism, became very noted
as a monk, and was intimate with Antony the
Great. He was very mild and prudent, and his
usual style of conversation was sweet and profit-
able, and well calculated to comfort the souls of
the afflicted, to transform them into good spirits,,
if even they had previously been depressed by
griefs which seemed necessary. He behaved
similarly about his own afflictions. He was
troubled with a severe and incurable ulcer, and
surgeons were employed to operate upon the dis-
eased members. During the operation Stephen
employed himself in weaving palm leaves, and
exhorted those who were around him not to
concern themselves about his sufferings. He
told them to have no other thought than that
God does nothing but for our good, and that
his affliction would tend to his real welfare, inas-
much as it would perhaps atone for his sins, it
being better to be judged in this life than in the
life to come.

Moses was celebrated for his meekness, his
love, and his power of healing of sufferings by
prayer. Pior determined, from bis youth, to
devote himself to a life of philosophy ; and,
with this view, quitted his father's house after
having made a vow that he would never again
look upon any of his relations. After fifty years
had expired, one of his sisters heard that he was
still alive, and she was so transported with joy
at this unexpected intelligence, that she could
not rest till she had seen him. The bishop of
the place where she resided was so affected by
the groans and tears of the aged woman, that he
wrote to the leaders of the monks in the desert
of Scetis, desiring them to send Pior to him.
The superiors accordingly directed him to repair
to the city of his birth, and he could not say
nay, for disobedience was regarded as unlawful
by the monks of Egypt, and I think also by
other monks. He went with another monk to
the door of his father's house, and caused him-
self to be announced. When he heard the door
being opened, he closed his eyes, and calling his
sister by name, he said to her, '' I am Pior, your
brother; look at me as much as you please."


368


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 29.


His sister was delighted beyond measure at
again beholding him, and returned thanks to
God. He prayed at the door where he stood,
and then returned to the place where he lived ;
there he dug a well, and found that the water
was bitter, but he persevered in the use of it till
his death. Then the height to which he had
carried his self-denial was known ; for after he
died, several attempted to practice philosophy
in the place where he had dwelt, but found it
impossible to remain there. I am convinced
that, had it not been for the principles of philos-
ophy which he had espoused, he could easily
have changed the water to a sweet taste by
prayer ; for he caused water to flow in a spot
where none had existed previously. It is said
that some monks, under the guidance of Moses,
undertook to dig a well, but the expected vein
did not appear, nor did any depth yield the
water, and they were about to abandon the task,
when, about midday, Pior joined them ; he first
embraced them, and then rebuked their want of
faith and littleness of soul ; he then descended
into the pit they had excavated ; and, after en-
gaging in prayer, struck the ground thrice with
a rod. A spring of water soon after rose to the
surface, and filled the whole excavation. After
prayer, Pior departed ; and though the monks
urged him to break his fast with them, he re-
fused, alleging that he had not been sent to
them for that purpose, but merely in order to
perform the act he had effected.^


CHAP. XXX. — MONKS OF SCETIS : ORIGEN, DIDYMUS,
CRONION, ORSISIUS, PUTUBATUS, ARSION, SERA-
PION, AMMON, EUSEBIUS, AND DIOSCORUS, THE
BRETHREN-WHO ARE CALLED LONG, AND EVAGRIUS
THE PHILOSOPHER.

At this period, Origen, one of the disciples of
Antony the Great, was still living at a great age,
in the monasteries of Scetis.^ Also, Didymus,
and Cronion, who was about one hundred and
ten years of age, Arsisius the Great, Putuba-
tus, Arsion, and Serapion, all of whom had
been contemporary with Antony the Great.
They had grown old in the exercise of philoso-
phy, and were at this period presiding over the
monasteries. There were some holy men among
them who were young and middle aged, but who
were celebrated for their excellent and good
qualities. Among these were Ammonius, Euse-
bius, and Dioscorus. They were brothers, but
on account of their height of stature were called
the "Long Brothers."'' It is said that Ammon

1 See another story of Pior in See. iv. 23.

' This chapter may have its basis in the collection of Timothy.
Cf. Palladius, H. L., (or some of the biographies.
' Cf. viii. 12 sqq.


attained the summit of philosophy, and conse-
quently overcame the love of ease and pleasure.
He was very studious, and had read the works
of Origen, of Didymus, and of other ecclesias-
tical writers. From his youth to the day of his
death he never tasted anything, with the excep-
tion of bread, that had been prepared by means
of fire. He was once chosen to be ordained
bishop ; and after urging every argument that
could be devised in rejection of the honor, but
in vain, he cut off one of his ears, and said to
those who had come for him, "Go away. Hence-
forward the priestly law forbids my ordination,
for the person of a priest should be perfect."
Those who had been sent for him accordingly
departed ; but, on ascertaining that the Church
does not observe the Jewish law in requiring a
priest to be perfect in all his members, but merely
requires him to be irreprehensible in point of
morals, they returned to Ammon, and endeav-
ored to take him by force. He protested to
them that, if they attempted any violence against
him, he would cut out his tongue ; and, terrified
at this menace, they immediately took their
departure. Ammon was ever after surnamed
Parotes. Some time afterwards, during the en-
suing reign, the wise Evagrius formed an inti-
macy with him. Evagrius'' was a wise man,
powerful in thought and in word, and skillful in
discerning the arguments which led to virtue
and to vice, and capable in urging others to
imitate the one, and to eschew the other. His
eloquence is fully attested by the works he has
left behind him.* With respect to his moral
character, it is said that he was totally free from
all pride or superciliousness, so that he was not
elated when just commendations were awarded
him, nor displeased when unjust reproaches were
brought against him. He was a citizen of Iberia,
near the Euxine. He had philosophized and
studied the Sacred Scriptures under Gregory,
bishop of Nazianzen, and had filled the office
of archdeacon when Gregory administered the
church in Constantinople. He was handsome
in person, and careful in his mode of attire ;
and hence an acquaintanceship he had formed
with a certain lady excited the jealousy of her
husband, who plotted his death. While the plot
was about being carried forward into deed, God
sent him while sleeping, a fearful and saving
vision in a dream. It appeared to him that he
had been arrested in the act of committing some
crime, and that he was bound hand and foot in
irons. As he was being led before the magis-
trates to receive the sentence of condemnation,
a man who held in his hand the book of the
Holy Gospels addressed him, and promised to
deliver him from his bonds, and confirmed this


♦ Cf. also Soc. iv. 23.


6 PGM. xl.


VI. 32.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


369


with an oath, provided he would quit the city.
Evagrius touched the book, and made oath that
he would do so. Immediately his chains ap-
peared to fall off, and he awoke. He was con-
vinced by this divine dream, and fled the danger.
He resolved upon devoting himself to a life of
asceticism, and proceeded from Constantinople
to Jerusalem. Some time after he went to visit
the philosophers of Scetis, and gladly deter-
mined to live there.

CHAP. XXXI. — CONCERNING THE MONKS OF NITRIA,
AND THE MONASTERIES CALLED CELLS ; ABOUT
THE ONE IN RHINOCORURA ; ABOUT MELAS,
DIONVSIUS, AND SOLON.

They call this place Nitria. It is inhabited
by a great number of persons devoted to a life
of philosophy, and derives its name from its
vicinity to a village in which nitre is gathered.
It contains about fifty monasteries, built toler-
ably near to each other, some of which are in-
habited by monks who live together in society,
and others by monks who have adopted a soli-
tary mode of existence. More in the interior
of the desert, about seventy stadia from this
locality, is another place called Cellia,^ through-
out which numerous little dwellings are dis-
persed hither and thither, and hence its name ;
but at such a distance that those who dwell in
them can neither see nor hear each other. They
assemble together on the first and last days of
each week ; and if any monk happen to be
absent, it is evident that he has been left be-
hind involuntarily, having been hindered by suf-
fering some disease ; they do not all go im-
mediately to see and nurse him, but each one
in turn at different times, and bearing what-
ever each has suitable for disease. Except for
such a cause, they seldom converse together,
unless, indeed, there be one among them capable
of communicating further knowledge concerning
God and the salvation of the soul. Those who
•dwell in the cells are those who have attained
the summit of philosophy, and who are there-
fore able to regulate their own conduct, to live
alone, and are separated from the others for the
sake of quietude. This is what I had briefly to
state concerning Scetis and its philosophers.
Some one would probably censure my writing
as prolix, were I to enter into further details
concerning their mode of life ; for they have
established individual courses of life, labors,
customs, exercises, abstinence, and time, divided
naturally according to the age of the individual.

Rhinocorura was also celebrated at this period,
an account of the holy men, not from abroad,
but who were natives of the place. I have


1 See above, note on c. 29.
H. M. 21, 22; Pallad. H. L. 69.


For Nitria and Cellia, see Ruf.


heard ^ that the most eminent philosophers
among them were Melas, who then administered
the church of the country ; Dionysius, who pre-
sided over a monastery situated to the north of
the city ; and Solon, the brother and successor
to the bishopric of Melas. It is said that when
the decree for the ejection of all priests opposed
to Arianism was issued, the officers appointed
to apprehend Melas found him engaged as the
lowest servant, in trimming the lights of the
church, with a girdle soiled with oil on his cloak,
and carrying the wicks. When they asked him
for the bishop, he replied that he was within,
and that he would conduct them to him. As
they were fatigued with their journey, he led them
to the episcopal dwelling, made them sit down
at table, and gave them to eat of such things as
he had. After the repast, he supplied them
with water to wash their hands ; for he served
the guests, and then told them who he was.
Amazed at his conduct, they confessed the
mission on which they had arrived ; but from
respect to him, gave him full liberty to go where-
ever he would. He, however, replied that he
would not shrink from the sufferings to which
the other bishops who maintained the same
sentiments as himself were exposed, and that
he was willing to go into exile. Having phil-
osophized from his youth, he had exercised him-
self in all the monastic virtues.

Solon quitted the pursuits of commerce to
embrace a monastic life, a measure which tended
greatly to his welfare ; for under the instruction
of his brother and other ascetics, he progressed
rapidly in piety towards God, and in goodness
towards his neighbor. The church of Rhino-
corura having been thus, from the beginning,
under the guidance of such exemplary bishops,
never afterwards swerved from their precepts,
and produced good men. The clergy of this
church dwell in one house, sit at the same table,
and have everything in common.

CHAP. XXXII. MONKS OF PALESTINE : HESYCAS,

EPIPHANIUS, WHO WAS AFTERWARDS IN CYPRUS,
AMMONIUS, AND SILVANUS.

Many monastical institutions flourished in Pal-
estine.'' Many of those whom I enumerated
under the reign of Constantius were still culti-
vating the science. They and their associates
attained the summit of philosophical perfection,
and added still greater reputation to their mon-
asteries ; and among them Hesycas,^ a companion
of Hilarion, and Epiphanius, afterwards bishop
of Salamis in Cyprus, deserve to be particularly
noticed. Hesycas devoted himself to a Ufe of

2 This is independent.

3 This chapter is probably derived from local F'alestinian biogra-
phies familiar to him as a native.

* Hesychius, Hieron. Vit. Hil.


370


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 32,


philosophy in the same locality where his master
had formerly resided ; and Epiphanius ' fixed
his abode near the village of Besauduc, which
was his birthplace, in the government of Eleu-
theropolis. Having been instructed from his
youth by the most celebrated ascetics, and hav-
ing on this account passed the most of his time
in Egypt, Epiphanius became most celebrated
in Egypt and Palestine by his attainments in
monastic philosophy, and was chosen by the
inhabitants of Cyprus to act as bishop of the
metropolis of their island. Hence he is, I
think, the most revered man under the whole
heaven, so to speak ; for he fulfilled his priest-
hood in the concourse of a large city and in a
seaport ; and when he threw himself into civil
affairs, he conducted them with so much virtue
that he became known in a little while to all
citizens and every variety of foreigner ; to some,
because they had seen the man himself, and had
experience of his manner of living; and to -oth-
ers, who had learned it from these spectators.
Before he went to Cyprus, he resided for some
time, during the present reign, in Palestine.

At the same period in the monasteries, Sala-
mines, Phuscon, Malachion, and Crispion, four
brethren, were highly distinguished : they prac-
ticed philosophy near Bethelia, a village of
Gaza ; they were of a resident noble family, and
had been instructed in philosophy by Hilarion.
It is related that the brothers were once jour-
neying homewards, when Malachion was sudden-
ly snatched away and became invisible ; soon
afterwards, however, he reappeared and con-
tinued the journey with his brothers. He did
not long survive this occurrence, but died in the
flower of his youth. He was not behind men
of advanced age in the philosophy of virtuous
life and of piety.

Ammonius lived at a distance of ten stadia
from those last mentioned ; he dwelt near Caph-
arcobra, the place of his birth, a town of Gaza.
He was very exact and courageous in carrying
through asceticism. I think that Silvanus, a
native of Palestine, to whom, on account of his
high virtue, an angel was once seen to minister,
practiced philosophy about the same time in
Egypt. Then he lived at Mount Sinai, and
afterwards founded at Gerari, in the wady, a
very extensive and most noted coenobium for
many good men, over which the excellent Zach-
arias subsequently presided.


CHAP. XXXIII. MONKS OF SYRIA AND PERSIA :

BATTHEUS, EUSEBIUS, BARGES, HALAS, ABBO, LAZA-
RUS, ABDALEUS, ZENO, HELIODORUS, EUSEBIUS OF
CARR-t, PROTOGENES, AND AONES.

> See in books vii. 27 and viii. 14.


Let us pass thence to Syria and Persia," the
parts adjacent to Syria. We shall find that the
monks of these countries emulated those of
Egypt in the practice of philosophy. Battheus,
Eusebius, Barges, Halas, Abbos, Lazarus, who
attained the episcopal dignity, Abdaleus, Zeno,
and Heliodorus, flourished in Nisibis, near the
mountain called Sigoron. When they first en-
tered upon the philosophic career, they were
denominated shepherds, because they had no
houses, ate neither bread nor meat, and drank
no wine ; but dwelt constantly on the mountains,
and passed their time in praising God by prayers
and hymns, according to the law of the Church.
At the usual hours of meals, they each took a
sickle, and went to the mountain to cut some
grass on the mountains, as though they were
flocks in pasture ; and this served for their
repast. Such was their course of philosophy.
Eusebius voluntarily shut himself up in a cell to
philosophize, near Carrse.'* Protogenes dwelt in
the same locality, and ruled the church there
after "Vitus who was then bishop. This is the
celebrated Vitus of whom they say that when
the Emperor Constantine first saw him, he con-
fessed that God had frequently shown this man
in appearances to him and enjoined him to obey
implicitly what he should say. Aones had a
monastery in Phadana ; this was the spot where
Jacob, the grandson of Abraham, on his journey
from Palestine, met the damsel whom he after-
wards married, and where he rolled away the
stone, that her flock might drink of the water of
the well. It is said that Aones was the first who
introduced the life apart from all men, and the
severe philosophy into Syria, just as it was first
introduced by Antony into Egypt.


CHAP. XXXIV. — MONKS OF EDESSA : JULIANUS,
EPHRAIM SVRUS, BARUS, AND EULOGIUS ; FURTHER,
THE MONKS OF CCELE-SVRIA : VALENTINUS,
THEODORE, MEROSAS, BASSUS, BASSONIUS J AND
THE HOLY MEN OF CAL.4TIA AND CAPPADOCIA,
AND ELSEWHERE ; WHY THOSE SAINTS UNTIL RE-
CENTLY WERE LONG-LIVED.

Gadd.anas and Azizus dwelt with Aones, and
emulated his virtues.* Ephraim the Syrian, who
was an historian, and has been noticed ■'' in our
own recital of events under the reign of Con-
stantius, was the most renowned philosopher in
this time, together with Julian, in the neighbor-
hood of Edessa and its adjacent regions. Bar-
ses"and Eulogius were both, at a later period
than that to which we are referring, ordained

' Acain, presumably, from Syrian hiographies. Theodoret, //. ^.
iv. 28, has but one identical name; and the same is true of his His-
toria Religiosa. Battheus, Halas, and Heliodorus are repeated it»
the following chapter.

' Cf. Basil, Ep. cclv. ' See above, iii. 14, 16.

« From Syrian biographies. « Basil, Ep. cclxvii.


VI. 35']


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


Z7^


bishops, but not of any city ; for the title was
merely an honorary one, conferred on them as a
compensation for their excellent conduct ; and
they were ordained in their own monasteries.
Lazarus, to whom we have already alluded, was
ordained bishop in the same manner. Such were
the most celebrated philosophers of asceticism
who flourished in Syria, Persia, and the neigh-
boring countries, so far, at least, as I have been
able to ascertain. The course common to all,
so to speak, consisted in diligent attention to
the state of the soul, which by means of fasting,
prayer, and hymns to God, they kept in constant
preparation to quit the things of this world.
They devoted the greater part of their time to
these holy exercises, and they wholly despised
worldly possessions, temporal affairs, and the ease
and adornment of the body. Some of the monks
carried their self-denial to an extraordinary
height. Battheus, for instance, by excessive ab-
stinence and fasting, had worms crawl from his
teeth ; Halas, again, had not tasted bread for
eighty years ; and Heliodorus passed many
nights without yielding to sleep, and added
thereto seven days of fasting.

Although Coele-Syria and Upper Syria, with
the exception of the city of Antioch, was slowly
converted to Christianity, it was not lacking in
ecclesiastical philosophers, whose conduct ap-
peared the more heroic from their having to
encounter the enmity and hatred of the inhab-
itants of the place. And they nobly refrained
from resistance, or resorting to the law, but
spiritedly endured the insults and blows inflicted
by the pagans. Such, I found, was the course
pursued by Valentian, who, according to some
accounts, was born at Emesa, but according to
others, at Arethusa. Another individual of the
same name distinguished himself by similar con-
duct, as likewise Theodore. Both were from Titti,
which is of the nome of the Apameans ; not less
distinguished were Marosas, a native of Nechilis,
Bassus, Bassones, and Paul. This latter was from
the village of Telmison. He founded many com-
munities in many places, and introduced the
method essential to the knowledge of philosophy,
and finally established the greatest and most dis-
tinguished community of monks in a place called
Jugatum. Here, after a long and honorable life, he
died, and was interred. Some of the monks who
have practiced philosophy in a distinguished
and divine way have survived to our own days ;
indeed, most of those to whom allusion has been
made enjoyed a very long term of existence ; and
I am convinced that God added to the length
of their days for the express purpose of further-
ing the interests of religion. They were instru-
mental in leading nearly the whole Syrian nation,
and most of the Persians and Saracens, to the
proper religion, and caused them to cease from


paganism. After beginning the monastic phil-
osophy there, they brought forward many like
themselves.

I suppose that Galatia, Cappadocia, and the
neighboring provinces contained many other
ecclesiastical philosophers at that time, for these
regions formerly had zealously embraced our
doctrine. These monks, for the most part, dwelt
in communities in cities and villages, for they
did not habituate themselves to the tradition of
their predecessors. The severity of the winter,
which is always a natural feature of that country,
would probably make a hermit life impracticable.
Leontius and Prapidius were, I understand, the
most celebrated of these monks. The former
afterwards administered the church of Ancyra,
and the latter, a man of very advanced age, per-
formed the episcopal functions in several vil-
lages. He also presided over the Basileias, the
most celebrated hospice for the poor. It was
established by Basil, bishop of Caesarea, from
whom it received its name in the beginning, and
retains it until to-day.

CHAP. XXXV. THE WOODEN TRIPOD AND THE

SUCCESSION OF THE EMPEROR, THROUGH A
KNOWLEDGE OF ITS LETTERS. DESTRUCTION OF
THE PHILOSOPHERS ; ASTRONOMY.

Such is the information which I have been
enabled to collect concerning the ecclesiastical
philosophers of that time. As to the pagans,
they were nearly all exterminated about the
period to which we have been referring.^ Some
among them, who were reputed to excel in
philosophy, and who viewed with extreme dis-
pleasure the progress of the Christian religion,
were devising who would be the successor of
Valens on the throne of the Roman Empire, and
resorted to every variety of mantic art for the
purpose of attaining this insight into futurity.
After various incantations, they constructed a
tripod of laurel wood, and they wound up with
the invocations and words to which they are
accustomed ; so that the name of the emperor
might be shown by the collection of letters
which were indicated, letter by letter, through
the machinery of the tripod and the prophecy.
They were gaping with open mouth for
Theodore, a man who held a distinguished
military appointment in the palace. He was a
pagan and a learned man. The disposition of
the letters, coming as far as the delta of his
name, deceived the philosophers. They hence
expected that Theodore would very soon be the
emperor. When their undertaking was informed
upon, Valens was as unbearably incensed, as if
a conspiracy had been formed against his safety.

1 Philost. ix. 15; Eunap. ^ra^>«. ii. 32, 33 ; Am. Marcel, xxix. i.
29-44; Zos. iv. 13; Soc. iv. 19.


372


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[vi. 35.


Therefore all were arrested ; Theodore and the
constructors of the tripod were commanded to
be put to death, some with fire, others with the
sword. Likewise for the same reason the most
brilliant philosophers of the empire were slain ;
since the wrath of the emperor was unchecked,
the death penalty advanced even to those who
were not philosophers, but who wore garments
similar to theirs ; hence those who applied them-
selves to other pursuits would not clothe them-
selves with the crocotium or tribonium, on
account of the suspicion and fear of danger, so
that they might not seem to be pursuing magic
and sorcery. I do not in the least think that the
emperor will be more blamed by right-thinking
people for such wrath and cruelty than the phil-
osophers, for their rashness and their unphilo-
sophical undertaking. The emperor, absurdly
supposing that he could put his successor to
death, spared neither those who had prophesied
nor the subject of their prophecy, as they say he
did not spare those who bore the same name of
Theodore, — and some were men of distinction,
— whether they were precisely the same or similar
in beginning with d and ending with 8. The
philosophers, on the other hand, acted as if the
deposition and restoration of emperors had
depended solely on them ; for if the imperial
succession was to be considered dependent on
the arrangement of the stars, what was requisite
but to await the accession of the future emperor,
whoever he might be ? or if the succe ssion was
regarded as dependent on the will of God,
what right had man to meddle? For it is not
the function of human foreknowledge or zeal to
understand God's thought ; nor if it were right,
would it be well for men, even if they be the
wisest of all, to think that they can plan better
than God. If it were merely from rash curi-
osity to discern the things of futurity that they
showed such lack of judgment as to be ready to
be caught in danger, and to despise the laws
anciently established among the Romans, and at
a time when it was not dangerous to conduct
pagan worship and to sacrifice ; in this they
thought differently from Socrates ; for when
unjustly condemned to drink poison, he refused
to save himself by violating the laws in which he
had been born and educated, nor would he escape
from prison, although it was in his power to do so.

CHAP. XXXVI. — EXPEDITION AGAINST THE SAR-
MATIANS ; DEATH OF VALENTINIAN IN ROME ;
VALENTINIAN THE YOUNGER PROCLAIMED J PER-
SECUTION OF THE PRIESTS ; ORATION OF THE
PHILOSOPHER THEMISTIUS, ON ACCOUNT OF WHICH
VALENS WAS DISPOSED TO TRFJVT THOSE WHO
DIFFERED FROM HIM MORE HUMANELY.

Such subjects as the above, however, are best


left to the examination and decision of individ-
ual judgment.

The Sarmatians * having invaded the western
parts of the empire, Valentinian levied an army
to oppose them. As soon, however, as they
heard of the number and strength of the troops
raised against them, they sent an embassy to
solicit peace. When the ambassadors were ush-
ered into the presence of Valentinian, he asked
them whether all the Sarmatians were similar to
them. On their replying that the principal men
of the nation had been selected to form the em-
bassy, the emperor exclaimed, in great fury, " A
terrible thing do our subjects endure, and a
calamity is surrounding the Roman government,
if the Sarmatians, a barbarous race, of whom
these are your best men, do not love to abide
by themselves, but are emboldened to invade
my government, and presume to make war at all
against the Romans." He spoke in this strain
for some time in a very high pitch of voice, and
his rage was so violent and so unbounded, that
at length he burst simultaneously a blood-vessel
and an artery. He lost, in consequence, a great
quantity of blood, and expired soon after in a
fortress of Gaul.- He was about fifty-four years
of age, and had, during thirteen years, guided
the reins of government with good results and
much distinction. Six days after his death his
youngest son, who bore the same name as him-
self, was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers ;
and soon afterwards Valens and Gratian, his
brother, formally assented to this election,
although they were at first irritated at the sol-
diers having transferred the symbols of govern-
ment to him without their previous consent.
During this period Valens had fixed his resi-
dence at Antioch in Syria, and became more
hostile to those who differed from him. in opin-
ion concerning the divine nature, and he vexed
them more severely and persecuted them. The
philosopher Themistius pronounced an oration
in his presence, in which he admonished him
that he ought not to wonder at the dissension
concerning ecclesiastical doctrines, for it was
more moderate and less than among the pagans,
for the opinions among them are multiform ;
and that, in the number of dogmas leading to
perpetual disputes, necessarily the difference
about them makes more contentions and discus-
sions ; and accordingly it might probably be
pleasing to God not to be so easily known, and to
have a divergence of opinion, so that each might
fear Him the rather, since an accurate knowl-
edge of Him is so unattainable. And in the at-
tempt to summarize this vastness, one would tend
to conclude how great He is and how good He is.'

' Soc iv. 31, 32; Ruf. H. E. ii. 12; Philost. ix. 16.
' Am. Marcel, xxx. 6, 1-4; Zos. iv. 17; Orosius, vii. 32.
^ The extant oration, xii., on this theme was addressed to Valens
at an earlier date.


VI. 37-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


Z7Z


CHAP. XXXVII. CONCERNING THE BARBARIANS BE-
YOND THE DANUBE, WHO WERE DRIVEN OUT BY
THE HUNS, AND ADVANCED TO THE ROMANS, AND
THEIR CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY ; ULPHILAS
AND ATHANARICHUS ; OCCURRENCES BETWEEN
THEM ; WHENCE THE GOTHS RECEIVED ARIANISM.

This remarkable oration of Themistius dis-
posed the emperor to be somewhat more
humane, and the punishments became in con-
sequence less severe than before. He would
not have wholly withdrawn his wrath from the
priests unless the anxieties of public affairs had
supervened, and not permitted him to pursue
them further.' For the Goths, who inhabited
the regions beyond the Ister, and had conquered
other barbarians, having been vanquished and
driven from their country by the Huns, had
passed over into the Roman boundaries. The
Huns, it is said, were unknown to the Thracians
of the Ister and the Goths before this period ;
for though they were dwelling secretly near to
one another, a lake of vast extent was between
them, and the inhabitants on each side of the
lake respectively imagined that their own coun-
try was situated at the extremity of the earth,
and that there was nothing beyond them but
the sea and water. It so happened, however,
that an ox, tormented by insects, plunged into
the lake, and was pursued by the herdsman ;
who, perceiving for the first time that the oppo-
site bank was inhabited, made known the circum-
stance to his fellow-tribesmen. Some, however,
relate that a stag was fleeing, and showed some of
the hunters who were of the race of the Huns the
way which was concealed superficially by the
water. On arriving at the opposite bank, the hunt-
ers were struck with the beauty of the country, the
serenity of the air, and the adaptedness for cul-
tivation ; and they reported what they had seen
to their king. The Huns then made an attempt
to attack the Goths with a few soldiers ; but they
afterwards raised a powerful army, conquered
the Goths in battle, and took possession of their
whole country. The vanquished nation, being
pursued by their enemies, crossed over into the
Roman territories. They passed over the river,
and dispatched an embassy to the emperor,
assuring him of their co-operation in any war-
fare in which he might engage, provided that
he would assign a portion of land for them to
inhabit. Ulphilas, the bishop of the nation,
was the chief of the embassy. The object of
his embassy was fully accomplished, and the
Goths were permitted to take up their abode
in Thrace. Soon after contentions broke out
among them, which led to their division into


1 Soc. iv. 32-35; Philost. ii. 5, ix. 16, 17. Cf. Theodoret, H. E.
iv. 37; Eunap. Fr. i. 5, 6, ii. 34; Am. Marcel, parts of xxvii., xxx.,
xxxi. ; Zos. iv. 10 sqq.


two parts, one of which was headed by Atha-
naric, and the other by Phritigernes. They took
up arms against each other, and Phritigernes
was vanquished, and implored the assistance
of the Romans. The emperor having com-
manded the troops in Thrace to assist and to
ally with him, a second battle was fought, and
Athanaric and his party were put to flight. In
acknowledgment of the timely succor afforded
by Valens, and in proof of his fidelity to the
Romans, Phritigernes embraced the religion of
the emperor, and persuaded the barbarians over
whom he ruled to follow his example. It does
not, however, appear to me that this is the only
reason that can be advanced to account for the
Goths having retained, even to the present day,
the tenets of Arianism. For Ulphilas, their
bishop, originally held no opinions at variance
with those of the Catholic Church ; for during
the reign of Constantius, though he took part,
as I am convinced, from thoughtlessness, at
the council of Constantinople, in conjunction
with Eudoxius and Acacius, yet he did not
swerve from the doctrines of the Nicaean coun-
cil. He afterwards, it appears, returned to
Constantinople, and, it is said, entered into dis-
putations on doctrinal topics with the chiefs of
the Arian faction ; and they promised to lay his
requests before the emperor, and fonvard the
object of his embassy, if he would conform to
their opinions. Compelled by the urgency of
the occasion, or, possibly, thinking that it was
better to hold such views concerning the Divine
nature, Ulphilas entered into communion with
the Arians, and separated himself and his whole
nation from all connection with the Catholic
Church. For as he had instructed the Goths in
the elements of religion, and through him they
shared in a gentler mode of life, they placed
the most implicit confidence in his directions,
and were firmly convinced that he could neither
do nor say anything that was evil. He had, in
fact, given many signal proofs of the greatness
of his virtue. He had exposed himself to
innumerable perils in defense of the faith,
during the period that the aforesaid barbarians
were given to pagan worship. He taught them
the use of letters, and translated the Sacred
Scriptures into their own language. It was on
this account, that the barbarians on the banks of
the Ister followed the tenets of Arius. At the
same period, there were many of the subjects of
Phritigernes who testified to Christ, and were
martyred. Athanaric resented that his subjects
had become Christian under the persuasion of
Ulphilas ; and because they had abandoned the
cult of their fathers, he subjected many indi-
viduals to many punishments ; some he put to
death after they had been dragged before tribu-
nals and had nobly confessed the doctrine, and


374


THE FXCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 37-


others were slain without being pormitteil to
utter a single word m their own detense. It is
said that the officers appointed by Athanaric
to execute his cruel mandates, caused a statue
to be constructed, which they placed on a
chariot, and had it conveyed to the tents of
those who were suspected of having embraced
Christianitv, and who were therefore commandeil
to worship the statue and offer sacrifice ; if they
refused to do so, the men and the tents were
burnt together. Hut I have heard that an out-
rage of still greater atrocity was pcrpetratcil at
this period. Many refused to obey those who
were compelling them by force to sacrifice.
Among them were men and women ; of the latter
some were leading their little children, others
were nourishing their new-born infants at the
breast ; they fled to their church, which was
a tent. The pagans set fire to it, and all were
destroyed.

The Goths were not long in making peace
among themselves ; and in unreasonable excite-
ment, tliey then began to ravage Thrace and to
pillage the cities and villages. Valens, on in-
quiry, learned by experiment how great a mis-
take he had maile ; for he had calculated that
the Goths would always be useful to the empire
and formidable to its enemies, ami had there-
fore neglected the reinforcement of the Roman
ranks. He had taken gold from the cities and
villages under the Romans, instead of the usual
complement of men for the military service.
On his expectation being thus frustratetl, he
quitted .\ntioch and hastened to Constantinople.
Hence the persecution which he had been car-
rying on against Christians differing in ojiinion
from himself, hail a truce. Ku/oius, jiresident
of the .Brians, died, and Dorotheas was proposed
for his government.


CHAP. XXXVIII. — CONCERNING MANIA, THE PHV-
LARCH OF THK SARACENS. WHEN THE TREATY
WITH THK ROMANS WAS DISSOLVED, MOSES,
THEIR HISHOP, WHO MAD BEEN ORDAINED BY
THE CHRISTIANS. RENEWED IT. NARRAIIVK
CONCERNING THE ISH.MAELHES AND THE SARA-
CENS, AND THEIR GOODS ; AND HOW THEY
BEGAN TO BE CHRISI lANIiJED THROUGH ZOCO-
MUS, THEIR PHYLARCH.

Aeoirr this period the king of the Saracens
died,' anil the peace which had previously ex-
isted between that nation and the Romans was
dissolved. Mania,'' the widow of the late mon-
arch, after attaining to the government of her
race, led her troops into Phoenicia and Pales-


> Ruf. //. E. ii. 6: Soc. iv. 36. Cf. Thewlorct. //. E. iv. ty.
yet S02. has original detail in the story of Mania, .mil appcmls the
story of Zocomus. ' Otherwise called Mavia.


tine, as far as the regions of Kgypt lying to the
left of those who sail towards the source of the
Nile, and which are generally denominated Ara-
bia. This war was by no means a contemptible
one, although conducted by a woman. The
Romans, it is said, considered it so arduous and
so perilous, that the general of the Phoenician
troops applied for assistance to the general of
the entire cavalry and infantry of the Kast.
This latter ridiculed the summons, and under-
took to give little alone. He accordingly at-
tacked ^Iania, who commanded her own troops
in person ; and he was rescued with difficulty
by the general of the troops of Palestine and
Phienicia. Perceiving the extremity of the dan-
ger, this general deemed it unnecessary to obey
the orders he had received to keep aloof from
the combat ; he therefore rushed upon the bar-
barians, and furnished his superior an opjiorlu-
nity for safe retreat, while he himself yielded
ground and shot at those who fled, and beat off
with his arrows the enemies who were ]ircssing
upon him. This occurrence is still held in re-
membrance among the people of tlie country,
and is celebrated in songs by the Saracens.

.As the war was still pursued with vigor, the
Romans found it necessary to send an embassy
to Mania to solicit peace. It is said that she
refiised to comply with the request of the em-
bassy, unless consent were given for the ordina-
tion of a certain man named Moses, who prac-
ticed philosophy in a neighboring desert, as
bishop over her subjects. This Moses was a
man of virtuous life, and noted for performing
the divine and miraculous signs. On these con-
ditions being announced to the emjieror, the
chiefs of the army were commanded to seize
Moses, and conduct him to Lucius. The monk
exclaimed, in the presence of the rulers and the
assembled people. " I am not worthy of the
honor of bearing the name and dignity of chief
priest ; but if, notwithstanding my unworthiness
(iod destines me to this oftice, 1 take Him to
witness who created the heavens anil the earth,
that I will not be ordained by the imposition of
the hands of Lucius, which are defiled with the
blood of holy men." Lucius immediately re-
joined, " If you are unacquainted with the
nature of my creed, you do wrong in judging
me before you are in possession of all the cir-
cumstances of the case. If you have been
prejudiced by the calumnies that have been cir-
culated against me, at least allow me to declare
to you what are my sentiments ; and do you be
the judge of them." "Your creed is already
well known to me," replied Moses; "and its
nature is testified by bishops, presbyters, and
deacons, who are suffering grievously in exile,
and the mines. It is clear that your sentiments
are opposed to the faith of Christ, and to all


VI. 40.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


375


orthodox doctrines concerning the Godhead." ^
Having again protested, upon oath, that he
would not receive ordination from them, he
went to the Saracens. He reconciled them to
the Romans, and converted many to Christianity,
and passed his life among them as a priest,
although he found few who shared in his belief.
This is the tribe which took its origin and had
its name from Ishmael, the son of Abraham ;
and the ancients called them Ishmaelites after
their progenitor. As their mother Hagar was a
slave, they afterwards, to conceal the opprobrium
of their origin, assumed the name of Saracens,
as if they were descended from Sara, the wife
of Abraham. Such being their origin, they
practice circumcision like the Jews, refrain from
the use of pork, and observe many other Jewish
rites and customs. If, indeed, they deviate in
any respect from the observances of that nation,
it must be ascribed to the lapse of time, and to
their intercourse with the neighboring nations.
Moses, who lived many centuries after Abraham,
only legislated for those whom he led out of
Egypt. The inhabitants of the neighboring
countries, being strongly addicted to supersti-
tion, probably soon corrupted the laws imposed
upon them by their forefather Ishmael. The
ancient Hebrews had their community life under
this law only, using therefore unwritten customs,
before the Mosaic legislation. These people
certainly served the same gods as the neighbor-
ing nations, honoring and naming them similarly,
so that by this likeness with their forefathers in
religion, there is evidenced their departure from
the laws of their forefathers. As is usual, in the
lapse of time, their ancient customs fell into
oblivion, and other practices gradually got the
precedence among them. Some of their tribe
afterwards happening to come in contact with
the Jews, gathered from them the facts of their
true origin, returned to their kinsmen, and in-
clined to the Hebrew customs and laws. From
that time on, until now, many of them regulate
their lives according to the Jewish precepts.
Some of the Saracens were converted to Chris-
tianity not long before the present reign. They
shared in the faith of Christ by intercourse with
the priests and monks who dwelt near them, and
practiced philosophy in the neighboring deserts,
and who were distinguished by the excellence of
their life, and by their miraculous works. It is
said that a whole tribe, and Zocomus, their chief,
were converted to Christianity and baptized
about this period, under the following circum-
stances : Zocomus was childless, and went to a
certain monk of great celebrity to complain to
him of this calamity ; for among the Saracens,
and I believe other barbarian nations, it was

* See above, vi. 19, 20.


accounted of great importance to have children.
The monk desired Zocomus to be of good cheer,
engaged in prayer on his behalf, and sent him
away with the promise that if he would believe
in Christ, he would have a son. When this
promise was confirmed by God, and when a son
was born to him, Zocomus was initiated, and all his
subjects with him. From that period this tribe
was peculiarly fortunate, and became strong in
point of number, and formidable to the Persians
as well as to the other Saracens. Such are the
details that I have been enabled to collect con-
cerning the conversion of the Saracens and their
first bishop.

CHAP. XXXIX. — PETER, HAVING RETURNED FROM
ROME, REGAINS THE CHURCHES OF EGYPT, AFTER
LUCIUS HAD GIVEN WAV ; EXPEDITION OF VALENS
INTO THE WEST AGAINST THE SCYTHIANS.

Those in every city who maintained the Nicene
doctrine now began to take courage, and more
particularly the inhabitants of Alexandria in
Egypt. Peter - had returned thither from Rome
with a letter from Damasus, confirmatory of the
tenets of Nicgea and of his own ordination ;
and he was installed in the government of the
churches in the place of Lucius, who sailed
away to Constantinople after his eviction. The
Emperor Valens very naturally was so distracted
by other affairs, that he had no leisure to attend
to these transactions. He had no sooner arrived
at Constantinople than he incurred the suspicion
and hatred of the people. The barbarians were
pillaging Thrace, and were even advancing to
the very suburbs, and attempted to make an
assault on the very walls, with no one to hinder
them. The city was indignant at this inertness ;
and the people even charged the emperor with
being a party to their attack, because he did
not sally forth, but delayed offering battle. At
length, when he was present at the sports of the
Hippodrome, the people openly and loudly ac-
cused him of neglecting the affairs of the state,
and demanded arms that they might fight in
their own defense. Valens, offended at these
reproaches, immediately undertook an expedi-
tion against the barbarians ; but he threatened
to punish the insolence of the people on his
return, and also to take vengeance on them for
having formerly supported the tyrant Procopius.

CHAP. XL. — SAINT ISAAC, THE MONK, PREDICTS

THE DEATH OF VALENS. VALENS IN HIS FLIGHT

ENTERS A CHAFF-HOUSE, IS CONSUMED, AND SO
YIELDS UP HIS LIFE.

When Valens was on the point of departing


2 Soc. iv. 37, 38; Eunap. Fr. i. 6; Am. MarceL xxxi. 11. 1-5;
Zos. iv. 22-24.


376


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VI. 40.


from Constantinople,' Isaac, a monk of great
virtue, who feared no danger in the cause of
God, presented himself before him, and ad-
dressed him in the following words : " Give
back, O emperor, to the orthodox, and to those
who maintain the Nicene doctrines, the churches
of which you have deprived them, and the vic-
tory will be yours." The emperor was offended
at this act of boldness, and commanded that
Isaac should be arrested and kept in chains
until his return, when he meant to bring him to
justice for his temerity. Isaac, however, replied,
" You will not return unless you restore the
churches." And so in fact it came to pass. For
when Valens marched out with his army, the
Goths retreated while pursued. In his advances
he passed by Thrace, and came to Adrianople.
When at not great distance from the barbarians,
he found them encamped in a secure position ;
and yet he had the rashness to attack them
before he had arranged his own legions in proper
order. His cavalry was dispersed, his infantry
compelled to retreat ; and, pursued by the ene-


' Philost. IX. 17; Soc. iv. 38; Ruf. H. E. ii. 13. Cf. Theodoret,
H. E. iv. 317-36; Eunap. Fr. i. 6; ii. 40, 41; Am. Marcel, xxxi. 11-
14; Zos. iv. 24. Soz. has wrought with some other material as well.


my, he dismounted from his horse, and with a
few attendants entered into a small house or
tower, where he secreted himself. The barba-
rians were in full pursuit, and went beyond the
tower, not suspecting that he had selected it for
his place of concealment. As the last detach-
ment of the barbarians was passing by the tower,
the attendants of the emperor let fly a volley of
arrows from their covert, which immediately led
to the exclamation that Valens was concealed
within the building. Those who were a little
in advance heard this exclamation, and made
known the news with a shout to those compan-
ions who were in advance of them ; and thus
the news was conveyed till it reached the de-
tachments which were foremost in the pursuit.
They returned, and encompassed the tower.
They collected vast quantities of wood from the
country around, which they piled up against the
tower, and finally set fire to the mass. A wind
which had happened to arise favored the prog-
ress of the conflagration ; and in a short period
the tower, with all that it contained, including
the emperor and his attendants, was utterly
destroyed. Valens was fifty years of age. He
had reigned thirteen years conjointly with his
brother, and three by himself.


BOOK VII.


CHAP. I. WHEN THE ROMANS ARE PRESSED BV

THE BARBARIANS, MAVIA SENDS ASSISTANCE, AND
SOME OF THE POPULACE EFFECT A VICTORY.
GRATIAN COMMANDS EACH TO BELIEVE AS HE
WISHES.

Such was the fate of Valens. The barbarians,^
flushed with victory, overran Thrace, and ad-
vanced to the gates of Constantinople. In this
emergency, a few of the confederate Saracens
sent by Mavia, together with many of the popu-
lace, were of great service. It is reported that
Dominica, wife of Valens, furnished money out
of the public treasury, and some of the people,
after hastily arming themselves, attacked the
barbarians, and drove them from the city.

Gratian, who at this period reigned conjointly
with his brother over the whole Roman Empire,
disapproved of the late persecution that had
been carried on to check the diversity in religious
creeds, and recalled all those who had been
banished on account of their religion. He also
enacted a law by which it was decreed that
every individual should be freely permitted the
exercise of his own religion, and should be
allowed to hold assemblies, with the exception
of the Manichgeans and the followers of Photinus
and Eunomius."

CHAP. II. — GRATIAN ELECTS THEODOSIUS OF SPAIN
TO REIGN WITH HUVL ARIANISM PREVAILS

THROUGHOUT THE EASTERN CHURCHES EXCEPT
THAT OF JERUSALEM. COUNCIL OF ANTIOCH.
THE SETTLEMENT OF THE PRESIDENCY OF THE
CHURCHES.

On reflecting that, while it was indispensably
requisite to check the incursions of the barba-
rians of the Ister in Illyria and Thrace, his
presence was equally necessary in Gaul to repel
the inroads of the Alemanni, Gratian associated
Theodosius ^ with himself at Sirmich, in the gov-
ernment of the empire. Theodosius belonged
to an illustrious family of the Pyrenees in Iberia,
and had acquired so much renown in war, that
before he was raised to the imperial power, he


1 Soc. V. I, 2; Ruf. H. E. ii. 13. Cf. Theodoret, H. E.y. 1,2;
Eunap. Fragm. i. 6.

- Cod. 7>4ifO</. xvi, V. 388. 5-16; the legislation from A. D. 379-388.

' Soc. V. 2-4; Philost. ix. 17; Ruf. H . E. ii. 14. Cf. Theodoret,
H. E. V. 5-7. Soz. has other material; Zos. iv. 24. Cf. Eunap.
Fragm. ii. 42, for an opposite view of Theodosius.


was universally considered capable of guiding
the reins of the empire.

At this period all the churches of the East,
with the exception of that of Jerusalem, were in
the hands of the Arians. The Macedonians
differed but little in opinion from those who
maintained the doctrine of Nicgea, and held
intercourse and communion with them in all
the cities ; and this had been more especially
the case with the Macedonians of Constantino-
ple, ever since their reconciliation with Liberius.
But after the enactment of Gratian's law, some
bishops of the Macedonian heresy took courage
and repossessed the churches from which they
had been ejected by Valens. They assembled
together at Antioch in Caria, and protested that
the Son is not to be declared " consubstantial "
with the Father, but only like unto Him in sub-
stance. From that period, many of the Macedo-
nians seceded from the others, and held separate
churches ; while others, condemning this oppo-
sition and contentiousness of those who had
made these decisions, united themselves still
more firmly with the followers of the Nicene
doctrines.

Many of the bishops who had been banished
by Valens, and who were recalled about this
period in consequence of the law of Gratian,
manifested no ambition to be restored to the
highest offices of the Church ; but they preferred
the unity of the people, and therefore begged the
Arian bishops to retain the posts they occupied,
and not to rend by dissension the Church, which
had been transmitted by God and the apostles
as one, but which contentiousness and ambition
for precedence had divided into many parts.
Eulalius, bishop of Amasia in Pontus, was one
of those who pursued this course of conduct.
It is said that when he returned from exile, he
found that his church was presided over by an
Arian bishop, and that scarcely fifty inhabitants
of the city had submitted to the control of this
new bishop. Eulalius, desiring unity above all
other considerations, offered to take part with
the Arian bishop in the government of the
church, and expressly agreed to allow him the
precedence. But as the Arian would not comply
with this proposition, it was not long before he
found himself deserted by the few who had fol-
lowed him, and who went over to the other party.


378


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 3.


CHAP. III. — CONCERNING ST. MELETIUS AND PAU-
LINUS, BISHOP OF ANTIOCH. THEIR OATH RE-
SPECTING THE EPISCOPAL SEE.

In consequence of this law, Meletius returned
about this period to Antioch in Syria ; and his
presence gave rise to great contention among
the people.' Paulinus, whom Valens, from ven-
eration for his piety, had not ventured to banish,
was still alive. The partisans of Meletius, there-
fore, proposed his association with Pauhnus,
who condemned the ordination of Meletius,
because it had been conferred by Arian bishops ;
and yet the supporters of Meletius went forward
by force into the work they had devised ; for
they were not few in number, and so placed
Meletius on the episcopal throne in one of the
suburban churches. The mutual animosity of
the two parties increased, and sedition was ex-
pected, had not a remarkable plan for the resto-
ration of concord prevailed. For it seemed best,
to take oaths from those who were considered
elegible, or who were expected to occupy the
episcopal see of that place. Of these there were
five besides Flavian. These promised that they
would neither strive for, nor accept the episco-
pate should an ordination take place among
them during the life of Paulinus and Meletius,
and that in the event of the decease of either of
these great men, the other alone should suc-
ceed to the bishopric. On their ratifying this
promise with oaths, unanimity was restored
among almost all the people ; a few of the
Luciferites still diverged because Meletius had
been ordained by heretics. On the termination
of this contest, Meletius proceeded to Con-
stantinople, where many other bishops had as-
sembled together to deliberate on the necessity
of translating Gregory from the bishopric of
Nazianzen to that of this city.

CHAP. IV. — REIGN OF THEODOSIUS THE GREAT;
HE WAS INITUTED INTO DIVINE BAPTISM BY
ASCHOLIUS, BISHOP OF THESSALONICA. THE LET-
TERS HE ADDRESSED TO THOSE WHO DID NOT
HOLD THE DEFINITION OF THE COUNCIL OF NICE.

As Gaul was about this period infested by
the incursions of the Alemanni,^ Gratian re-
turned to his paternal dominions, which he had
reserved for himself and his brother, when he
bestowed the government of Illyria and of the
Eastern provinces upon Theodosius. He ef-
fected his purpose with regard to the barbarians ;
and Theodosius was equally successful against
the tribes from the banks of the Ister ; he de-
feated them, compelled them to sue for peace,
and, after accepting hostages from them, pro-

• Soc. V. s; Ruf. f/. E. ii. 21; Theodoret, //. E. v. 3.
' Soc. V. 6; Philost. ix. 19. Independent points by Soz. Cf.
Zos. iv. 25-27; cf. Eunap. Fragm. i. 7, ii. 43-46.


ceeded to Thessalonica. He fell ill while in this
city, and after receiving instruction from Ascho-
lius, the bishop, he was initiated, and was soon
after restored to health. The parents of Theo-
dosius were Christians, and were attached to the
Nicene doctrines ; he was pleased with Ascho-
lius, who maintained the same doctrines, and
was, in a word, endowed with every virtue of
the priesthood. He also rejoiced at finding
that the Arian heresy had not been participated
in by Illyria.^ He inquired concerning the
religious sentiments which were prevalent in the
other provinces, and ascertained that, as far as
Macedonia,* all the churches were like minded,
and all held that equal homage ought to be ren-
dered to God the Word, and to the Holy Ghost,
as to God the Father ; but that towards the East,
and particularly at Constantinople, the people
were divided into many different heresies. Re-
flecting that it would be better to propound his
own religious views to his subjects, so as not to
appear to be using force by commanding the
unwilling subject to worship contrary to his
judgment, Theodosius enacted a law at Thessa-
lonica, which he caused to be published at Con-
stantinople, well knowing that the rescript would
speedily become public to all the other cities, if
issued from that city, which is as a citadel of the
whole empire. He made known by this law his
intention of leading all his subjects to the recep-
tion of that faith which Peter, the chief of the
apostles, had, from the beginning, preached to
the Romans, and which was professed by Dama-
sus, bishop of Rome, and by Peter, bishop of
Alexandria. He enacted* that the title of
" Catholic Church " should be exclusively con-
fined to those who rendered equal homage to
the Three Persons of the Trinity, and that those
individuals who entertained opposite opinions
should be treated as heretics, regarded with
contempt, and delivered over to punishment.


CHAP. V. — GREGORY, THE THEOLOGIAN, RECEIVES
FROM THEODOSIUS THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
CHURCHES. EXPULSION OF DEMOPHILUS, AND
OF ALL WHO DENY in.KT THE SON IS ** CON-
SUBSTANTIAL " WITH THE FATHER.

Soon after the enactment of this law, Theo-
dosius went to Constantinople.® The Arians,
under the guidance of Demophilus, still retained
possession of the churches. Gregory of Nazi-
anzen presided over those who maintain the
"consubstantiality " of the Holy Trinity, and

' The same testimony is given by Basil, in his letter to Valeria-
nus, bishop of Illyria, Ep. xci., and in the letter to the Neo-Caesa-
reans, Ef>. cciv.

* This is also plain from the acts of the council of Aquileia, a.d.
381. Hard. vol. 1.

* Cod. Theod. xvi., under " de Fide Catkolica," 2.

" Soc. V. 6; Philost. ix. iq; Theodoret, H. E. v. 8; Marcellinus
Comes, Chronicon, s. a.d. 380.


VII. 6.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


379


assembled them together in a Httle dwelHng,
which had been altered into the form of a house
of prayer, by those who held the same opinions
and had a like form of worship. It subsequently
became one of the most conspicuous in the city,
and is so now, not only for the beauty and num-
ber of its structures, but also for the advantages
accruing to it from the visible manifestations of
God. For the power of God was there mani-
fested, and was helpful both in waking visions
and in dreams, often for the relief of many dis-
eases and for those afflicted by some sudden
transmutation in their affairs. The power was
accredited to Mary, the Mother of God, the holy
virgin, for she does manifest herself in this way.
The name of Anastasia was given to this church,
because, as I believe, the Nicene doctrines which
were fallen into disuse in Constantinople, and,
so to speak, buried by reason of the power of the
heterodox, arose from the dead and were again
quickened through the discourses of Gregory ;
or, as I have heard, some affirm with assurance
that one day, when the people were met together
for worship in this edifice, a pregnant woman
fell from the highest gallery, and was found dead
on the spot ; but that, at the prayer of the whole
congregation, she was restored to life, and she
and the infant were saved. On account of the
occurrence of this divine marvel, the place, as
some assert, obtained its name.

The emperor sent to command Demophilus
to conform to the doctrines of Nicaea, and to
lead the people to embrace the same sentiments,
or else to vacate the churches. Demophilus
assembled the people, acquainted them with the
imperial edict, and informed them that it was
his intention to hold a church the next day with-
out the walls of the city, in accordance, he said,
with the Divine law, which commands us when
we are persecuted in one city to " flee unto
another." ^ From that day he always held
church without the city with Lucius, who was
formerly the bishop of the Arians at Alexandria ;
and who, after having been expelled, as above
related, from that city, fled to Constantinople
and fixed his residence there. When Demophi-
lus and his followers had quitted the church, the
emperor entered therein and engaged in prayer ;
and from that period those who maintained the
consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity held pos-
session of the houses of prayer. These events
occurred in the fifth year of the consulate of
Gratian, and in the first of that of Theodosius,
and after the churches had been during forty
years in the hands of the Arians.

CHAP. VI. CONCERNING THE ARIANS ; AND FUR-
THER, THE SUCCESS OF EUNOMIUS. BOLDNESS
OF ST. AMPHILOCHIUS TOWARD THE EMPEROR.

' Matt. X. 23.


The Arians, who were still very strong in
point of numbers,^ and who, through the pro-
tection formerly granted by Constantius and
Valens, were still convening without fear, and
discoursing publicly concerning God and the
Divine nature, now determined upon making an
attempt to gain over the emperor to their party,
through the intervention of individuals of their
sect who held appointments at court ; and they
entertained hopes of succeeding in this project,
as well as they had succeeded in the case of
Constantius. These machinations excited great
anxiety and fear among the members of the
Catholic Church ; but the chief cause of their
apprehension was the reasoning power of Euno-
mius. It appears that, during the reign of
Valens, Eunomius had some dispute with his
own clergy at Cyzicus, and had in consequence
seceded from the Arians, and retired to Bithynia,
near Constantinople. Here multitudes resorted
to him ; some also gathered from different quar-
ters, a few with the design of testing his princi-
ples, and others merely from the desire of listen-
ing to his discourses. His reputation reached the
ears of the emperor, who would gladly have held
a conference with him. But the Empress Flacilla*
studiously prevented an interview from taking
place between them ; for she was the most faithful
guard of the Nicene doctrines, and feared least
Eunomius might, by his powers of disputation,
induce a change in the sentiments of the emperor.

In the meantime, while these intrigues were
being carried on by each party, it is said that
the bishops then residing in Constantinople went
to the emperor, to render him the customary
salutations. An old priest from a city of httle
note,* and who was simple and unworldly, yet
well instructed in Divine subjects, formed one
of this party. The rest saluted the emperor
with uncovered head and very reverently. The
aged priest greeted him in the same form ; but,
instead of rendering equal honor to the prince,
who was seated beside his father, the old priest
approached him, patted him familiarly, and
called him his dear child. The emperor was
incensed and enraged at the indignity offered
to his son, in that he had not been accorded
like honor ; and commanded that the old man
should be thrust from his presence with violence.
While being pushed away, hither and thither,
however, the old priest turned around and ex-
claimed, " Reflect, O emperor, on the wrath of
the Heavenly Father against those who do not
honor His Son as Himself, and who have the
audacity to assert that the Son is inferior to the


2 Independent chapter. Cf. Philost. ix. 13, 14.

3 She was the first, and not the second, wife of Theodosius, and
the mother of Arcadius and Honorius. Her funeral panegyric was
delivered hy Gregory of Nyssa (vol. iii. 877), as well as that of her
daughter Pulcheria, {id. 863). Cf. Philost. x. 7 (Placidia).

* Theodoret, H. E. v. 16, refers this incident to Amphilochius,
bishop of Iconium and Nicephorus follows him, xii. 9.


38o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 6.


Father." The emperor felt the force of this
observation, recalled the priest, apologized to
him for what had occurred, and confessed that
he had spoken the truth. The emperor was
henceforward less disposed to hold intercourse
with heretics, and he prohibited contests and
assemblies in the markets. He made it danger-
ous to hold discussions of this kind about the
substance and nature of God, by enacting a law,
and defining the punishments in this matter.'

CHAP. VII. — CONCERNING THE SECOND HOLY GEN-
ERAL COUNCIL, AND THE PL.\CE AND C.WSE OF
ITS CONVENTION. ABDICATION OF GREGORY THE
THEOLOGLU^.

The emperor soon after convened a council
of orthodox bishops, for the purpose of con-
firming the decrees of Nicaea, and of electing
a bishop to the vacant see of Constantinople.-
He likewise summoned the Macedonians to this
assembly ; for as their doctrines differed but
little from those of the Catholic Church, he
judged that it would be easy to effect a reunion
with them. About a hundred and fifty bishops
who maintained the consubstantiality of the
Holy Trinity, were present at this council, as
likewise thirty-six of the Macedonian bishops,
chiefly from the cities of the Hellespont ; of
whom the principal were Eleusius, bishop of
Cyzicus, and Marcian, bishop of Lampsacus.
The other party was under the guidance of Tim-
othy, who had succeeded his brother Peter in
the see of Alexandria ; of Meletius, bishop of
Antioch, who had repaired to Constantinople a
short time previously, on account of the election
of Gregory, and of Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem,
who had at this period renounced the tenets of
the Macedonians which he previously held.
Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica, Diodorus,
bishop of Tarsus, and Acacius, bishop of Berea,
were also present at the council. These latter
unanimously maintained the decrees of Nicaea,
and urged Eleusius and his partisans to conform
to these sentiments, reminding them, at the
same time, of the embassy they had formerly
deputed to Liberius, and of the confession they
conveyed to him through the medium of Eus-
tathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus, as has been
narrated. The Macedonians, however, declared
openly that they would never admit the Son to
be of the same substance as the Father, what-
ever confession they might formerly have made
to Liberius, and immediately withdrew. They
then wTote to those of their adherents in every
city, exhorting them not to conform to the doc-
trines of Nicaea.


' Cod. Theod. xvi. iv. De his, qui super religione conUn-
dunt, 2.

» -Soc. V. 7, 8; cf. Theodoret, //. E. v. 7, 8; Ruf. H. E. 11. 19;
Marcell. Chron. s. a.d. 381.


The bishops who remained at Constantinople
now turned their attention to the election of a
prelate to the see of that city. It is said that
the emperor, from profound admiration of the
sanctity and eloquence of Gregory, judged that
he was worthy of this bishopric, and that, from
reverence of his virtue, the greater number of
the Synod was of the same opinion. Gregory
at first consented to accept the presidency of
the church of Constantinople ; but afterwards,
on ascertaining that some of the bishops, par-
ticularly those of Egpyt, objected to the elec-
tion, he withdrew his consent. For my part,
this wisest of men is worthy of admiration, not
only for universal qualifications, but not the least
for his conduct under the present circumstances.
His eloquence did not inspire him with pride,
nor did vainglory lead him to desire the con-
trol of a church, which he had received when
it was no longer in danger. He surrendered
his appointment to the bishops when it was
required of him, and never complained of
his many labors, or of the dangers he had in-
curred in the suppression of heresies. Had he
retained possession of the bishopric of Con-
stantinople, it would have been no detriment to
the interests of any individual, as another bishop
had been appointed in his stead at Nazianzen.
But the council, in strict obedience to the laws
of the fathers and ecclesiastical order, withdrew
from him, with his own acquiescence, the de-
posit which had been confided to him, without
making an exception in favor of so eminent a
man. The emperor and the priests therefore
proceeded to the election of another bishop,
which they regarded as the most important
affair then requiring attention ; and the emperor
was urgent that diligent investigations might be
instituted, so that the most excellent and best
individual might be intrusted with the high-
priesthood of the great and royal city. The
council, however, was divided in sentiment ; for
each of the members desired to see one of his
own friends ordained over the church.

CHAP. VIII. — ELECTION OF NECTARIUS TO THE
SEE OF CONSTANTINOPLE ; HIS BIRTHPLACE AND
EDUCATION.

A CERTAIN man of Tarsus in Cilicia, of the
illustrious order of senator, was at this period
residing at Constantinople.' Being about to
return to his own country, he called upon Dio-
dorus, bishop of Tarsus, to inquire whether he
had any letters to send by him. Diodorus was
fully intent upon the ordination, which was the
subject then engrossing universal attention of
the men. He had no sooner seen Nectarius
than he considered him worthy of the bishopric,

' Soc. V. 8; cf. Theodoret, //. £.v. 8; Marcell. s. A.D. 381. S02.
is entirely iadependcnt.


VII. 9.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


381


and straightway determined this in his own mind
as he reflected on the venerable age of the man,
his form so befitting a priest, and the suavity of
his manners. He conducted him, as if upon
some other business, to the bishop of Antioch,
and requested him to use his influence to pro-
cure this election. The bishop of Antioch de-
rided this request, for the names of the most
eminent men had already been proposed for
consideration. He, however, called Nectarius
to him, and desired him to remain for a short
time with him. Some time after, the emperor
commanded the priests to draw up a list of the
names of those whom they thought worthy of
the ordination, reserving to himself the right of
choosing any one of those whose names were
thus submitted to him. All the bishops complied
with this mandate ; and, among the others, the
bishop of Antioch wrote down the names of
those whom he proposed as candidates for the
bishopric, and, at the end of his list, from con-
sideration for Diodorus, he inserted the name of
Nectarius. The emperor read the list of those
inscribed and stopped at the name of Nectarius
at the end of the document, on which he placed
his finger, and seemed for some time lost in re-
flection ; ran it up to the beginning, and again
went through the whole, and chose Nectarius.
This nomination excited great astonishment,
and all the people were anxious to ascertain who
Nectarius was, his manner of life, and birthplace.
When they heard that he had not been initiated,
their amazement was increased at the decision
of the emperor. I believe that Diodorus him-
self was not aware that Nectarius had not been
baptized.; for, had he been acquainted with this
fact, he would not have ventured to give his
vote for the priesthood to one uninitiated. It
appears reasonable to suppose, that on perceiv-
ing that Nectarius was of advanced age, he took
it for granted that he had been initiated long
previously. But these events did not take place
without the interposition of God. For when
the emperor was informed that Nectarius had
not been initiated, he remained of the same
opinion, although opposed >by many priests.
When at last, consent had been given to the im-
perial mandate, Nectarius was initiated, and
while yet clad in his initiatory robes, was pro-
claimed bishop of Constantinople by the unani-
mous voice of the Synod. Many have conjec-
tured that the emperor was led to make this
election by a Divme revelation. I shall not de-
cide whether this conjecture be true or false ;
but I feel convinced, when I reflect on the ex-
traordinary circumstances attending this ordina-
tion, that the events were not brought about with-
out the Divine strength ; and that God led this
mild and virtuous and excellent man into the
priesthood. Such are the details which I have


been able to ascertain concerning the ordination
of Nectarius,


CHAP. IX. — DECREES OF THE SECOND GENERAL
COUNCIL. MAXIMUS, THE CYNICAL PHILOSOPHER.

After these transactions, Nectarius and the
other priests assembled together,' and decreed
that the faith established by the council of Nicaea
should remain dominant, and that all heresies
should be condemned ; that the churches every-
where should be governed according to the
ancient canons ; that each bishop should remain
in his own church, and not go elsewhere under
any light pretext ; or, without invitation, perform
ordinations in which he had no right to inter-
fere, as had frequently been the case in the
Catholic Church during the times of persecu-
tion. They likewise decreed that the affairs of
each church should be subjected to the investi-
gation and control of a council of the province ;
and that the bishop of Constantinople should
rank next in point of precedence to the bishop
of Rome, as occupying the see of New Rome ;
for Constantinople was not only already favored
with this appellation, but was also in the enjoy-
ment of many privileges, — such as a senate of
its own, and the division of the citizens into
ranks and orders; it was also governed by its
own magistrates, and possessed contracts, laws,
and immunities in equal degree with those of
Rome in Italy.

The council also decreed that Maximus had
not been nor was now a bishop ; and that those
individuals whom he had ordained were not of
the clergy ; and that all that had been done by
him, or in his name, was null and void. Max-
imus was a native of Alexandria, and, by profes-
sion, a cynical philosopher. He was zealously
attached to the Nicene doctrines, and had been
secretly ordained bishop of Constantinople by
bishops who had assembled in that city from
Egypt.

Such were the decrees of the council. They
were confirmed by the emperor, who enacted ^
that the faith established at Nicsea should be
dominant, and that the churches everywhere
should be placed in the hands of those who
acknowledged one and the same Godhead in
the hypostasis of three Persons of equal honor
and of equal power ; namely, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. To designate them
still more precisely, the emperor declared that
he referred to those who held communion with
Nectarius, at Constantinople, and with Timothy,
bishop of Alexandria, in Egypt ; in the churches
of the East with Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus,

^ Soc. V. 8; cf. Theodoret, H. E. v. 8, 9. The latter chapter
gives the text of the letter of this Synod to the Synod of Rome.
Soz. is here independent.

2 Cod. Theod. xvi. 3.


382


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 9.


and in Syria with Pelagius, bishop of Laodicea,
and in Asia with Amphilochius, president of the
churches in Iconium ; to those in the cities by
the Pontus, from Bithynia to Armenia, who held
communion with Helladius, bishop of the church
of Caesarea in Cappadocia ; with Gregory, bishop
of Nyssa ; and with Otreinus, bishop of MeH-
tine ; and to the cities of Thrace and Scythia,
who held communion with Terentius, bishop of
Tomi, and with Martyrius, bishop of Marcian-
opolis. The emperor was personally acquainted
with all these bishops, and had ascertained that
they governed their respective churches wisely
and piously. After these transactions, the
council was dissolved, and each of the bishops
returned homewards.

CHAP. X. CONCERNING MART^'RIUS OF CILICIA.

TRANSLATION OF THE REMAINS OF ST. PAUL THE
CONFESSOR, AND OF MELETIUS, BISHOP OF ANTIOCH.

Nectarius made himself acquainted with the
routine of sacerdotal ceremonies under the in-
struction of Cyriacus,^ bishop of Adana, whom
he had requested Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, to
leave with him for a short period. Nectarius
also retained several other Cilicians with him,
amongst whom was Martyrius, his physician, who
had been a witness of the irregularities of his
youth. Nectarius was desirous of ordaining him
deacon ; but Martyrius refused the honor under
the plea of his own unworthiness of such a divine
service, and called upon Nectarius himself to
witness as to the course of his past life. To this
Nectarius replied as follows : " Although I am
now a priest, do you not know that my past
career was a more guilty one than yours, inas-
much as you were but an instrument in my
numerous profligacies ? " " But you, O blessed
one," replied Martyrius, " were cleansed by bap-
tism, and were then accounted worthy of the
priesthood. Both these ordinances are appointed
by the Divine law for purification from sin, and
it seems to me that you now differ in no respect
from a new-born infant ; but I long ago received
holy baptism, and have since continued in the
same abusive course." It was under this plea
that he excused himself from receiving ordina-
tion ; and I commend the man for his refusal,
and therefore would give him a part in my
history.

The Emperor Theodosius, on being informed
of various events connected with Paul,- formerly
bishop of Constantinople, caused his body to be
removed to the church erected by Macedonius,
his enemy, and buried there. This temple is a
spacious and most distinguished edifice, and is
still named after Paul. Hence many persons

> Most of this chapter is independent with Soz.
* Soc. V. 9. Soz. IS independent.


who are ignorant of the facts of the case, par-
ticularly women and the mass of the people, im-
agine that Paul, the apostle, is interred therein.
The remains of Meletius were at the same time
conveyed to Antioch, and deposited near the
tomb of Babylas the martyr. It is said that
through every public way, by the command of
the emperor, the relics were received within the
walls in every city, contrary to Roman custom,
and were honored with singing of psalms an-
tiphonally in such places, until they were trans-
ferred to Antioch.


CHAP. XI. — ORDINATION OF FLAVIAN AS BISHOP OF
ANTIOCH, AND SUBSEQUENT OCCURRENCES ON
ACCOUNT OF THE OATH.

After the pompous interment of the remains
of Meletius, Flavian was ordained in his stead,
and that, too, in direct violation of the oath he
had taken;'' for Paulinus was still alive. This
gave rise to fresh troubles in the church of
Antioch. Many persons refused to maintain
communion with Flavian, and held their church
apart with Paulinus. Even the priests differed
among themselves on this subject. The Egyp-
tians, Arabians, and Cypriots were indignant at
the injustice that had been manifested towards
Paulinus. On the other hand, the Syrians, the
Palestinians, the Phoenicians, and the greater
part of Armenia, Cappadocia, Galatia, and
Pontus, sided with Flavian. The bishop of
Rome, and all the Western priests, regarded the
conduct of Flavian with the utmost displeasure.
They addressed the customary epistles, called
synodical, to Paulinus as bishop of Antioch, and
took no notice of Flavian. They also withdrew
from communion with Diodorus, bishop of
Tarsus, and Acacius, bishop of Berea, because
they had ordained Flavian.* To take further
cognizance of the affair, the Western bishops and
the Emperor Gratian wrote to the bishops of the
East, and summoned them to attend a council
in the West.


CHAP. XII. — PROJECT OF THEODOSIUS TO UNIFY
ALL THE HERESIES. THE PROPOSITIONS MADE BY
AGELIUS AND SISINIUS, THE NOVATIONS. AT AN-
OTHER SYNOD, THE EMPEROR RECEIVED THOSE
ONLY WHO REPRESENT CONSUBSTANTIALITY ;
THOSE WHO HELD A DIFFERENT VIEW HE EJECTED
FROM THE CHURCHES.

Although all the houses of prayer were at
this period in the possession of the Catholic
Church, many troubles occurred in various parts

' Soc. V. 9; cf. Theodoret, H. E. v. 23.

* Ambrose, and other bishops of Italy, convened in an undesig-
nated Synod, condemned Nectarius, both for his part in this pro-
cedure and also as improperly ordained. Hard. i. c. 844.


VII. 13-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


383


of the empire, instigated by the Arians.' The
Emperor Theodosius, therefore, soon after the
council above mentioned, again summoned
together the presidents of the sects which were
flourishing, in order that they might either bring
others to their own state of conviction on dis-
puted topics, or be convinced themselves ; for
he imagined that all would be brought to oneness
of opinion, if a free discussion were entered
into, concerning ambiguous points of doctrine.
The council, therefore, was convened. This
occurred in the year of the second consulate of
Merobaudes, and the first of Saturninus, and at
the same period that Arcadius was associated
with his father in the government of the empire.
Theodosius sent for Nectarius, consulted with
him concerning the coming Synod, and com-
manded him to introduce the discussion of all
questions which had given rise to heresies, so
that the church of the believers in Christ might
be one, and might agree on the doctrine accord-
ing to which piety ought to be observed. When
Nectarius returned home, feeling anxious about
the affair confided to him, he made known the
mandate of the emperor to Agelius, the president
of the church of the Novatians, who held the
same religious sentiments as himself. Agelius
proved the virtue of his life by works, but was
unaccustomed to the finesse and deception of
words ; he therefore proposed as a substitute, one
of his readers, by name Sisinius, who afterwards
succeeded him as bishop, a man who could see
what was practical, and could debate, if that
were necessary. Sisinius possessed powers of
intellect and of expression ; he had an accurate
knowledge of the interpretation of the Holy
Scriptures, and was well acquainted with profane
and with ecclesiastical literature. He proposed
that all disputation with the heterodox, as being
a fruitful source of contention and war, should
be avoided ; but recommended that inquiries
should rather be instituted, as to whether the
heretics admitted the testimony of the expositors
and teachers of the sacred words, who lived
before the Church was rent in division. "If
they reject the testimony of these great men,"
said he, " they will be condemned by their own
followers ; but if they admit their authority as
being adequate to resolve ambiguous points of
doctrine, we will produce their books." For
Sisinius was well aware that, as the ancients rec-
ognized the Son to be eternal like the Father, they
had never presumed to assert that He had had
an origin from some beginning. This suggestion
received the approbation of Nectarius, and after-
wards of the emperor ; and investigations were
set on foot as to the opinions entertained by
heretics concerning the ancient interpreters of

1 Soc. V. 10, from whom Soz. borrows his facts.


Scripture. As it was found that the heretics pro-
fessed to hold these early writers in great admi-
ration, the emperor asked them openly whether
they would defer to the authority of the afore-
said on controverted topics, and test their own
doctrines by the sentiments propounded in those
works. This proposition excited great conten-
tion among the leaders of the various heretical
sects, for they did not all hold the same view
about the books of the ancients ; the emperor
knew that they were convicted by the debates
over their own words alone, and withdrew the
proposition. He blamed them for their opinion,
and commanded each party to draw up a writ-
ten exposition of its own creed. On the day
appointed for the presentation of these docu-
ments, Nectarius and Agelius appeared at the
palace, as representatives of those who maintain
the consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity ; Demo-
philus, the Arian president, came forward as the
deputy of the Arians ; Eunomius represented the
Eunomians ; and Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus,
appeared for the sectarians denominated Mace-
donians. The emperor, after receiving theii
formularies, expressed himself in favor of that
one alone in which consubstantiality of the Trin-
ity was recognized, and destroyed the others.
The interests of the Novatians were not affected
by this transaction, for they held the same doc-
trines as the Catholic Church concerning the
Divine nature. The members of the other sects
were indignant with the priests for having en-
tered into unwise disputations in the presence of
the emperor. Many renounced their former
opinions, and embraced the authorized form of re-
ligion. The emperor enacted a law, prohibiting
heretics from holding churches, from giving pub-
lic instructions in the faith, and from conferring
ordination on bishops or others.^ Some of the
heterodox were expelled from the cities and vil-
lages, while others were disgraced and deprived
of the privileges enjoyed by other subjects of
the empire. Great as were the punishments
adjudged by the laws against heretics, they were
not always carried into execution, for the empe-
ror had no desire to persecute his subjects ; he
only desired to enforce uniformity of view about
God through the medium of intimidation. Those
who voluntarily renounced heretical opinions re-
ceived commendation from him.


CHAP. XIII. MAXIMUS THE TYRA>rr. CONCERNING

THE 0CCURRENC:ES between the empress JUS-
TINA AND ST. AMBROSE. THE EMPEROR GRATIAN
WAS KILLED BY GUILE. VALENTINLVN AND HIS
MOTHER FLED TO THEODOSIUS IN THESSALONICA.

As the Emperor Gratian was at this period

' Cod. Theod. xvi. 5, 15.


384


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 13.


occupied with a war against the Alamanni/ Max-
imus quitted Britain, with the design of usurping
the imperial power. Valentinian was then resid-
ing in Italy, but as he was a minor, the affairs
of state were transacted by Probus, a praetorian
prefect, who had formerly been consul.

Justina, the mother of the emperor, having
espoused the Arian heresy, persecuted Ambrose,
bishop of Milan, and disquieted the churches
by her efforts to introduce alterations in the
Nicene doctrines, and to obtain the predomi-
nance of the form of belief set forth at Arimi-
num. She was incensed against Ambrose because
he strenuously opposed her attempts at innova-
tion, and she represented to her son that he had
insulted her. Valentinian believed this calumny,
and, determined to avenge the supposed wrongs
of his mother, he sent a party of soldiers against
the church. On their reaching the temple, they
forced their way into the interior, arrested Am-
brose, and were about to lead him into exile at
that very moment, when the people assembled
in crowds at the church, and evinced a resolu-
tion to die rather than submit to the banishment
of their priest. Justina was still further incensed
at this occurrence ; and with a view of enforcing
her project by law, she sent for Menivolus,- one
of the legal secretaries, and commanded him to
draw up, as quickly as possible, an edict confirm-
atory of the decrees of Ariminum. Menivolus,
being firmly attached to the Catholic Church,
refused to write the document, and the empress
tried to bribe him by promises of greater honors.
He still, however, refused compliance, and, tear-
ing off his belt, he threw it at the feet of Justina,
and declared that he would neither retain his
present ofifice, nor accept of promotion, as the
reward of impiety. As he remained firm in his
refusal, others were intrusted with the compila-
tion of the law. By this law, all who conformed
to the doctrines set forth at Ariminum and rati-
fied at Constantinople were exhorted to convene
boldly ; and it was enacted that death should
be the punishment of those who should hinder
or be running counter to this law of the emperor.

While the mother of the emperor was plan-
ning the means of carrying this cruel law into
execution, intelligence was brought of the mur-
der of Gratian, through the treachery of Andra-
gathius, the general of Maximus. Andragathius
obtained possession cf the imperial chariot, and
sent word to the emperor that his consort was
traveling towards his camp. Gratian, who was
but recently married and youthful, as well as
passionately attached to his wife, hastened in-
cautiously across the river, and in his anxiety to
meet her fell without forethought into the hands

' Ruf. H. E. ii. 14-16; Philost. x. 5, 7; Soc. v. 11. Cf. The-
odoret, H. E. v. ii, 13; Eunap. Fragm. ii. 48; Zos. iv. 41, 43.
' In Ruf. H. E. ii. 16, Bcnevolus.


of Andragathius ; he was seized, and, in a little
while, put to death. He was in the twenty-
fourth year of his age, and had reigned fifteen
years. This calamity quieted Justina's wrath
against Ambrose.

Maximus, in the meantime, raised a large army
of Britons, neighboring Gauls, Celts, and other
nations, and marched into Italy. The pretext
which he advanced for this measure was, that
he desired to prevent the introduction of inno-
vations in the ancient form of religion and of
ecclesiastical order ; but he was in reality actu-
ated by the desire of dispelling any suspicion
that might have been excited as to his aspirations
after tyranny. He was watching and intriguing
for the imperial rule in such a way that it might
appear as if he had acquired the Roman gov-
ernment by law, and not by force. Valentin-
ian was compelled by the exigencies of the
times to recognize the symbols of his rule ; but
soon after, in fear of suffering, fled with his
mother Justina, and Probus, the praetorian pre-
fect in Italy, to Thessalonica.

CHAP. XIV. — BIRTH OF HONORIUS. THEODOSIUS
LEAVES ARCADIUS AT CONSTA>rnNOPLE, AND
PROCEEDS TO ITALY. SUCCESSION OF THE NO-
V.'VTL^N AND OTHER PATRL-VRCHS. AUDACITY OF
THE ARIANS. THEODOSIUS, AFTER DESTROYING
THE TYRANT, CELEBRATES A MAGNIFICENT TRI-
UMPH IN ROME.

While Theodosius was making preparations
for a war against Maximus, his son Honorius
was born.^ On the completion of these warlike
preparations, he left his son Arcadius to govern
at Constantinople, and proceeded to Thessa-
lonica, where he received Valentinian. He re-
fused either to dismiss openly, or to give audi-
ence to the embassy sent by Maximus, but
continued his journey at the head of his troops
towards Italy.

About this period, Agelius, bishop of the
Novatians at Constantinople, feeling his end ap-
proaching, nominated Sisinius, one of the pres-
byters of his church, as his successor. The
people, however, murmured that the preference
had not rather been given to Marcian, who was
noted on account of his piety, and Agelius
therefore ordained him, and addressed the peo-
ple who were assembled in the church in the
following words : " After me you shall have Mar-
cian for your bishop, and after him, Sisinius."
Agelius died soon after he had uttered these
words. He had governed his church forty
years with the greatest approbation from his own
heretical party ; and some assert that during the
times of Pagan persecution, he had openly con-
fessed the name of Christ.

' Soc. V. 11-14, *'i 's the main source for Sor. Cf. Ruf. H. E.
ii. 17; Philost. X. 8, 9, 11; Theodoret, H. E. v. 15; Zos. iv. 45-47.


VII. 15.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


385


Not long after Timothy and Cyril died ; The-
ophilus succeeded to the see of Alexandria, and
John to that of Jerusalem. Demophilus, leader
of the Arians at Constantinople, likewise died,
and was succeeded by Marinus of Thrace ; but
he was superseded by Dorotheus, who soon
after arrived from Antioch in Syria, and who
was considered by his sect to be better qualified
for the office than Marinus.

Theodosius, having in the meantime entered
Italy, various conflicting reports were spread as
to the success of his arms. It was rumored
among the Arians that the greater part of his
army had been cut to pieces in battle, and that
he himself had been captured by the tyrant ;
and assuming this report to be true, these sec-
tarians became bold and ran to the house of
Nectarius and set it on fire, from indignation at
the power which the bishop had obtained over
the churches. The emperor, however, carried
out his purpose in the war, for the soldiers of
Maximus, impelled by fear of the preparations
against them, or treachery, seized and slew the
tyrant. Andragathius, the murderer of Gratian,
no sooner heard of the death of Maximus, than
he leaped into the river with his armor, and
perished. The war having been thus termi-
nated, and the death of Gratian avenged, Theo-
dosius, accompanied by Valentinian, celebrated
a triumph in Rome, and restored order in the
churches of Italy, for the Empress Justinawas
dead.


CHAP. XV, FLAVIAN AND EVAGRIUS, BISHOPS OF

ANTIOCH. THE EVENTS AT ALEXANDRIA UPON
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE OF DIONV'SUS.
THE SERAPEUM AND THE OTHER IDOLATROUS
TEMPLES WHICH WERE DESTROYED.

Paulinus,^ bishop of Antioch, died about this
period, and those who had been convened into
a church with him persisted in their aversion to
Flavian, although his religious sentiments were
precisely the same as their own, because he had
violated the oath he had formerly made to
Meletius. They, therefore, elected Evagrius as
their bishop. Evagrius did not long survive this
appointment, and although Flavian prevented
the election of another bishop, those who had
seceded from communion with him, still contin-
ued to hold their assemblies apart.

About this period, the bishop of Alexandria,
to whom the temple of Dionysus had, at his own
request, been granted by the emperor, converted
the edifice into a church. The statues were
removed, the adyta were exposed ; and, in order
to cast contumely on the pagan mysteries, he
made a procession for the display of these ob-

1 Soc. V. 15-17; Ruf. ii. H. E. ii. 21-24; Theodoret, H. E. v.
21-23; many independent points in Soz.


jects ; the phalli, and whatever other object had
been concealed in the adyta which really was
or seemed to be, ridiculuus, he made a public
exhibition of. The pagans, amazed at so unex-
pected an exposure, could not suffer it in silence,
but conspired together to attack the Christians.
They killed many of the Christians, wounded
others, and seized the Serapion, a temple which
was conspicuous for beauty and vastness and
which was seated on an eminence. This they con-
verted into a temporary citadel ; and hither they
conveyed many of the Christians, put them to
the torture, and compelled them to offer sacri-
fice. Those who refused compliance were
crucified, had both legs broken, or were put to
death in some cruel manner. When the sedi-
tion had prevailed for some time, the rulers
came and urged the people to remember the
laws, to lay down their arms, and to give up the
Serapion. There came then Romanus, the gen-
eral of the military legions in Egpyt ; and Eva-
grius was the prefect of Alexandria.^ As their
efforts, however, to reduce the people to sub-
mission were utterly in vain, they made known
what had transpired to the emperor. Those
who had shut themselves up in the Serapion
prepared a more spirited resistance, from fear of
the punishment that they knew would await their
audacious proceedings, and they were further
instigated to revolt by the inflammatory dis-
courses of a man named Olympius, attired in
the garments of a philosopher, who told them
that they ought to die rather than neglect the
gods of their fathers. Perceiving that they
were greatly dispirited by the destruction of the
idolatrous statues, he assured them that such a
circumstance did not warrant their renouncing
their religion ; for that the statues were com-
posed of corruptible materials, and were mere
pictures, and therefore would disappear ; whereas,
the powers which had dwelt within them, had
flown to heaven. By such representations as
these, he retained the multitude with him in the
Serapion.

When the emperor was informed of these
occurrences, he declared that the Christians who
had been slain were blessed, inasmuch as they
had been admitted to the honor of martyrdom,
and had suffered in defense of the faith. He
offered free pardon^ to those who had slain
them, hoping that by this act of clemency they
would be the more readily induced to embrace
Christianity ; and he commanded the demolition
of the temples in Alexandria which had been
the cause of the popular sedition. It is said


' Cod. Theod. xvi. 10, 11.

3 The opinion of St. Augustine (^Ep. 158, ad Marcel!.) is here
quoted by Valesius: "lest the sufferings of the servants of God,
which ought to be held in esteem in the Church, be defiled by the
blood of their enemies." See, also, below, the death of Marccllus
of Apamea.


386


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 15.


that, when this imperial edict was read in pub-
lic, the Christians uttered loud shouts of joy,
because the emperor laid the odium of what had
occurred upon the pagans. The people who
were guarding the Serapion were so terrified at
hearing these shouts, that they took to flight,
and the Christians immediately obtained pos-
session of the spot, which they have retained
ever since. I have been informed that, on the
night preceding this occurrence, Olympius
heard the voice of one singing hallelujah in the
Serapion. The doors were shut and everything
was still ; and as he could see no one, but could
only hear the voice of the singer, he at once
understood what the sign signified ; and unknown
to any one he quitted the Serapion and embarked
for Italy. It is said that when the temple was
being demolished, some stones were found, on
which were hieroglyphic characters in the form
of a cross, which on being submitted to the
inspection of the learned, were interpreted as
signifying the life to come.^ These characters
led to the conversion of several of the pagans,
as did likewise other inscriptions found in the
same place, and which contained predictions of
the destruction of the temple. It was thus that
the Serapion was taken, and, a little while after,
converted into a church ; it received the name
of the Emperor Arcadius.

There were still pagans in many cities, who
contended zealously in behalf of their temples ;
as, for instance, the inhabitants of Petraea and
of Areopolis, in Arabia ; of Raphi and Gaza, in
Palestine ; of Heriopolis in Phoenicia ; and of
Apamea, on the river Axius, in Syria. I have
been informed that the inhabitants of the last-
named city often armed the men of Galilee and
the peasants of Lebanon in defense of their
temples ; and that at last, they even carried
their audacity to such a height, as to slay a
bishop named Marcellus. This bishop had
commanded the demolition of all the temples
in the city and villages, under the supposition
that it would not be easy otherwise for them to
be converted from their former religion. Hav-
ing heard that there was a very spacious temple
at Aulon, a district of Apamea, he repaired thither
with a body of soldiers and gladiators. He
stationed himself at a distance from the scene
of conflict, beyond the reach of the arrows ; for
he was afflicted with the gout, and was unable
to fight, to pursue, or to flee. Whilst the soldiers
and gladiators were engaged in the assault
against the temple, some pagans, discovering
that he was alone, hastened to the place where
he was separated from the combat ; they arose
suddenly and seized him, and burnt him alive.
The perpetrators of this deed were not then


' Ruf. H. E. ii. 29; Soc. v. 17.


known, but, in course of time, they were de-
tected, and the sons of Marcellus determined
upon avenging his death. The council of the
province, however, prohibited them from exe-
cuting this design, and declared that it was not
just that the relatives or friends of Marcellus
should seek to avenge his death ; when they
should rather return thanks to God for having
accounted him worthy to die in such a cause.

CHAP. XVI. IN WHAT MANNER, AND FROM WHAT

CAUSE, THE FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESBYTER, AP-
POINTED TO PRESIDE OVER THE IMPOSITION OF
PENANCE, WERE ABOLISHED. DISSERTATION ON
THE MODE OF IMPOSING PENANCE.

Nectarius, about this period, abolished the
office of the presbyter whose duty it was to pre-
side over the imposition of penance ; and this
is the first instance of the suppression of this
office in the Church.^ This example was fol-
lowed by the bishops of every region. Various
accounts have been given of the nature, the
origin, and the cause of the abolition of this
office. I shall state my own views on the sub-
ject. Impeccability is a Divine attribute, and
belongs not to human nature ; therefore God has
decreed that pardon should be extended to the
penitent, even after many transgressions. As in
supplicating for pardon, it is requisite to confess
the sin, it seems probable that the priests, from
the beginning, considered it irksome to make this
confession in public, before the whole assembly
of the people. They therefore appointed a
presbyter, of the utmost sanctity, and the most
undoubted pnidence, to act on these occasions ;
the penitents went to him, and confessed their
transgressions ; and it was his office to indicate
the kind of penance adapted to each sin, and
then when satisfaction had been made, to pro-
nounce absolution. As the custom of doing
penance never gained ground among the Nova-
tians, regulations of this nature were of course un-
necessary among them ; but the custom prevailed
among all other heretics, and prevails even to
the present day. It is observed with great rigor
by the Western churches,^ particularly at Rome,
where there is a place appropriated to the recep-
tion of penitents, in which spot they stand and
mourn until the completion of the services, for it
is not lawful for them to take part in the myste-
ries ; then they cast themselves, with groans and
lamentations, prostrate on the ground. The
bishop conducts the ceremony, sheds tears, and
prostrates himself in like manner ; and all the
people burst into tears, and groan aloud. After-
wards, the bishop rises first from the ground, and
raises up the others ; he offers up prayer on be-

* Soc. V. 19; yet Soz.'s account and setting is different.
' The Western Church preserved the earlier discipline.


VII. 17-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


Z^7


half of the penitents, and then dismisses them.
Each of the penitents subjects himself in private
to voluntary suffering, either by fastings, by ab-
staining from the bath or from divers kinds of
meats, or by other prescribed means, until a
certain period appointed by the bishop. When
the time arrives, he is made free from the con-
sequences of his sin, and assembles at the
church with the people. The Roman priests
have carefully observed this custom from the
beginning to the present time. In the church
at Constantinople, a presbyter was always ap-
pointed to preside over the penitents, until a
lady of the nobility made a deposition to the
effect, that when she resorted as a penitent to
the presbyter, to fiist and offer supplications to
God, and tarried for that purpose, in the church,
a rape had been committed on her person by
the deacon. Great displeasure was manifested
by the people when this occurrence was made
known to them, on account of the discredit that
would result to the church ; and the priests, in
particular, were thereby greatly scandalized.
Nectarius, after much hesitation as to what
means ought to be adopted, deposed the dea-
con ; and, at the advice of certain persons, who
urged the necessity of leaving each individual to
examine himself before participating in the
sacred mysteries, he abolished the office of the
presbyter presiding over penance. From that
period, therefore, the performance of penance
fell into disuse ; and it seems to me, that extreme
laxity of principle was thus substituted for the
severity and rigor of antiquity. Under the an-
cient system, I think, offences were of rarer
occurrence ; for people were deterred from their
commission, by the dread of confessing them,
and of exposing them to the scrutiny of a severe
judge. I believe it was from similar considera-
tions, that the Emperor Theodosius, who was
always zealous in promoting the glory of the
Church, issued a law,' enacting that women
should not be admitted into the ministry, unless
they had had children, and were upwards of
sixty years of age, according to the precept of
the Apostle Paul.^ By this law it was also de-
creed, that women who had shaved their heads
should be ejected from the churches ; and that
the bishop by whom such women were admitted
should be deposed from the bishopric.

CHAP. XVII. BANISHMENT OF EUNOMIUS BY THEO-
DOSIUS THE GREAT. THEOPHRONIUS, HIS SUC-
CESSOR ; OF EUTYCHUS, AND OF DOROTHEUS,
AND THEIR HERESIES ; OF THOSE CALLED PSATHV-
RIANS ; DIVISION OF THE ARIANS INTO DIFFER-
ENT PARTIES ; THOSE IN CONSTANTINOPLE WERE
MORE LIMITED.

' Cod. Theod. xvi. 2. 27.

2 I Tim. V. 9. Cf. change in Justinian, Novell. 123. 13.


Such subjects as the above, however, are best
left to the decision of imlividual judgment.

The emperor, about this period, condemned
Eunomius to banishment.' This heretic had
fixed his residence in the suburbs of Constan-
tinople, and held frequent churches in private
houses, where he read his own writings. He in-
duced many to embrace his sentiments, so that
the sectarians, who were named after him, be-
came very numerous. He died not long after
his banishment, and was interred at Dacora,
his birthplace, a village of Cappadocia, situated
near Mount Argeus, in the territory of Caesarea.
Theophronius, who was also a native of Cappa-
docia, and who had been his disciple, continued
to promulgate his doctrines. Having gotten
a smattering, through the writings of Aristotle,
he composed an introduction to the study of the
syllogisms in them, which he entitled " Exercises
for the Mind." But he afterwards engaged. I
have understood, in many unprofitable dis-
putations, and soon ceased to confine himself to
the doctrines of his master. But being eager
for new things, he endeavored to prove, from
the terms which are placed in the Sacred Scrip-
tures, that though God foreknows that which is
not, and knows that which is, and remembers
what has happened, he does not always have
that knowledge in the same manner with re-
spect to the future and present, and changes his
knowledge of the past. As this hypothesis ap-
peared positively absurd to the Eunomians, they
excommunicated him from their church ; and
he constituted himself the leader of a new sect,
called, after his name, Theophronians. Not
long after, Eutychus, one of the Eunomians,
originated another sect in Constantinople, to
which his own name was given. For the question
had been proposed, as to whether the Son of
God is or is not acquainted with the last hour ;
and for its solution, the words of the evangelist
were quoted, in which it is stated that the day
and hour are known only to the Father.*
Eutychus, however, contended that this knowl-
edge belongs also to the Son, inasmuch as He
has received all things from the Father. The
Eunomian presidents, having condemned this
opinion, he seceded from communion with them,
and went to join Eunomius in his place of ban-
ishment. A deacon, and some other individuals,
who had been dispatched from Constantinople
to accuse Eutychus, and, if necessary, to oppose
him in argument, arrived first at the place of
destination. When Eunomius was made ac-
quainted with the object of their journey, he
expressed himself in favor of the sentiments
propounded by Eutychus ; and, on his arrival,
prayed with him, although it was not lawful to

' Soc. V. 20, 23, 24; Philost. X. 6. Soz. has some independent
points. ♦ Matt. xxiv. 36.


388


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 17.


pray with any one who travels unprovided with
letters written in sacred characters, attesting his
being in communion. Eunomius died soon
after this contention ; and the Eunomian presi-
dent, at Constantinople, refused to receive
Eutychus into communion ; for he antagonized
him from jealousy because he was not even of
clerical rank, and because he could not answer
his arguments, and did not find it possible to
solve his problems. Eutychus, therefore, sepa-
rated those who had espoused his sentiments into
a personal heresy. Many assert that he and
Theophronius were the first who propounded the
peculiar views entertained by the Eunomians
concerning divine baptism. The above is a
brief account of such details as I have been able
to give in order to afford a succinct knowledge of
the causes which led the P^momians to be divided
among themselves. I should be prolix were I
to enter into further particulars ; and, indeed,
the subject would be by no means an easy one
to me, since I have no such dialectic skill.

The following question was, in the meantime,
agitated among the Arians of Constantinople :
Prior to the existence of the Son (whom they
regard as having proceeded out of nothing), is
God to be termed the Eather? Dorotheus, who
had been summoned from Antioch to rule over
them in the place of Marinus, was of opinion
that God could not have been called the Father
prior to the existence of the Son, because the
name of Father has a necessary connection with
that of Son. Marinus, on the other hand, main-
tained that the Father was the Father, even when
the Son existed not ; and he advanced this opin-
ion either from conviction, or else from the
desire of contention, and from jealousy at the
preference that had been shown to Dorotheus in
the Church. The Arians were thus divided into
two parties ; Dorotheus and his followers re-
tained possession of the hquses of prayer, while
Marinus, and those who seceded with him,
erected new edifices in which to hold their
own churches. The name " Psathyrians " and
" Goths " were given to the partisans of Marinus ;
Psathyrians, because Theoctistus, a certain cake-
vender {^j/a6vp(y7^o)\r]<;) was a zealous advocate
of their opinions ; and (ioths, because their sen-
timents were approved by Selinus, bishop of that
nation. Almost all these barbarians followed
the instructions of Selinus, and they gathered in
churches with the followers of Marinus. The
Goths were drawn to Selinus particularly because
he had formerly been the secretary of Ulphilas,
and had succeeded him as bishop. He was
capable of teaching in their churches, not only
in the vernacular, but also in the Greek language.

Soon after a contest for precedency arose
between Marinus and Agapius, whom Marinus
himself had ordained bishop over the Arians at


Ephesus ; and in the quarrel which ensued, the
Goths took the part of Agapius. It is said that
many of the Arian clergy of that city were so
much irritated through the ambition displayed by
these two bishops, that they communed with the
Catholic Church. Such was the origin of the
division of the Arians into two factions, — a
division which still subsists ; so that, in every
city, they have separate churches. The Arians
at Constantinople, however, after a separation
of thirty-five years, were reconciled to each
other by Plinthas, formerly a consul,' general
of the cavalry and infantry, a man possessed of
great influence at court. To prevent the revival
of the former dissensions among them, the ques-
tion which had been the cause of the division
was forbidden to be mooted. And these occur-
rences took place later.

CHAP. XVIII. — ANOTHER HERESY, THAT OF THE
SARBA'ITANS, IS ORIGINATED BY THE NOVATIANS.
THEIR SYNOD IN SANGARUS. ACCOUNT IN GREATER
DETAIL OF THE EASTER FESTIVAL.

A DIVISION arose during the same reign among
the Novatians^ concerning the celebration of the
festival of Easter, and from this dispute origi-
nated another, called the Sabbatian. Sabbatius,
who, with Theoctistus and Macarius, had been
ordained presbyter by Marcian, adopted the
opinion of the co-pfesbyters, who had been con-
vened at Pazoucoma'' during the reign of Valens,
and maintained that the feast of the Passover
(Easter) ought to be celebrated by Christians
as by Jews. He seceded from the Church at
first for the purpose of exercising greater aus-
terity, for he professed to adopt a very austere
mode of life. He also declared that one motive
of his secession was, that many persons who
participated in the mysteries appeared to him
to be unworthy of the honor. VVhen, however,
his design of introducing innovations was de-
tected, Marcian expressed his regret at having
ordained him, and, it is said, was often heard to
exclaim that he would rather have laid his hands
upon thorns than upon the head of Sabbatius.
Perceiving that the people of his diocese were
being rent into two factions, Marcian summoned
all the bishops of his own persuasion to San-
garus, a town of Bithynia, near the seashore,
not far from the city of Helenopolis. When
they had assembled, they summoned Sabbatius,
and asked him to state the cause of his griev-
ance ; and as he merely complained of the
diversity prevailing in regard to the feast, they
suspected that he made this a pretext to dis-
guise his love of precedency, and made him

• He held the consulate with Monaxius, a.d. 419.
' Soc. V. 21, 22. Soz. has independent material.
3 IIa^ouicui/u.f;; Soc. iv Ild^ui Kuifir).


VII. 19.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


389


declare upon oath that he would never accept
the episcopal office. When he had taken the
required oath, all were of the same opinion,
and they voted to hold the church together, for
the difference prevailing in the celebration of
the Paschal feast ought by no means to be made
an occasion for separation from communion ;
and they decided that each individual should be
at liberty to observe the feast according to his
own judgment. They enacted a canon on the
subject, which they styled the " Indifferent {dSid-
<^opos) Canon." Such were the transactions of
the assembly at Sangarus. From that period
Sabbatius adhered to the usage of the Jews ;
and unless all happened to observe the feast at
the same time, he fasted, according to the cus-
tom, but in advance, and celebrated the Passover
with the usual prescriptions by himself. He
passed the Saturday, from the evening to the
appointed time, in watching and in offering up
the prescribed prayers ; and on the following
day he assembled with the multitude, and par-
took of the mysteries. This mode of observing
the feast was at first unnoticed by the people ;
but as, in process of time, it began to attract
observation, and to become more generally
known, he found a great many imitators, par-
ticularly in Phrygia and Galatia, to whom this
celebration of the feast became a national cus-
tom. Eventually he openly seceded from com-
munion, and became the bishop of those who
had espoused his sentiments, as we shall have
occasion to show in the proper place.

I am, for my own part, astonished that Sabba-
tius and his followers attempted to introduce this
innovation. The ancient Hebrews, as is related
by Eusebius,' on the testimony of Philo, Josephus,
Aristobulus, and several others, offered the sacri-
fices after the vernal equinox, when the sun is in
the first sign of the zodiac, called by the Greeks
the Ram, and when the moon is in the opposite
quarter of the heavens, and in the fourteenth day
of her age. Even the Novatians themselves, who
have studied the subject with some accuracy, de-
clare that the founder of their heresy and his
first disciples did not follow this custom, which
was introduced for the first time by those who
assembled at Pazoucoma ; and that at old Rome
the members of this sect still observe the same
practice as the Romans, who have not deviated
from their original usage in this particular, the
custom having been handed down to them by
the hbly apostles Peter and Paul. Further, the
Samaritans, who are scrupulous observers of the
laws of Moses, never celebrate this festival till
the first-fruits have reached maturity ; they say
it is, in the law, called the Feast of First-Fruits,
and before these appear, it is not lawful to

^ Eus. ff. E. vii. 32. Extracts from the canons of Anatolius.


observe the feast ; and, therefore, necessarily the
vernal equinox must precede. Hence arises
my astonishment that those who profess to
adopt the Jewish custom in the celebration of
this feast, do not conform to the ancient practice
of the Jews. With the exception of the people
above mentioned, and the Quartodecimani of
Asia, all heresies, I believe, celebrate the Pass-
over in the same manner as the Romans and
the Egyptians. The Quartodecimani are so
called because they observe this festival, like
the Jews, on the fourteenth day of the moon,
and hence their name. The Novatians observe
the day of the resurrection. They follow the
custom of the Jews and the Quartodecimani,
except when the fourteenth day of the moon
falls upon the first day of the week, in which
case they celebrate the feast so many days after
the Jews, as there are intervening days between
the fourteenth day of the moon and the follow-
ing Lord's day. The Montanists, who are
called Pepuzites and Phrygians, celebrate the
Passover according to a strange fashion which
they introduced. They blame those who regu-
late the time of observing the feast according to
the course of the moon, and affirm that it is
right to attend exclusively to the cycles of the
sun. They reckon each month to consist of
thirty days, and account the day after the vernal
equinox as the first day of the year, which,
according to the Roman method of computa-
tion, would be called the ninth day before the
calends of April. It was on this day, they say,
that the two great luminaries appointed for the
indication of times and of years were created.
This they prove by the fact that every eight
years the sun and the moon meet together in
the same point of the heavens. The moon's
cycle of eight years is accomplished in ninety-
nine months, and in two thousand nine hundred
and twenty-two days ; and during that time
there are eight revolutions made by the sun,
each comprising three hundred and sixty-five
days, and the fourth part of a day. For they
compute the day of the creation of the sun,
mentioned in Sacred Writ, to have been the
fourteenth day of the moon, occurring after the
ninth day before the calends of the month of
April, and answering to the eighth day prior to
ides of the same month. They always celebrate
the Passover on this day, when it falls on the
day of the resurrection ; otherwise they celebrate
it on the following Lord's day ; for it is written
according to their assertion that the feast may
be held on any day between the fourteenth and
twenty-first.

CHAP. XIX. — A LIST WORTHY OF STUDY, GIVEN BY
THE HISTORIAN, OF CUSTOMS AMONG DIFFERENT
NATIONS AND CHURCHES.


390


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. igi


We have now described the various usages
that prevailed in the celebration of the Passover.'
It appears to me that Victor, bishop of Rome,
and Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, came to a very
wise decision on the controversy that had arisen
between them.- For as the bishops of the West
did not deem it necessary to dishonor the tra-
dition handed down to them by Peter and by
Paul, and as, on the other hand, the Asiatic
bishops persisted in following the rules laid down
by John the evangelist, they unanimously agreed
to continue in the observance of the festival
according to their respective customs, without
separation from communion with each other.
They faithfully and justly assumed, that those
who accorded in the essentials of worship ought
not to separate from one another on account
of customs. For exactly similar traditions on
every point are to be found in all the churches,
even though they hold the same opinions. There
are, for instance, many cities in Scythia, and yet
they all have but one bishop ; whereas, in other
nations a bishop serves as priest even over a
village, as I have myself observed in Arabia, and
in Cyprus, and among the Novatians and Mon-
tanists of Phrygia. Again, there are even now
but seven deacons at Rome, answering precisely
to the number ordained by the apostles, of whom
Stephen was the first martyr ; whereas, in other
churches, the number of deacons is a matter of
indifference. At Rome hallelujah is sung once
annually, namely, on the first day of the festival
of the Passover ; so that it is a common thing
among the Romans to swear by the fact of hear-
ing or singing this hymn. In that city the peo-
ple are not taught by the bishop, nor by any
one in the Church. At Alexandria the bishop
of the city alone teaches the people, and it is
said that this custom has prevailed there ever
since the days of Arius, who, though but a pres-
byter, broached a new doctrine. Another strange
custom also prevails at Alexandria which I have
never witnessed nor heard of elsewhere, and this
is, that when the Gospel is read the bishop does
not rise from his seat. The archdeacon alone
reads the Gospel in this city, whereas in some
places it is read by the deacons, and in many
churches only by the priests ; while on noted
days it is read by the bishops, as, for instance,
at Constantinople, on the first day of the festival
of the resurrection.^ In some churches the in-
terval called Quadragesima, which occurs before
this festival, and is devoted by the people to
fasting, is made to consist of six weeks ; and


1 Soc. V. 33. Soz. has much new matter of his own.

* Eus. H. E. iv. 14 (from Irenscus^. Not Victor, but Anicetus;
the conflict of Victor was with Polycrates, bishop of Ephesus. Eus.
H. E. V. 34.

' Nicephorus (xii. ■^\) declares that this custom lasted down to
his own day: and that it was practiced also on the ist of January, as
well as at Easter.


this is the case in Illyria and the Western regions,
in Libya, throughout Egypt, and in Palestine ;
whereas it is made to comprise seven weeks at
Constantinople, and in the neighboring provinces
as far as Phoenicia. In some churches the peo-
ple fast three alternate weeks, during the space
of six or seven weeks, whereas in others they
fast continuously during the three weeks imme-
diately preceding the festival. Some people, as
the Montanists, only fast two weeks. Assem-
blies are not held in all churches on the same
time or manner. The people of Constantinople,
and almost everywhere, assemble together on
the Sabbath, as well as on the first day of the
week, which custom is never observed at Rome
or at Alexandria. There are several cities and
villages in Egypt where, contrary to the usage
established elsewhere, the people meet together
on Sabbath evenings, and, although they have
dined previously, partake of the mysteries. The
same prayers and psalms are not recited nor
the same lections read on the same occasions
in all churches. Thus the book entitled " The
Apocalypse of Peter," which was considered
altogether spurious by the ancients, is still read
in some of the churches of Palestine, on the day
of preparation, when the people observe a fast
in memory of the passion of the Saviour. So the
work entitled " The Apocalypse of the Apostle
Paul," though unrecognized by the ancients, is
still esteemed by most of the monks. Some
persons affirm that the book was found during
this reign, by Divine revelation, in a marble box,
buried beneath the soil in the house of Paul at
Tarsus in Cilicia. I have been informed that
this report is false by Cilix, a presbyter of the
church in Tarsus, a man of very advanced age,
as is indicated by his gray hairs, who says that
no such occurrence is known among them, and
wonders if the heretics did not invent the story.
What I have said upon this subject must now
suffice. Many other customs are still to be ob-
served in cities and villages ; and those who
have been brought up in their observance would,
from respect to the great men who instituted
and perpetuated these customs, consider it wrong
to abolish them. Similar motives must be at-
tributed to those who observe different practices
in the celebration of the feast which has led us
into this long digression.


CHAP. XX. — EXTENSION OF OUR DOCTRINES, AND
COMPLETE DEMOLITION OF IDOLATROUS TEMPLES.
INUNDATION OF THE NILE.

While the heretics were disrupted among them-
selves, the Catholic Church increased more and
more by many accessions from the heterodox,
on account of the dissensions among them and


VII. 21.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


391


especially from multitudes of pagans.' The
emperor having observed that the practice of
idolatry had been greatly promoted by the
facility of constant ingress and egress to and
from the temple, directed the entrances of all
temples to be closed ; and eventually he com-
manded the demolition of many of these edi-
fices.'^ When the pagans found themselves
deprived of their own houses of prayer, they
began to frequent our churches ; for they did
not dare to offer sacrifices after the pagan form
in secret, for it was dangerous, since the sacri-
fice was under the penalty of death and of
confiscation of property.

It is said that the river of Egypt did not
overflow its banks this year at the proper season ;
and that the Egyptians angrily ascribed this
circumstance to the prohibition of sacrifices to
it, according to the ancestral law. The governor
of the province, apprehensive lest the general
discontent should terminate in sedition, sent a
message to the emperor on the subject. But
the emperor, far from attaching more importance
to the temporary fertility produced by the Nile,
than to the fidelity he owed to God and the inter-
ests of religion, replied as follows : " Let that
river cease to flow, if enchantments are requisite
to insure the regularity of its course ; or if it
delights in sacrifices, or if blood must be mingled
with the waters that derive their source from
the paradise of God." Soon afterwards, the
Nile overflowed its banks with such violence,
that the highest eminences were submerged.
When it reached the farthest Hmit and almost
had attained the fullest measure, the water did
not the less press upward, so that the Egyptians
were thrown into the contrary fear. The dread
was lest the city of Alexandria and part of Libya
should be submerged. The pagans of Alexan-
dria, irritated at this unexpected occurrence,
exclaimed in derision at the public theatres,
that the river, Hke an old man or fool, could
not moderate its proceedings. Many of the
Egpytians were hence induced to abandon the
superstitions of their forefathers, and embrace
Christianity. These incidents are given as I
have learned them.

CHAP. XXI. — DISCOVERY OF THE HONORED HEAD
OF THE FORERUNNER OF OUR LORD, AND THE
EVENTS ABOUT IT.

About this time the head of John the Baptist,
which Herodias had asked of Herod the te-
trarch, was removed to Constantinople.'' It is
said that it was discovered by some monks of
the Macedonian heresy, who originally dwelt at


' Independent chapter. Cf. Ruf. H. E. ii. 19; Theodoret, H. E.
V. 21 ; Zos. iv. 28, 29. 2 Cod. Theod. xvi. 10, 12.

3 An independent chapter. Cf. Philost. vii. 4; Theodoret, H. E.
iii. 7; Marcell. Ckron. a.d. 453; Ruf. H. E. ii. 28.


Constantinople, and afterwards fixed their abode
in Cilicia. Mardonius, the first eunuch of the
palace, made known this discovery at court,
during the preceding reign ; and Valens com-
manded that the relic should be removed to
Constantinople. The officers appointed to
carry it thither, placed it in a public chariot,
and proceeded with it as far as Pantichium, a
district in the territory of Chalcedon. Here the
mules of the chariot suddenly stopped ; and
neither the application of the lash, nor the
threats of the hostlers, could induce them to
advance further. So extraordinary an event was
considered by all, and even by the emperor
himself, to be of God ; and the holy head was
therefore deposited at Cosilaos, a village in the
neighborhood, which belonged to Mardonius.
Soon after, the Emperor Theodosius, impelled
by an impulse from God, or from the prophet,
repaired to the village. He determined upon
removing the remains of the Baptist, and it is
said met with no opposition, except from a holy
virgin, Matrona, who had been the servant and
guardian of the relic. He laid aside all authority
and force, and after many eTitreaties, extorted a
reluctant consent from her to remove the head ;
for she bore in mind what had occurred at the
period when Valens commanded its removal.
The emperor placed it, with the box in which it
was encased, in his purple robe, and conveyed
it to a place called Hebdomos, in the suburbs
of Constantinople, where he erected a spacious
and magnificent temple. The woman who had
been appointed to the charge of the relic could
not be persuaded by the emperor to renounce
her religious sentiments, although he had re-
course to entreaty and promises ; for she was,
it appears, of the Macedonian heresy. A pres-
byter of the same tendency, named Vincent, who
also took charge of the coffin of the prophet,
and performed the sacerdotal functions over it,
followed the religious opinions of the emperor,
and entered into communion with the Catholic
Church. He had taken an oath, as the Mace-
donians afiirm, never to swerve from their doc-
trines ; but he afterwards openly declared that, if
the Baptist would follow the emperor, he also
would enter into communion with him and be
separated. He was a Persian, and had left his
country in company with a relative named Addas,
during the reign of Constantius, in order to avoid
the persecution which the Christians were then
suffering in Persia. On his arrival in the Roman
territories, he was placed in the ranks of the
clergy, and advanced to the office of presbyter.
Addas married and rendered great service to the
Church. He left a son named Auxentius, who
was noted for his very faithful piety, his zeal for
his friends, the moderation of his hfe, his love
of letters, and the greatness of his attainments


392


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 21.


in pagan and ecclesiastical literature. He was
modest and retiring in deportment, although
admitted to familiarity with the emperor and
the courtiers, and possessed of a very illustrious
appointment. His memory is still revered by
the monks and zealous men, who were all ac-
quainted with him. The woman who had been
entrusted with the relic remained during the
rest of her life at Cosilaos. She was greatly dis-
tinguished by her piety and wisdom, and in-
structed many holy virgins ; and I have been
assured that many still survive who reflect the
honorable character which was the result of
training under Matrona.

CHAP. XXII. DEATH OF VALENTINIAN THE

YOUNGER, EMPEROR IN ROME, THROUGH STRAN-
GLING. THE TYRANT EUGENIUS. PROPHECY OF
JOHN, THE MONK OF THEBAIS.

While Theodosius was thus occupied in the
wise and peaceful government of his subjects in
the East, and in the service of God, intelligence
was brought that Valentinian had been strangled.^
Some say that he was put to death by the
eunuchs of the bedchamber, at the solicitation of
Arbogastes, a military chief, and of certain
courtiers, who were displeased because the
young prince had begun to walk in the footsteps
of his father, concerning the government, and
contrary to the opinions approved by them.
Others assert, however, that Valentinian com-
mitted the fatal deed with his own hands,
because he found himself impeded in attempt-
ing deeds which are not lawful in one of his
years ; and on this account he did not deem it
worth while to live ; for although an emperor,
he was not allowed to do what he wished. It is
said that the boy was noble in person, and
excellent in royal manners ; and that, had he
lived to the age of manhood, he would have
shown himself worthy of holding the reins of
empire, and would have surpassed his father in
magnanimity and justice. But though endowed
with these promising qualities, he died in the
manner above related.

A certain man named Eugenius, who was by
no means sincere in his professions of Christian-
ity, aspired to sovereignty, and assumed the
symbols of imperial power. He was hoping to
succeed in the attempt safely ; for he was led by
the predictions of individuals who professed to
foresee the future, by the examination of the
entrails and livers of animals and the course of
the stars. Men of the highest rank among the
Romans were addicted to these superstitions.
Flavian, then a praetorian prefect, a learned
man, and one who appeared to have an aptitude

' Ruf. H. E. ii. 31-33, the source; Philost. xi. i, 2; Theodoret,
H. E. V. 24; Soc. V. 25; Zos. iv. 53, 54; Oros. vii. 35.


for politics, was noted for being conversant with
every means of foretelling the future. He per-
suaded Eugenius to take up arms by assuring
him that he was destined for the throne, that his
warlike undertakings would be crowned with
victory, and that the Christian religion would be
abolished. Deceived by these flattering repre-
sentations, Eugenius raised an army and took
possession of the gates into Italy, as the Romans
call the Julian Alps, an elevated and precipitous
range of mountains ; these he seized beforehand
and fortified, for they had but one path in the
narrows, and were shut in on each side by preci-
pices and the loftiest mountains. Theodosius
was perplexed as to whether he ought to await
the issue of the war, or whether it would be bet-
ter in the first place to attack Eugenius ; and in
this dilemma, he determined to consult John, a
monk of Thebais, who, as I have before stated,
was celebrated for his knowledge of the future.
He therefore sent Eutropius, a eunuch of the
palace, and of tried fidelity, to Egypt, with
orders to bring John, if possible, to court ; but,
in case of his refusal, to learn what ought to be
done. When he came to John, the monk could
not be persuaded to go to the emperor, but he
sent word by Eutropius that the war would ter-
minate in favor of Theodosius, and that the
tyrant would be slain'; but that, after the vic-
tory, Theodosius himself would die in Italy.
The truth of both of these predictions was con-
firmed by events.


chap. XXIII. EXACTION OF TRIBUTE IN ANTIOCH,

AND DEMOLITION OF THE STATUES OF THE EM-
PEROR. EMBASSY HEADED BY FLAVL^N THE
CHIEF PRIEST.

In this time, on account of the necessities of
war, it seemed best to the officials whose con-
cern it was, to impose more than the customary
taxes ; for this reason the populace of Antioch
in Syria revolted ; ^ the statues of the emperor
and empress were thrown down and dragged by
ropes through the city, and, as is usual on such
occasions, the enraged multitude uttered every
insulting epithet that passion could suggest.
The emperor determined to avenge this insult
by the death of many of the citizens of Antioch ;.
the people were struck dumb at the mere an-
nouncement ; the rage of the citizens had sub-
sided, and had given place to repentance ; and,
as if already subjected to the threatened punish-
ment, they abandoned themselves to groans and
tears, and supplicated God to turn away the
anger of the emperor, and made use of some
threnodic hymns for their litanies. They deputed


• Soz. is again independent. Cf. Theodoret, H. E. v. ao;
Chrysost. HoniUiee, xxi., de Statuis ad populum Antiochenum
habit tt.


VII. 25-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


393


Flavian, their bishop, to go on an embassy to
Theodosius ; but on his arrival, finding that the
resentment of the emperor at what had occurred
was unabated, he had recourse to the following
artifice. He caused some young men accustomed
to sing at the table of the emperor to utter these
hymns with the litanies of the Antiochans. It
is said that the humanity of the emperor was
excited ; he was overcome by pity at once ; his
wrath was subdued, and as his heart yearned
over the city, he shed tears on the cup which he
held in his hand. It is reported that, on the
night before the sedition occurred, a spectre was
seen in the form of a woman of prodigious height
and terrible aspect, pacing through the streets of
the city, lashing the air with an ill-sounding whip,
similar to that which is used in goading on the
beasts brought forward at the public theatres.
It might have been inferred that the sedition
was excited by the agency of some evil and
malicious demon. There is no doubt but that
much bloodshed would have ensued, had not
the wrath of the emperor been stayed by his
respect for this sacerdotal entreaty.

CHAP. XXIV. VICTORY OF THEODOSIUS THE EM-
PEROR OVER EUGENIUS.

When he had completed his preparations for
war,^ Theodosius declared his younger son Hono-
rius emperor, and leaving him to reign at Con-
stantinople conjointly with Arcadius, who had
previously been appointed emperor, he departed
from the East to the West at the head of his
troops. His army consisted not only of Roman
soldiers, but of bands of barbarians from the
banks of the Ister. It is said that when he left
Constantinople, he came to the seventh mile-
stone, and went to pray to God in the church
which he had erected in honor of John the
Baptist ; and in his name prayed that success
might attend the Roman arms, and besought
the Baptist himself to aid him. After offering
up these prayers he proceeded towards Italy,
crossed the Alps, and took the first guard-
posts. On descending from the heights of these
mountains, he perceived a plain before him cov-
ered with infantry and cavalry, and became at
the same time aware that some of the enemy's
troops were lying in ambush behind him, among
the recesses of the mountains. The advance
guard of his army attacked the infantry stationed
in the plain, and a desperate and very doubtful
conflict ensued. Further, when the army sur-
rounded him, he considered that he had come
into the power of men, and could not be saved
even by those who would desire to do so, since


1 Soz. has his account from an independent source. Cf. Ruf.
H.E. ii. 33: Philost. xi. 2; See. v. 25; Theodoret, //. £". v. 24;
Zos. iv. ss-58; Olymp. Fr. 19.


those who had been posted in his rear were seiz-
ing the heights ; he fell prone upon the earth, and
prayed with tears, and God instantly answered
him ; for the officers of the troops stationed in
ambush on the height sent to offer him their
services as his allies, provided that he would
assign them honorable posts in his army. As
he had neither paper nor ink within reach, he
took up some tablets, and wrote on them the
high and befitting appointments he would confer
upon them, provided that they would fulfill their
promise to him. Under these conditions they
advanced to the emperor. The issue did not
yet incline to either side, but the battle was still
evenly balanced in the plain, when a tremendous
wind descended into the face of the enemy. It
was such an one as we have never before re-
corded, and broke up the ranks of the enemies.
The arrows and darts which were sent against
the Romans, as if projected by the opposing
ranks, were turned upon the bodies of those who
had cast them ; and their shields were wrenched
from their hands, and whirled against them with
filth and dust. Standing thus exposed, in a
defenseless condition, to the weapons of the
Romans, many of them perished, while the few
who attempted to effect an escape were soon
captured. Eugenius threw himself at the feet
of the emperor, and implored him to spare his
life ; but while in the act of offering up these
entreaties, a soldier struck off his head. Arbo-
gastes fled after the batde, and fell by his own
hands. It is said that while the battle was be-
ing fought, a demoniac presented himself in the
temple of God which is in the Hebdomos,
where the emperor had engaged in prayer on
starting out, and insulted John the Baptist, taunt-
ing him with having his head cut off, and shouted
the following words : " You conquer me, and
lay snares for my army." The persons who
happened to be on the spot, and who were wait-
ing impatiently to learn some news of the war,
were amazed, and wrote an account of it on the
day that it occurred, and afterwards ascertained
that it was the same day as that on which the
battle had been fought. Such is the history of
these transactions.


CHAP. XXV. INTREPID BEARING OF ST. AMBROSE

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE EMPEROR THEODO-
SIUS. MASSACRE AT THESSALONICA. NARRATIVE
OF THE OTHER RIGHTEOUS DEEDS OF THIS
SAINT.

After the death of Eugenius, the emperor
went to Milan, and repaired towards the church
to pray within its walls.- When he drew near
the gates of the edifice, he was met by Ambrose,

' An independent chapter. Cf. Theodoret, H. "E. v. 17, iS; Ruf.
H. E. ii. 18; Ambrose, £>/. CI. i. 51.


394


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 25.


the bishop of the city, who took hold of him
by his purple robe, and said to him, in the pres-
ence of the multitude, " Stand back ! a man
defiled by sin, and with hands imbrued in blood
unjustly shed, is not worthy, without repentance,
to enter within these sacred precincts, or par-
take of the holy mysteries." The emperor,
struck with admiration at the boldness of the
bishop, began to reflect on his own conduct,
and, with much contrition, retraced his steps.
The occasion of the sin was as follows. When
Buthericus was general of the troops in Illyria,
a charioteer saw him shamefully exposed at a
tavern, and attempted an outrage ; he was ap-
prehended and put in custody. Some time
after, some magnificent races were to be held at
the hippodrome, and the populace of Thessa-
ionica demanded the release of the prisoner, con-
sidering him necessary to the celebration of the
contest. As their request was not attended to, they
rose up in sedition and finally slew Buthericus. On
hearing of this deed, the wrath of the emperor was
excited immediately, and he commanded that a
certain number of the citizens should be put to
death. The city was filled with the blood of
many unjustly shed ; for strangers, who had but
just arrived there on their journey to other lands,
were sacrificed with the others. There were
many cases of suffering well worthy of commis-
eration, of which the following is an instance.
A merchant offered himself to be slain as a sub-
stitute for his two sons who had both been
selected as victims, and promised the soldiers to
give them all the gold he possessed, on condi-
tion of their eff'ecting the exchange. They
could not but compassionate his misfortune, and
consented to take him as a substitute for one of
his sons, but declared that they did not dare to
let off" both the young men, as that would ren-
der the appointed number of the slain incom-
plete. The father gazed on his sons, groaning
and weeping ; he could not save either from
death, but he continued hesitating until they
had been put to death, being overcome by an
equal love for each. I have also been informed,
that a faithful slave voluntarily offered to die
instead of his master, who was being led to the
place of execution. It appears that it was for
these and other acts of cruelty that Ambrose
rebuked the emperor, forbade him to enter the
church, and excommunicated him. Theodosius
publicly confessed his sin in the church, and dur-
ing the time set apart for penance, refrained from
wearing his imperial ornaments, according to
the usage of mourners. He also enacted a law '
prohibiting the officers entrusted with the exe-
cution of the imperial mandates, from inflicting
the punishment of death till thirty days after

< NotexUot.


the mandate had been issued, in order that the
wrath of the emperor might have time to be
appeased, and that room might be made for the
exercise of mercy and repentance.

Ambrose, no doubt, performed many other
actions worthy of his priestly office, which are
known, as is likely, only to the inhabitants of
the country. Among the illustrious deeds that
are attributed to him, I have been made ac-
quainted with the following. It was the cus-
tom of the emperor to take a seat in assemblies
of the church within the palisades of the altar,
so that he sat apart from the rest of the people.
Ambrose, considering that this custom had origi-
nated either from subserviency or from want of
discipline, caused the emperor to be seated
without the trellis work of the altar, so that he
sat in front of the people, and behind the
priests. The emperor Theodosius approved of
this best tradition, as did likewise his successors ;
and we are told that it has been ever since scru-
pulously observed.

I think it necessary to make a record of an-
other action worthy of mention performed by
this bishop. A pagan of distinction insulted
Gratian, affirming that he was unworthy of his
father ; and he was in consequence condemned
to death. As he was being led out to execution,
Ambrose went to the palace to implore a par-
don. Gratian was then engaged in witnessing a
private exhibition of the hunt, such as the em-
perors were wont to celebrate for their private
pleasure, and not for the public pastime. On
finding this to be the case, the bishop went to
the gate where they led in the beasts ; he hid
himself, and entered with the hunters who took
charge of the animals, and did not intermit,
although Gratian and his attendants resisted,
till he had obtained an immediate and saving
consent of the emperor, which released the man
who was to be led out to death. Ambrose was
very diligent in the observance of the laws of the
Church, and in maintaining discipline among
his clergy. I have selected the above two inci-
dents from among the records of his numerous
magnanimous deeds, in order to show with what
intrepidity he addressed those in power when
the service of God was in question.


CHAP. XXVI. — ST. DONATUS, BISHOP OF EURCEA,
AND THEOTIMUS, HIGH-PRIEST OF SCVTHIA.

There were at this period many other bish-
ops ^ in various parts of the empire highly cele-
brated for their sanctity and high qualifications,
of whom Donatus, bishop of Eunjea^ in Epirus,


' An independent chapter from a Greek life of Donatus, which
was probably incorporated in Anastasiiis' translation. A Greek
biography of Theotimus was not unlikely the basis of the account
of the bishop of Tomi. ' Also Euoria.


VII. 27-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


395


deserves to be particularly instanced. The in-
habitants of the country relate many extraordi-
nary miracles which he performed, of which the
most celebrated seems to have been the destruc-
tion of a dragon of enormous size. It had sta-
tioned itself on the high road, at a place called
Chamoegephyrae, and devoured sheep, goats,
oxen, horses, and men. Donatus came upon
this beast, attacked it unarmed, without sword,
lance, or javelin ; it raised its head, and was
about to dash upon him, when Donatus made
the sign of the cross with his finger in the air,
and spat upon the dragon. The saliva entered
its mouth, and it immediately expired. As it
lay extended on the earth it did not appear in-
ferior in size to the noted serpents of India.
I have been informed that the people of the
country yoked eight pair of oxen to transport
the body to a neighboring field, where they
burnt it, that it might not during the process of
decomposition corrupt the air and generate dis-
ease. The tomb of this bishop is deposited in
a magnificent house of prayer which bears his
name. It is situated near a fountain of many
waters, which God caused to rise from the
ground in answer to his prayer, in an arid spot
where no water had previously existed. For it
is said that one day, when on a journey, he had
to pass through this locality ; and, perceiving
that his companions were suffering from thirst,
he moved the soil with his hands and engaged
in prayer ; before his prayer was concluded, a
spring of water arose from the ground, which
has never since been dried up. The inhabi-
tants of Isoria, a village in the territory of
Euroea, bear testimony to the truth of this
narration.

The church of Tomi, and indeed all the
churches of Scythia, were at this period under
the government of Theotimus, a Scythian. He
had been brought up in the practice of philoso-
phy ; and his virtues had so won the admiration
of the barbarian Huns, who dwelt on the banks
of the Ister, that they called him the god of the
Romans, for they had experience of divine deeds
wrought by him. It is said that one day, when
traveling toward the country of the barbarians,
he perceived some of them advancing towards
Tomi. His attendants burst forth into lamen-
tations, and gave themselves up at once for
lost ; but he merely descended from horseback,
and prayed. The consequence was, that the
barbarians passed by without seeing him, his
attendants, or the horses from which they had
dismounted. As these tribes frequently devas-
tated Scythia by their predatory incursions, he
tried to subdue the ferocity of their disposition
by presenting them with food and gifts. One
of the barbarians hence concluded that he was a
man of wealth, and, determining to take him pris-


oner, leaned upon his shield, as was his custom
when parleying with his enemies ; the man raised
up his right hand in order to throw a rope, which
he firmly grasped, over the bishop, for he intended
to drag him away to his own country ; but in
the attempt, his hand remained extended in the
air, and the barbarian was not released from his
terrible bonds until his companions had implored
Theotimus to intercede with God in his behalf.

It is said that Theotimus always retained the
long hair which he wore when he first devoted
himself to the practice of philosophy. He was
very temperate, had no stated hours for his
repasts, but ate and drank when compelled to
do so by the calls of hunger and of thirst. I
consider it to be the part of a philosopher to
yield to the demands of these appetites from
necessity, and not from the love of sensual
gratification.


CHAP. XXVII. — ST. EPIPHANIUS, BISHOP OF CYPRUS,
AND A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF HIS ACTS.

Epiphanius was at this period at the head of
the metropolitan church of Cyprus.* He was
celebrated, not only for the virtues he manifested
and miraculous deeds during his life, but also
for the honor that was rendered to him by God
after his death ; for it was said that demons were
expelled, and diseases healed at his tomb. Many
wonderful actions wrought while he lived are at-
tributed to him, of which the following is one
of the most remarkable that has come to our
knowledge. He was extremely liberal towards
the needy, either to those who had suffered from
shipwreck or any other calamity ; and after ex-
pending the whole of his own patrimony in the
relief of such cases, he applied the treasures of
the church to the same purpose. These treas-
ures had been greatly increased by the donations
of pious men of various provinces, who had been
induced by their admiration of Epiphanius to
entrust him with the distribution of their alms
during their lives, or to bequeath their property
to him for this purpose at their death. It is
said that on one occasion the treasurer, who
was a godly man, discovered that the revenues
of the church had been nearly drained, and so
little remained in the treasury that he considered
it his duty to rebuke the bishop as a spendthrift.
Epiphanius, however, having, notwithstanding
these remonstrances, given away the small sum
that had remained, a stranger went to the little
house where the treasurer lived, and placed in
his hands a bag containing many gold coins.
Since neither the giver nor the sender was visible,
it seemed very naturally miraculous, that in a
gift of so much money a man should keep him-

• Independent chapter. Cf. life by alleged Polybius.


96


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VII. 27.


self unknown ; thus everybody thought it to be
a Divine work.

I desire also to relate another miracle that is
attributed to Epiphanius. I have heard that a
similar action has been related of (iregory, who
formerly governed Neocjesarea ; and I see no
reason to doubt the veracity of the account ;
but it does not disprove the authenticity of the
miracle attributed to Epiphanius. Peter, the
apostle, was not the only man who raised another
from the dead ; John, the evangelist, wrought a
similar miracle at Ephesus ; as did likewise the
daughters of Philip at Hierapolis. Similar
actions have been performed in different ages
by the men of God. The miracle which I wish
to instance is the following. Two beggars having
ascertained when Epiphanius would pass that
way, agreed to extract a larger donation than
usual from him by having recourse to stratagem.
As soon as the bishop was seen approaching, one
of the beggars flung himself on the ground and
simulated death ; the other stood by and uttered
loud lamentations, deploring the loss of his
companion, and his own poverty, which made
him unable to procure sepulture for him.
Epiphanius prayed to God that the deceased
might rise in peace ; he gave the survivor suffi-
cient money for the interment, and said to the
weeper, " Take measures, my son, for the burial
of your companion, and weep no more ; he
cannot now arise from the dead ; the calamity
was inevitable, therefore you ought to bear it
with resignation." Saying these words, the
bishop departed from the spot. As soon as
there was no one in sight, the beggar who had
addressed Epiphanius touched the other with
his foot, as he lay extended on the ground, and
said to him, " You have well performed your
part ; arise now, for through your labor, we have
a good provision for to-day." He, however,
lay in the same way, neither heard any cry, nor
perceived him who moved him with all his
strength ; the other beggar ran after the priest
and confessed their artifice, and, with lamen-
tations and tearing of his hair, he besought
Epiphanius to restore his companion. Epipha-
nius merely exhorted him to submit with patience
to the catastrophe, and sent him away. God
did not undo what had happened, because, I feel
persuaded, it was his design to show that those
who practice deception on his servants are
accounted as guilty of the fraud as if it had been
perpetrated against Him who sees all, and who
hears all.


CHAP. XXVIII. ACACIUS, BISHOP OF BERCEA, ZP:N0,
AND AJAX, MEN DISTINGUISHED AND RENOWNED
FOR VIRTUE.

The following details are also the results of


inquiry.' Acacius ^ was conspicuous among the
bishops ; he had already previously administered
the episcopate of Keroea in Syria. There are of
course many actions of his, which are worthy of
record. He was from his youth brought up to the
profession of ascetic monasticism, and was rigid
in observing all the regiilations of this mode of
life. When he was raised to the bishopric, he
gave this evidence of greatest virtue, in that he
kept the episcopal residence open at all hours of
the day, so that the citizens and strangers were
ahvavs free to visit him, even when he was at
meals or at repose. This course of conduct is,
in my opinion, very admirable ; for either he was
living in such a way as to be always sure of him-
self, or he devised this as a means of preparation
against the evil in one's nature, so that in ex-
pecting to be caught by the sudden entrance of
persons, it would be necessary for him to be on
continuous guard, not to err in his duties, but
rather to be engaged in covenanted acts.

Zeno and Ajax,^' two celebrated brothers,
flourished about the same period. They de-
voted themselves to a life of philosophy, but
did not fix their abode as hermits in the desert,
but at Gaza, a maritime city, which was also
called Majuma. They both defended the truth
of their religion with greatest fidelity, and con-
fessed God with courage, so that they were
frequently subjected to very cniel and harsh
treatment by the pagans. It is said that Ajax
married a very lovely woman, and after he
had known her thrice in all that time, had
three sons ; and that subsequently he held no
further intercourse with her, but persevered in
the exercises of monasticism. He brought up
two of his sons to the divine life and celibacy,
and the third he permitted to marry. He gov-
erned the church of Botolium with propriety
and distinction.

Zeno, who had from his youth renounced the
world and marriage, persevered in steadfast
adherence to the service of God. It is said,
and I myself am witness of the truth of the
assertion, that when he was bishop of the
church in Majuma, he was never absent at
morning or evening hymns, or any other worship
of God, unless attacked by some malady ; and
yet he was at this period an old man, being
nearly a hundred years of age. He continued
his course of life in the monastic philosophy,
but, by pursuing his trade of weaving linen,
continued to earn the means of supplying his
own wants and of providing for others. He
never deviated from this course of conduct till
the close of his life, although he exceeded all
the other priests of that province in age ; and


' .Mso independent.

- Acacius, Soc. vi. 18; and Theodoret, H. E. v. 4, 8.

' Cf. V. 9.


VII. 29.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


397


although he presided over the people and
property of the largest church.

I have mentioned these as examples of those
who served as priests at this period. It would
be a task to enumerate all where the main part
of them were good, and God bore testimony to
their lives by readily hearing their prayers and
by working many miracles.

CHAP. XXIX. — DISCOVERY OF THE REMAINS OF THE
PROPHETS HABAKKUK AND MICAH. DEATH OF
THE EMPEROR THEODOSIUS THE GREAT.

While the Church everywhere was under the
sway of these eminent men, the clergy and peo-
ple were excited to the imitation of their virtue
and zeal. Nor was the Church of this era dis-
tinguished only by these illustrious examples of
piety ; for the relics of the proto-prophets,'
Habakkuk, and a little while after, Micah, were
brought to light about this time. As I under-
stand, God made known the place where both
these bodies were deposited by a divine vision
in a dream to Zebennus, who was then acting as
bishop of the church of Eleutheropolis. The
relics of Habakkuk were found at Cela, a city


' First part independent.


formerly called Ceila. The tomb of Micah was
discovered at a distance of ten stadia from Cela,
at a place called Berathsatia.^ This tomb was
ignorantly styled by the people of the country,
" the tomb of the faithful " ; or, in their native
language, Nephsameemana. These events, which
occurred during the reign of Theodosius, were
sufficient for the good repute of the Christian
religion.

After conquering Eugenius,^ Theodosius the
emperor remained for some time at Milan, and
here he was attacked with a serious malady.
He recalled to mind the prediction of the monk,
John, and conjectured that his sickness was unto
death. He sent in haste for his son Honorius
from Constantinople ; and on seeing him by, he
seemed to be easier, so that he was able to be
present at the sports of the Hippodrome. After
dinner, however, he suddenly grew worse, and
sent to desire his son to preside at the spectacle.
He died on the following night. This event
happened during the consulate of the brothers
Olybrius and Probianus.^


- Or simply Bera.

3 Soc. V. 26; Ruf. H.E. ii. 34; Theodoret, H. E. v. 25; Philost.
xi. 2; Zos. iv. 59. For a different view of the private life of Theo-
dosius, see Eunap. Fragni. ii. 42,49; Philost. xi. 2; Zos. iv. 33, 44.

■• A.D. 395. Idat. Descr. Coss.; Marcel. Com. chron.


BOOK VIII.


CHAP. I. — SUCCESSORS OF THEODOSRIS THE GREAT.
RUFINUS, THE PR.1=T0RIAN PREFECT, IS SLAIN.
THE CHIEF PRIESTS OF THE PRINCIPAL CITIES.
DIFFERENCES ' AMONG THE HERETICS. ACCOUNT
OF SISINIUS, BISHOP OF THE NOVATIANS.

Such was the death of Theodosius, who had
contributed so efficiently to the aggrandizement
of the Church.^ He expired in the sixtieth year
of his age, and the sixteenth of his reign. He
left his two sons as his successors. Arcadius,
the elder, reigned in the East, and Honorius in
the West. They both held the same religious
sentiments as their father.

Damasus was dead ; and at this period Siricius
was the leader of the church of Rome ; Nec-
tarius, of the church in Constantinople ; Theophi-
lus, over the church of Alexandria ; Flavian, over
the church of Antioch ; and John, over that of
Jerusalem. Armenia and the Eastern provinces
were at this time overrun by the barbarian
Huns.'^ Rufinus, prefect of the East, was sus-
pected of having clandestinely invited them to
devastate the Roman territories, in furtherance
of his own ambitious designs ; for he was said
to aspire to tyranny. For this reason, he was
soon after slain ; for, on the return of the troops
from the conquest of Eugenius, the Emperor
Arcadius, according to custom, went forth from
Constantinople to meet them ; and the soldiers
took this opportunity to massacre Rufinus.
These circumstances tended greatly to the ex-
tension of religion. The emperors attributed to
the piety of their father, the ease with which the
tyrant had been vanquished, and the plot of
Rufinus to gain their government arrested ; and
they readily confirmed all the laws which had
been enacted by their predecessors in favor of
the churches, and bestowed their own gifts in
addition. Their subjects profited by their ex-
ample, so that even the pagans were converted
without difficulty to Christianity, and the heretics
united themselves tO the Catholic Church.

Owing to the disputes which had arisen among
the Arians and Eunomians, and to which I have
already alluded, these heretics daily diminished
in number. Many of them, in reflecting upon the
diversity of sentiments which prevailed among

' Soc. V. 26; vi. I, 22; Philost. xi. 3; Theodoret, //. E. v. 26.
» Claudianus, in Rufinnm, lib. ii.; Hieron. Ep. Ixxvii. ad Ocea-
num, de morte Fabiotcr, 8; Eiinap. Fragm. ii. 52.


those of their own persuasion, judged that the
truth of God could not be present with them,
and went over to those who held the same faith
as the emperors.

The interests of the Macedonians of Constan-
tinople were materially affected by their pos-
sessing no bishop in that juncture ; for, ever
since they had been deprived of their churches
by Eudoxius, under the reign of Constantius,
they had been governed only by presbyters, and
remained so until the next reign. The Nova-
tians, on the other hand, although they had been
agitated by the controversy concerning the Pass-
over, which was an innovation made by Sabba-
tius, yet the most of them remained in quiet
possession of their churches, and had not been
molested by any of the punishments or laws
enacted against other heretics, because they
maintained that the Three Persons of the Trinity
are of the same substance. The virtue of their
leaders also tended greatly to the maintenance
of concord among them. After the presidency
of Agelius they were governed by Marcian, a
good man ; and on his decease,^ a little while
before the time now under consideration, the
bishopric devolved upon Sisinius,* a very elo-
quent man, well versed in the doctrines of phi-
losophy and of the Holy Scriptures, and so expert
in disputation that even Eunomius, who was well
approved in this art and effective in this work,
often refused to hold debates with him. His
course of life was prudent and above the reach
of calumny ; yet he indulged in luxury, and even
in superfluities ; so that those who knew him not
were incredulous as to whether he could remain
temperate in the midst of so much abundance.
His manners were gracious and suave in assem-
blies, and on this account he was esteemed
by the bishops of the Catholic Church, by the
rulers, and by the learned. His jests were re-
plete with good nature, and he could bear ridi-
cule without manifesting the least resentment.
He was very prompt and witty in his rejoinders.
Being once asked wherefore, as he was bishop,
he bathed twice daily, he replied, " Because I
do not bathe thrice." On another occasion,
being ridiculed by a member of the Catholic


' i.e. Nov. 27, 395 A.D.

♦ Soc. vi. 22. Soz. is careful to omit the joke on Joh« Chrysos-

tODl.


VIII. 2.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


399


Church because he dressed in white, he asked
where it was commanded that he should dress
in black ; and, as the other hesitated for a reply,
he continued, " You can give no argument in
support of your position ; but I refer you to
Solomon, the wisest of men, who says, * Let
your garments be always white.' Moreover
Christ is described in the Gospel as having
appeared in white, and Moses and Elias mani-
fested themselves to the apostles in robes of
white." It appears to me that the following
reply was also very ingenious. Leontius, bishop
of Ancyra, in Galatia, settled in Constantinople
after he had deprived the Novatians in his prov-
ince of their churches. Sisinius went to him to
request that the churches might be restored ;
but far from yielding compliance, he reviled the
Novatians, and said that they were not worthy
of holding churches, because, by abolishing the
observance of penance, they intercepted the
philanthropy of God. To this Sisinius replied,
"No one does penance as I do." Leontius
asked him in what way he did penance. " In
coming to see you," retorted Sisinius. Many
other witty speeches are attributed to him, and
he is even said to have written several works
with some elegance. But his discourses obtained
greater applause than his writings, since he was
best at declamation, and was capable of attracting
the hearer by his voice and look and pleasing
countenance. This brief description may serve
as a proof of the disposition and mode of life
of this great man.


CHAP. II. — EDUCATION, TRAINING, CONDUCT, AND
WISDOM OF THE GREAT JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ; HIS
PROMOTION TO THE SEE; THEOPHILUS, BISHOP
OF ALEXANDRIA, BECOMES HIS CONFIRMED OPPO-
NENT.

Nectarius died about this period,^ aad length-
ened debates were held on the ordination of a
successor. They all voted for different indi-
viduals, and it seemed impossible for all to unite
on one, and the time passed heavily. There
was, however, at Antioch on the Orontes, a cer-
tain presbyter named John, a man of noble birth
and of exemplary life, and possessed of such won-
derful powers of eloquence and persuasion that
he was declared by the sophist, Libanius the
Syrian, to surpass all the orators of the age.
When this sophist was on his death-bed he was
asked by his friends who should take his place.
" It would have been John," replied he, " had
not the Christians taken him from us." Many
of those who heard the discourses of John in
the church were thereby excited to the love of

1 Pallad. Dialog, de vita Chrys. 5, 6; Soc. vi. 2, 3: Theodoret,
H. E. V. 27. Soz. works his material for the most part indepen-
dently.


virtue and to the reception of his own religious
sentiments.^ For by living a divine life he im-
parted zeal from his own virtues to his hearers.
He produced convictions similar to his own,
because he did not enforce them by rhetorical
art and strength, but expounded the sacred books
with truth and sincerity. For a word which is
ornamented by deeds customarily shows itself
as worthy of belief ; but without these the speaker
appears as an impostor and a traitor to his own
words, even though he teach earnestly. Appro-
bation in both regards was due to John. He
devoted himself to a prudent course of hfe and
to a severe public career, while he also used a
clear diction, united with brilliance in speech.

His natural abilities were excellent, and he
improved them by studying under the best mas-
ters. He learned rhetoric from Libanius, and
philosophy from Andragathius. When it was
expected that he would embrace the legal pro-
fession and take part in the career of an advo-
cate, he determined to exercise himself in the
sacred books and to practice philosophy accord-
ing to the law of the Church. He had as
teachers of this philosophy, Carterius and Dio-
dorus, two celebrated presidents of ascetic insti-
tutions. Diodorus was afterwards the governor
of the church of Tarsus, and, I have been in-
formed, left many books of his own writings in
which he explained the significance of the sacred
words and avoided allegory. John did not re-
ceive the instructions of these men by himself,
but persuaded Theodore and Maximus, who had
been his companions under the instruction of
Libanius, to accompany him. Maximus after-
wards became bishop of Seleucia, in Isauria ;
and Theodore, bishop of Mompsuestia, in Cili-
cia. Theodore was well conversant with the
sacred books and with the rest of the discipline
of rhetoricians and philosophers. After study-
ing the ecclesiastical laws, and frequenting the
society of holy men, he was filled with admira-
tion of the ascetic mode of life and condemned
city life. He did not persevere in the same
purpose, but after changing it, he was drawn to
his former course of life ; and, to justify his con-
duct, cited many examples from ancient history,
with which he was well acquainted, and went
back into the city. On hearing that he was en-
gaged in business and intent on marriage, John
composed an epistle,^ more divine in language
and thought than the mind of man could pro-
duce, and sent it to him. Upon reading it, he
repented and immediately gave up his posses-
sions, renounced his intention of marrying, and
was saved by the advice of John, and returned
to the philosophic career. This seems to me a

2 Some of the disciples of Libanius, who had the habit of attend-
ing the public instructions of John in the church, were converted by
him to the faith of Christ.

^ Chrys. ad Theodorum lapiunt, xlvii. i. Migne.


400


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 2.


remarkable instance of the power of John's
eloquence ; for he readily forced conviction on
the mind of one who was himself habituated to
persuade and convince others. By the same
eloquence, John attracted the admiration of the
people ; while he strenuously convicted sinners
even in the churches, and antagonized with bold-
ness all acts of injustice, as if they had been
perpetrated against himself. This boldness
pleased the people, but grieved the wealthy and
the powerful, who were guilty of most of the
vices which he denounced.

Being, then, held in such high estimation by
those who knew him by experience, and by
those who were acquainted with him through
the reports of others, John was adjudged wor-
thy, in word and in deed, by all the subjects of the
Roman Empire, to be the bishop of the church of
Constantinople. The clergy and people were
unanimous in electing him ; their choice was
approved by the emperor, who also sent the
embassy which should conduct him ; and, to
confer greater solemnity on his ordination, a
council was convened. Not long after the let-
ter of the emperor reached Asterius, the gen-
eral of the East ; he sent to desire John to repair
to him, as if he had need of him. On his ar-
rival, he at once made him get into his chariot,
and conveyed him with dispatch to a military
station, Pagras so-called, where he delivered
him to the officers whom the emperor had sent
in quest of him. Asterius acted very prudently
in sending for John before the citizens of An-
tioch knew what was about to occur ; for they
would probably have excited a sedition, and
have inflicted injury on others, or subjected
themselves to acts of violence, rather than have
suffered John to be taken from them.

When John had arrived at Constantinople, and
when the priests were assembled together, The-
ophilus opposed his ordination ; and proposed as
a candidate in his stead, a presbyter of his
church named Isidore, who took charge of
strangers and of the poor at Alexandria. I have
been informed by persons who were acquainted
with Isrdore, that from his youth upwards he
practiced the philosophic virtues, near Scetis.
Others say that he had gained the friendship of
Theophilus by being a participant and a familiar
in a very perilous undertaking. For it is re-
ported that during the war against Maximus,
Theophilus intrusted Isidore with gifts and let-
ters respectively addressed to the emperor and
to the tyrant, and sent him to Rome, desiring
him to remain there until the termination of the
war, when he was to deliver the gifts, with the
letters, to him, who might prove the victor.
Isidore acted according to his instructions, but
the artifice was detected ; and, fearful of being
arrested, he fled to Alexandria. Theophilus


from that period evinced much attachment
towards him, and, with a view of recompensing
his services, strove to raise him to the bishopric
of Constantinople. But whether there was really
any truth in this report, or whether Theophilus de-
sired to ordain this man because of his excel-
lence, it is certain that he eventually yielded to
those who decided for John.' He feared Eutro-
pius, who was artfully eager for this ordination.
Eutropius then presided over the imperial house,
and they say he threatened Theophilus, that un-
less he would vote with the other bishops, he
would have to defend himself against those who
desired to accuse him ; for many written accu-
sations against him were at that time before the
council.


CHAP. III. RAPID PROMOTION OF JOHN TO THE

BISHOPRIC, AND MORE VEHEMENT GRAPPLING WITH
rrS AFFAIRS. HE RE-ESTABLISHES DISCIPLINE IN
THE CHURCHES EVER\'^VHERE. BY SENDING AN
EMBASSY TO ROME, HE ABOLISHED THE HOSTILITY
TO FLAVIAN.

As soon as John was raised to the episcopal
dignity, he devoted his attention first to the
reformation of the lives of his clergy ; ^ he re-
proved and amended their ways and diet and
every procedure of their manifold transactions.
He also ejected some of the clergy from the
Church. He was naturally disposed to repre-
hend the misconduct of others, and to antago-
nize righteously those who acted unjustly ; and
he gave way to these characteristics still more
in the episcopate ; for his nature, having attained
power, led his tongue to reproof, and nerved his
wrath more readily against the enemy. He did
not confine his efforts to the reformation of his
own church ; but as a good and large-minded
man, he sought to rectify abuses throughout the
world. Immediately upon entering the episco-
pate, he strove to put an end to the dissension
which had arisen concerning Paulinus, between
the Western and Egyptian bishops and the bish-
ops of the East ; since on this account a general
disunion was overpowering the churches in the
whole empire. He requested the assistance
of Theophilus in effecting the reconciliation of
Flavian with the bishop of Rome.^ Theophilus
agreed to co-operate with him in the restoration
of concord ; and Acacius, bishop of Berea, and
Isidore, whom Theophilus had proposed as a
candidate for ordination instead of John, were
sent on an embassy to Rome. They soon effected
the object of their journey, and sailed back to
Egypt. Acacius repaired to Syria, bearing con-

' Soc. also attests to the presence of Theophilus at the ordination
of John, vi.2; PMaA. Diahg-. 5.
I » Soc. vi. 4. Cf. Theodoret, //. E. v. 28; Pallad. Dialog. 5.
» Soc. vi. 3 ; Theodoret, H. E. v. 23.


VIII. 4]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


401


ciliatory letters to the adherents of Flavian from
the priests of Egypt and of the West. And 'the
churches, after a long delay once more laid aside
their discord, and took up communion with one
another. The people at Antioch, who were
called Eustathians, continued, indeed, for some
time to hold separate assemblies, although they
possessed no bishop. Evagrius, the successor
of Paulinus, did not, as we have stated, long
survive him ; and I think reconciliation became
easier for the bishops from there being no one
to oppose. The laity, as is customary with the
populace, gradually went over to those who as-
sembled together under the guidance of Flavian ;
and thus, in course of time, they were more and
more united.


CHAP. IV. ENTERPRISE OF GAINAS, THE GOTHIC

BARBARIAN. EVILS WHICH HE PERPETRATED.

A BARBARIAN, named Gainas,^ who had taken
refuge among the Romans, and who had risen
from the lowest ranks of the army to military
command, formed a design to usurp the throne
of the Roman Empire. With this in view, he
sent for his countrymen, the Goths, from their own
homes to come to the Roman territories, and ap-
pointed his relatives to be tribunes and chiliarchs.
Tirbingilus, a relative of his, who commanded
a large body of troops in Phrygia, commenced
an insurrection ; and to all persons of judgment
it was patent that he was preparing the way.
Under the pretext of resenting the devastation
of many of the Phrygian cities, which had been
committed to his superintendence, Gainas turned
to their assistance ; but on his arrival, when a
multitude of barbarians had been equipped for
war, he disclosed his plan which he had pre-
viously concealed, and pillaged the cities which
he had been commanded to guard, and was
about to attack others. He then proceeded to
Bithynia, and encamped in the boundaries of
Chalcedon, and threatened war. The cities
of the East of Asia, and as many as lived be-
tween these regions and about the Euxine, being
thus in danger, the emperor and his counsellors
judged that it would not be safe to venture into
any hazardous undertaking without preparation
against men who were already desperate ; for
the emperor declared that he was ready to be
favorable to him in every point, and sent to Gai-
nas to offer him whatever he might demand.

Gainas requested that two consuls, named
Saturninus and Aurelian, whom he suspected of
being inimical, should be delivered up to him ;
and when they were in his power, he pardoned

* Chrys, Homilia cum Saturninus et Aurelianus acii essent
in exsilium, iii. 413; Soc. vi. 6. He advises the curious to read
the raii'ta, a poem by Eusebius the Scholastic; and the verses on
the same theme by the poet Ammonius. Philost. xi. 8; Theodoret,
H. E, V. 32, 33; Eunap. Fragm. ii. 62-65, "'• *7J 2os, v. 7-22.


them. He afterwards held a conference with
the emperor near Chalcedon, in the house of
prayer in which the tomb of Euphemia the
martyr is deposited ; and after he and the
emperor had mutually bound themselves by
vows of friendship to each other, he threw
down his arms, and repaired to Constan-
tinople, where, by an imperial edict, he was
appointed general of the infantry and cavalry.
Prosperity so far beyond his deserts was more
than he could bear with moderation ; and as,
contrary to all expectations, he had succeeded
so wonderfully in his former enterprise, he deter-
mined to undermine the peace of the Catholic
Church. He was a Christian, and, like the
rest of the barbarians, had espoused the Arian
heresy. Urged either by the presidents of this
party, or by the suggestions of his own ambition,
he applied to the emperor to place one of the
churches of the city in the hands of the Arians.
He represented that it was neither just nor
proper that, while he was general of the Roman
troops, he should be compelled to retire with-
out the walls of the city when he wished to en-
gage in prayer. John did not remain inactive
when made acquainted with these proceedings.
He assembled all the bishops who were then
residing in the city, and went with them to the
palace. He spoke at great length in the pres-
ence of the emperor and of Gainas, reproached
the latter with being a stranger and a fugitive,
and reminded him that his life had been saved
by the father of the emperor, to whom he had
sworn fidelity, as likewise to his children, to the
Romans, and to the laws which he was striving
to make powerless. When he had made this
speech he showed the law which Theodosius
had established, forbidding the heterodox to
hold a church within the walls. Then, address-
ing himself to the emperor, John exhorted him
to maintain the laws which had been established
against heretics ; and told him that it would be
better to be deprived of the empire, than to be
guilty of impiety by becoming a traitor to the
house of God. Thus did John speak boldly
like a man, and gave no place to innovation in
the churches under his care. Gainas, however,
regardless of his oaths, attacked the city. His
enterprise was pre-announced by the appear-
ance of a comet directly over the city ; this
comet was of extraordinary magnitude, larger,
it is said, than any that had previously been
seen, and reaching almost to the earth itself.
Gainas intended to seize first upon the stores of
the bankers, and hoped to collect together their
enormous wealth. But since the rumor of his
plan was spread, the bankers concealed their
ready wealth and no longer set forth silver upon
the tables, as they were wont publicly to do.
Gainas then sent some of the barbarians by


402


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 4.


night to set fire to the palace ; but they were
unskillful and overcome with fear, so they turned
back. For when they drew near the edifice,
they fancied that they saw a multitude of heavily
armed men of immense stature, and they re-
turned to inform Gainas that fresh troops had
just arrived. Gainas disbelieved their report,
for he was confident that no troops had entered
the city. As, however, other individuals whom
he despatched to the palace for the same pur-
pose, on the following night, returned with the
same report, he went out himself to be an eye-
witness of the extraordinary spectacle. Imagin-
ing that the army before him consisted of sol-
diers who had been withdrawn from other cities,
and that these troops protected the city and
palace by night and concealed themselves by
day, Gainas feigned to be possessed of a demon ;
and under the pretext of offering up a prayer,
went to the church which the father of the em-
peror had erected in honor of John the Baptist,
at Hebdomos. Some of the barbarians remained
in Constantinople, and others accompanied
Gainas ; they secretly carried arms and pots full
of darts in the women's chariots, but when they
were discovered, they slew the guard at the
gates, who attempted to hinder the carrying out
of the arms. From this the city was filled with as
much confusion and uproar, as if it had suddenly
been captured. A good thought ruled this terri-
ble moment ; for the emperor without delay de-
clared Gainas a public enemy, and commanded
that all the barbarians left in the city should be
slain. No sooner was this mandate issued, than
the soldiers rushed upon the barbarians, and slew
the greater number of them ; they then set fire to
the church which was named after the Goths ;
for as was customary, they had congregated
there in the house of prayer, because there
was no other refuge, since the gates were shut.
On hearing of this calamity, Gainas passed
through Thrace, and proceeded towards the
Cherronesus, intending to cross the Hellespont ;
for he thought that if he could conquer the
ojjposite coast of Asia, he could easily subjugate
to himself all the provinces of the empire in the
E;ist. All these things proved contrary to his
hopes, because the Romans were there favored
by Divine power. For the army sent by the
emperor was on hand by land and by sea, under
the command of Flavita, who although a bar-
barian by birth, was a good man, and an able
general. The barbarians, having no ships, im-
prudently attempted to cross the Hellespont to
the opposite continent on rafts ; when suddenly
a great wind blew and violently separated them,
and drove them against the Roman vessels.
The greater part of the barbarians and their
horses were drowned ; but many were slain by
the military. Gainas, however, with a few of his


followers escaped ; but not long after, when
fleeing through Thrace, they fell in with another
detachment of the Roman army, and Gainas,
with all his barbarians, perished. Such was the
termination of the daring schemes and life of
Gainas.

Flavita had rendered himself very conspicu-
ous in this war, and was therefore appointed
consul.^ During his consulate, and that of
Vincentius, a son was bom to the emperor.
The young prince was named after his grand-
father, and at the commencement of the next
consulate,^ was proclaimed Augustus.

CHAP. V. — JOHN SWAYED THE PEOPLE BY HIS
TEACHINGS. CONCERNING THE WOMAN, A FOL-
LOWER OF MACEDONIUS, ON ACCOUNT OF WHOM
THE BREAD WAS TURNED INTO A STONE.

John governed the church of Constantinople
with exemplary prudence, and induced many of
the pagans and of the heretics to unite them-
selves with him.^ Crowds of people daily re-
sorted to him ; some for the purpose of being
edified by listening to his discourses, and others
with the intention of tempting him. He, how-
ever, pleased and attracted all classes, and led
them to embrace the same religious sentiments
as himself. As the people pressed around him,
and could not get enough of his words, so that
when they were pushed hither and yon, and
were pressing one another, they incurred danger ;
and each one was forcing his way to go farther,
so that by standing near, he might hear more
accurately what John was saying, he placed him-
self in the midst of them upon the platform of
the readers, and, having taken a seat, taught the
multitude. It seems to me that this is a suit-
able place in my history for the insertion of the
account of a miracle which was performed dur-
ing the life of John. A certain man of the
Macedonian heresy, lived with a wife of the
same belief; he chanced to hear John discours-
ing concerning the opinion one ought to hold
about the Divine nature ; he was convinced by
the argument he heard advanced, and strove to
persuade his wife to embrace the same senti-
ments. Her previous habits of mind, and the
conversation of other women of her acquaint-
ance, deterred her from complying with his
wishes ; and, when he found that all his efforts
to convince her were futile, he told her that, un-
less she would be of one mind with him on
Divine subjects, she should not continue to live
with him. The woman, therefore, promised to
do as she was required ; but, at the same time,

' Flavita was consul with vincentius, A.D. 401. See under
Marcell. Com. chron.

' Arcadiiis and Honorius, each in their fifth consulate. Theo-
dosius junior was made Cxsar A.D. 402.

' Independent chapter.


VIII. 7-]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


403


she made known the matter to one of her ser-
vant -maids, in whose fidehty she confided, and
used her as an instrument in deceiving her hus-
band. At the season of the celebration of the
mysteries (the initiated will understand what I
mean), this woman kept what was given to her
and held down her head as if engaged in prayer.
Her servant, who was standing behind her,
placed in her hand a bit of bread which she had
brought with her ; but, as soon as she had
placed it between her teeth, it was converted
into stone. Since such a divine affair had hap-
pened to her, she was very fearful lest any fur-
ther calamity should befall her, and ran to the
bishop, and confessed on herself. She showed
him the stone, which bore the marks of her
teeth ; it was composed of some unknown sub-
stance, and was marked by a very strange color.
She implored forgiveness with tears, and contin-
ued ever after to hold the same religious tenets
as her husband. If any person should consider
this narrative incredible, he can inspect the
stone in question ; for it is still preserved in the
treasury of the church of Constantinople.


CHAP. VI. — PROCEEDINGS OF JOHN IN ASU AND
PHRVGIA. HERACLIDES, BISHOP OF EPHESUS, AND
GERONTIUS, BISHOP OF NICOMEDIA.

JOHN^ having been informed that the churches
in Asia and the neighborhood were governed by
unworthy persons, and that they bartered the
priesthood for the incomes and gifts received, or
bestowed that dignity as a matter of private favor,
repaired to Ephesus, and deposed thirteen bish-
ops, some in Lycia and Phrygia, and others in
Asia itself, and appointed others in their stead.
The bishop of Ephesus was dead, and he there-
fore ordained Heraclides over the church.
Herachdes was a native of Cyprus, and was one
of the deacons under John : he had formerly
joined the monks at Scetis, and had been the dis-
ciple of the monk Ev'agrius. John also expelled
Gerontius, bishop of the church in Nicomedia.
This latter was a deacon under Ambrosius, of
the church of Milan ; he declared, I do not
know why, either with an intention to invent a
miracle, or because he had been himself de-
ceived by the art and phantasms of a demon,
that he had seized something resembling an ass
(ovoo-KcAts) by night, had cut off its head, and
flung it into a grinding-house. Ambrose re-
garded this mode of discourse as unworthy of a
deacon of God, and commanded Gerontius to
remain in seclusion until he had expiated his
fault by repentance. Gerontius, however, was a
very skillful physician ; he was eloquent and

' Soc. vi. 11; Pallad. Dialog. 13-20. .Soz. has material of his
own.


persuasive, and knew well how to gain friends ;
he therefore ridiculed the command of Ambrose,
and rei)aired to Constantinople. In a short
time he obtained the friendship of some of the
most powerful men at court ; and, not long after,
was elevated to the bishopric of Nicomedia.
He was ordained by Helladius, bishop of Csesa-
rea in Cappadocia, who performed this office the
more readily for him, because he had been instru-
mental, through his interest at court, in obtaining a
high appointment in the army for that function-
ary's son. When Ambrose heard of this ordina-
tion, he wrote to Nectarius, the president of the
church of Constantinople, desiring him to eject
Gerontius from the priesthood, and not permit
him and the ecclesiastical order to be so abused.
However desirous Nectarius might have been to
obey this injunction, he could never succeed in
carrying it into effect, owing to the determined
resistance of the people of Nicomedia. John
deposed Gerontius, and ordained Pansophius,
who had formerly been preceptor to the wife of
the emperor, and who, though a man of decided
piety and of a mild and gentle disposition, was
not liked by the Nicomedians. They arose in
frequent sedition, and enumerated publicly and
privately the beneficence of Gerontius, and on
the liberal advantage derived from his science, and
its generous and active use for the rich and poor
alike ; and as is usual when we applaud those
we love, they ascribed many other virtues to
him. They went about the streets of their own
city and Constantinople as if some earthquake,
or pestilence, or other visitation of Divine wrath
had occurred, and sang psalms, and offered sup-
plications that they might have Gerontius for
their bishop. They were at length compelled
to yield to necessity, and parted with grief and
groans from Gerontius, receiving in his stead a
bishop whom they regarded with fear and aver-
sion. The bishops who had been deposed and
all their followers declaimed against John, as the
leader of a revolution in the churches, and as
changing the rights of the ordained, contrary to
the ancestral laws ; and under the influence of
their grievance, they condemned deeds done by
him, which were worthy of praise according to
the opinion of most people. Among other
matters, they reproached him with the proceed-
ings that had been taken against Eutropius.

CHAP. Vll. — CONCERNING EUTROPIUS, CHIEF OF THK
EUNUCHS, AND THE LAW ENACTED BY HIM. ON
BEING TURNED FROM THE CHURCH, HE WAS PUT
TO DEATH. MURMURS AGAINST JOHN.

EuTROPius was originally the chief of the
eunuchs, and was the first and only person of
that rank of whom we have known or heard
who attained the consular and patrician dig-


404


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 7.


nity.^ When he was raised to present power,
he thought not of the future, nor of the insta-
bility of human affairs, but caused those who
sought an asylum in churches to be thrust out.
He treated Pentadia, the wife of Timasius, in
this manner. Timasius was a general in the
army, capable and much feared ; but Eutropius
procured an edict for his banishment to Pasis
in Egypt, under the pretext that he aspired to
tyranny. I have been informed that Timasius
fell a victim to thirst, or dreading lest anything
worse might be in store, he was caught in the
sands there, and was found dead. Eutropius
issued a law, enacting that no one should seek
refuge in churches, and that those who had already
fled thither should be driven out. He was, how-
ever, the first to transgress this law ; for not Icng
after its enactment, he offended the empress,
and immediately left the palace, and fled to the
Church as a suppliant. While he was lying be-
neath the table, John pronounced a discourse,
in which he reprehended the pride of power,
and directed the attention of the people to the
instability of human greatness. The enemies of
John hence took occasion to cast reproach on
him, because he had rebuked instead of com-
passionating, one who was suffering under the
calamities of adverse fortunes. Eutropius soon
after paid the penalty of his impious plan, and
was beheaded ; and the law which he had en-
acted was effaced from the public inscriptions.
The wrath of God having been thus promptly
visited on the injustice that had been perpetrated
against the Church, prosperity was restored to
it, and there was an increase in the Divine wor-
ship. The people of Constantinople were more
sedulous then than before, in attendance at the
singing of the morning and evening hymns.


CHAP. VIII. — ANTIPHONAL HYMNS AGAINST THE
ARIANS INTRODUCED BY JOHN. THE INTERESTS
OF THE ORTHODOX ARE MUCH AUGMENIED BY
THE TEACHINGS OF JOHN, WHILE THE WEALTHY
ARE MORE AND MORE ENRAGED.

The Arians, having been deprived of their
churches in Constantinople during the reign of
Theodosius, held their churches without the
walls of the city.^ They previously assembled
by night in the public porticoes, and were divided
into bands, so that they sang antiphonally, for
they had composed certain refrains which re-
flected their own dogma, and at the break of
day marched in procession, singing these hymns,
to the places in which they held their churches.

1 Independent chapter. Cf. Soc. vi. 5: Philost. xi. 4-6; Chrys.
Honiilia in Eutropium eunuchtim patria'um ; honiilia de cnfitp
Eutropio ft (it diviiiaruni vanitate ; Claudianus in Eutropium,
i. li. ; Eunap. Fragni. ii. 53-56; Fra^m. iii. 16; Fragtn. iv. 20-23;
J'ragm. v. 3; Zos. v. 3, 8-18.

» Soc. vi. 8.


They proceeded in this manner on all solemn
festivals, and on the first and last days of the
week. The sentiments propounded in these
odes were such as were likely to engender dis-
putes. As, for instance, the following : " Where
are those who say that the Three Persons con-
stitute one Power?" Other similar acrimonious
observations were interspersed throughout their
compositions. John was fearful lest any of his
own church people should be led astray by
witnessing these exhibitions, and therefore com-
manded them to sing hymns in the same man-
ner. The orthodox became more distinguished,
and in a short time surpassed the opposing here-
tics in number and processions ; for they had sil-
ver crosses and lighted wax tapers borne before
them. The eunuch of the empress was ap-
pointed to regulate these processions, to pay the
cost of whatever might be required, and to pre-
pare hymns. Hence the Arians, impelled either
by jealousy or revenge, attacked the members
of the Catholic Church. Much bloodshed en-
sued on both sides. Briso (for this was the
name of the imperial eunuch) was wounded on
the forehead by a stone that was cast at him.
The resentment of the emperor was kindled,
and he put a stop to the Arian assemblies.
Having commenced the custom of singing hymns
in the manner and from the <iause above stated,
the members of the Catholic Church did not
discontinue the practice, but have retained it to
the present day. The institution of these pro-
cessions and his services in the Church endeared
John to the people ; but he was hated by the
clergy and the powerful on account of his free
boldness, for he never failed to rebuke the clergy
when he detected them in acts of injustice, nor
to exhort the powerful to return to the practice
of virtue when they abused their wealth, com-
mitted impiety, or yielded to voluptuousness.


CHAP. IX. — SERAPION, THE ARCHDEACON, AND ST,
OLYMPIAS. SOME OF THE CELEBRATED MEN IN-
SOLENTLY BF^R DOWN UPON JOHN, TRADUCING
HIM AS IMPRACTICABLE AND P.ASSIONATE.

The enmity of the clerg)' against John was
greatly increased by Serapion, his archdeacon.
He was an Egyptian, naturally prone to anger,
and always ready to insult his opponents.^ The
feeUngs of hostility were further fostered by the
counsel which Olympias received from John.
Olympias was of most illustrious birth, and
although she had become a widow while young,
and was zealously attached to the exercises of
monastic philosophy according to the laws of
the church, yet Nectarius had ordained her

' Soc. vi. 4, 11; Pallad. Dialog. Pallad. H. L. cxliv.; Epp. xvii.
ad Olympiadem. Soz. has independent material concerning Olym-
pias and Isaac.


viim.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


405


as deaconess. John, perceiving that she bestowed
her goods Hberally on any one who asked her for
them, and that she despised everything but the
service of (rod, said to her : " I applaud your
intentions ; but would have you know that those
who aspire to the perfection of virtue according
to God, ought to distribute their wealth with
economy. You, however, have been bestowing
wealth on the wealthy, which is as useless as if
you had cast it into the sea. Know you not that
you have voluntarily, for the sake of God,
devoted all your possessions to the relief of the
poor. You ought, therefore, to regard your
wealth as belonging to your Master, and to
remember that you have to account for its dis-
tribution. If you will be persuaded by me, you
will in future regulate your donations according
to the wants of those who solicit rehef. You
will thus be enabled to extend the sphere of
your benevolence, and your mercy and most
zealous care will receive reward from God."

John had several disputes with many of the
monks, particularly with Isaac. He highly com-
mended those who remained in quietude in the
monasteries and practiced philosophy there ; he
protected them from all injustice and solicitiously
supplied whatever necessities they might have.
But the monks who went out of doors and made
their appearance in cities, he reproached and
regarded as insulting philosophy. For these
causes, he incurred the hatred of the clergy, and
of many of the monks, who called him a hard,
passionate, morose, and arrogant man. They
therefore attempted to bring his life into public
disrepute, by stating confidently, as if it were
the truth, that he would eat with no one, and
that he refused every invitation to a meal that
was offered him. I know of no pretext that
could have given rise to this assertion, except
that, as I have been assured by a man of un-
doubted veracity, John had, by rigorous asceti-
cism, rendered himself liable to pain in the
head and stomach, and was thus prevented from
being present at some of the choicest symposia.
Hence, however, originated the greatest accusa-
tion that was ever devised against him.


CHAP. X. — SEVERIAN, BISHOP OF GABALES, AND
ANTIOCHUS, BISHOP OF PTOLEMAIS. DISPUTE BE-
TWEEN SERAPION AND SEVERIAN. RECONCILIATION
BETWEEN THEM EFFECTED BY THE EMPRESS.

John likewise incurred the enmity of the
empress, through the machinations of Severian,
bishop of Gabali in Syria. ^ Severian and An-
tiochus, bishop of Ptolernais, a city in Phoenicia,
were both learned men, and well qualified to
teach in the churches. Antiochus had so fine a


* Soc. vi. 11; Pallad. Dialog.


voice and delivery that, by some persons, he was
surnamed Chrysostom. Severian, on the other
hand, had the harshness of the Syrians in his
speech ; but, in point of knowledge and the
evidences of the Scriptures, he was considered
superior to Antiochus. It appears that Antiochus
was the first to visit Constantinople ; he gained
great applause by his discourses, amassed some
property, and then returned to his own city.
Severian followed his example, and went to
Constantinople. He formed an intimacy with
John, spoke frequently in the churches, and was
admired. He was in honor, and became well-
known to many of those in power, and to the
emperor and empress. When John went to
Asia, he commended the Church to his care ; for
he was so far deceived by the adulation of Seve-
rian as to imagine him to be his zealous friend.
Severian, however, thought only of gratifying his
auditors, and of pleasing the people by his dis-
courses.^ When John was apprised of this, he
was filled with jealousy ; and his resentment was
further kindled, it is said, by the representations
of Serapion. After the return of John from
Asia, Serapion happened to see Severian passing ;
but, instead of rising to salute him, he kept his
seat, in order to show his utter contempt for the
man. Severian was offended by this manifesta-
tion of disrespect, and exclaimed, " If Serapion
die a clergyman, then Christ was not incarnate."
Serapion reported these words ; and John, in
consequence, expelled Severian from the city as
insolent, and as a blasphemer against God ; for
witnesses were brought forward to attest that the
above words had been really uttered by him.
Some of the friends of Serapion even went so
far as to suppress part of the speech of Severian,
and to affirm that he had declared that Christ
was not incarnate. John also rebuked Severian,
by asking whether, " If Serapion should not die
among the clergy, it would follow that Christ
had not been incarnate ? " As soon as the wife of
the emperor was informed by the friends of Seve-
rian of what had occurred, she immediately sent
for him from Chalcedon. John, notwithstanding
all her remonstrances, positively refused to hold
any intercourse \vith him, until the empress placed
her son Theodosius on his knees in the church
named after the apostles ; then she entreated him
persistently, and frequently adjured him, until
John yielded a reluctant consent to receive Seve-
rian into friendship. Such are the accounts which
I have received of these transactions.^

CHAP. XI. — QUESTION AGITATED IN EGYPT, AS TO
WHETHER GOD HAS A CORPOREAL FORM. THE-

* A number of the homilies still attributed to Chrysostom, as well
as those now acknowledged not to be his, were from the eloquent
Severian.

^ Chrys. Homilia de recipiendo Sevtriano ; and Sermo ipsius
Sevtriant de pace, iii. 421-423.


4o6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. II.


OPHILUS, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA, AND THE
BOOKS OF ORIGEN.

A QUE.STION was at this period agitated in
Egypt, which had been propounded a short
time previously, namely, whether it is right to
believe that God is anthropomorphic.^ Because
they laid hold of the sacred words with simplic-
ity and without any questioning, most of the
monks of that part of the world were of this
opinion ; and supposed that God possessed eyes,
a face, and hands, and other members of the
bodily organization. But those who searched
into the hidden meaning of the terms of Scrip-
ture held the opposite ; and they maintained
that those who denied the incorporeality of God
were guilty of blasphemy. This later opinion
was espoused by Theophilus, and preached by
him in the church ; and in the epistle - which,
according to custom, he wrote respecting the
celebration of the passover, he took occasion to
state that God ought to be regarded as incor-
poreal, as alien to a human form. When it was
signified to the Egyptian monks that Theophilus
had broached these sentiments, they went to
Alexandria, assembled the people together in one
place, excited a tumult, and determined upon
slaying the bishop as an impious man. Theophi-
lus, however, presented himself to the insurgents
forthwith, and said to them, "When I look
upon you, it is as if I beheld the face of God."
This address sufficiently mollified the men ;
yielding their wrath, they replied, " Wherefore,
then, if you really hold orthodox doctrines, do
you not denounce the books of Origen ; since
those who read them are led into such opin-
ions?" " Such has long been my intention," re-
plied he, " and I shall do as you advise ; for I
blame not less than you do, all those who follow
the doctrines of Origen." By these means he
deluded the brethren, and broke up the sedition.


CHAP. XII. ABOirr THE FOUR BROTHERS, CALLED

" THE LONG," WHO WERE ASCETICS, AND OF
WHO.M THEOPHILUS WAS AN ENEMY J ABOUT ISI-
DORE AND THE EVENTS WHICH CAME ABOUT
THROUGH THESE FOUR.

The controversy would most likely have been
terminated, had it not been renewed by Theoph-
ilus himself, from inimical feelings against Am-
monius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and Euthymius,
who were called " the long." ^ They were broth-
ers ; and, as we have before stated, became con-
spicuous among the philosophers at Scetis.
They were at one period beloved by Theophilus

• Soc. vi. 7.

* This epistle is no longer extant: it is alluded to by Cassianus
in his Collatio, x. 2: Opp. i. p. 821, 822.

' Soc. vi. 7, 9: Pallad, Dialog. 6. S02. has different order and
some new opinions.


above all the other monks of Egypt ; he sought
their society, and frequently dwelt with them.
He even conferred on Dioscorus the bishopric
of Hermopolis. He was confirmed in his hatred
of them, on account of his enmity to Isidore,
whom he had endeavored to ordain in Constan-
tinople after Nectarius. Some say, that a wo-
man, belonging to the Manichean heresy, had
been converted to the faith of the Catholic
Church; Theophilus rebuked the arch-presbyter
(towards whom he had other reasons for enter-
taining resentful feeling), because he had ad-
mitted her to participate in the sacred mysteries
before she had adjured her former heresy.
Peter, for this was the name of the arch-presby-
ter, maifitained that he had received the woman
into communion according to the laws of the
Church, and with the consent of Theophilus ; and
referred to Isidore, as a witness to the truth of
what he had deposed. Isidore happened to be
then at Rome on an embassy ; but, on his return,
he testified that the assertions of Peter were
true. Theophilus resented this avowal as a cal-
umny, and ejected both him and Peter from the
Church. Such is the account given by some
persons of the transaction. I have, however,
heard it alleged, by a man of undoubted verac-
ity, who was very intimate with the monks above
mentioned, that the enmity of Theophilus
towards Isidore originated from two causes.
One of these causes was identical with that
specified by Peter the presbyter, namely, that
he had refused to attest the existence of a testa-
ment in which the inheritance was entailed on
the sister of Theophilus; the other cause
alleged by this individual was, that Isidore re-
fused to give up certain moneys that had been
confided to him for the relief of the poor, and
which Theophilus wished to appropriate to the
erection of churches ; saying that it is better to
restore the bodies of the suffering, which are
more rightly to be considered the temples of
God, and for which end the money had been
furnished, than to build walls. But from what-
ever cause the enmity of Theophilus might
have originated, Isidore, immediately after his
excommunication, joined his former companions,
the monks at Scetis. Ammonius, with a few
others, then repaired to Theophilus, and en-
treated him to restore Isidore to communion.
Theophilus readily promised to do as they re-
quested ; but as time passed away, and noth-
ing more was effected for them, and it became
evident that Theophilus was pretending, they
again repaired to him, renewed their entreaties,
and pressed him to be faithful to his engage-
ment. Instead of corrlplying, Theophilus thrust
one of the monks into prison, for the purpose
of intimidating the others. But he erred in this.
Ammonius and all the monks with him then


VIII. 14.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


407


went to the prison, into which they were readily
admitted by the jailer, who imagined that they
had come to bring provisions to the prisoner;
but having once obtained admission, they re-
fused to leave the prison. When Theophilus
heard of their voluntary confinement, he sent
to desire them to come to him. They replied,
that he ought first to take them out of prison
himself, for it was not just, after having been
subjected to public indignity, that they should
be privately released from confinement. At
length, however, they yielded and went to him.
Theophilus apologized for what had occurred,
and dismissed them as if he had no further in-
tention of molesting them ; but by himself, he
champed and was vexed, and determined to
do them ill. He was in doubt, however, as
to how he could ill-treat them, as they had no
possessions, and despised everything but philos-
ophy, until it occurred to him, to disturb the
peace of their retirement. From his former in-
tercourse with them he had gathered that they
blamed those who believe that God has a human
form, and that they adhered to the opinions of
Origen ; he brought them into collision with the
multitude of monks who maintained the other
view. A terrible contention prevailed among the
monks, for they did not think it worth while to
persuade one another by framing arguments for
themselves in an orderly way, but settled down
into insults. They gave the name of Origenists
to those who maintained the incorporeality of
the Deity, while those who held the opposite
opinion were called Anthropomorphists.

CHAP. XIII. THESE FOUR REPAIR TO JOHN ON

ACCOUNT OF HIS INTEREST; FOR THIS REASON,
THEOPHILUS WAS ENRAGED, AND PREPARES HIM-
SELF TO FIGHT AGAINST JOHN.

DioscoRUS, Ammonius, and the other monks,
having discovered the machinations of Theophi-
lus, retired to Jerusalem, and thence proceeded
to Scythopolis ; for they thought that it would be
an advantageous residence there for them on
account of the many palms, whose leaves are
used by the monks for their customary work.^
Dioscorus and Ammonius were accompanied
hither by about eighty other monks. In the
meantime, Theophilus sent messengers to Con-
stantinople, to prefer complaints against them,
and to oppose any petitions that they might lay
before the emperor. On being informed of this
fact, Ammonius and the monks embarked for
Constantinople, and took Isidore with them ;
and they requested that their cause might be
tried in the presence of the emperor and of the
bishop ; for they thought that, by reason of his


1 Pallad. Dialog. 7; Soc. vi. 7, 9. Soz.'s has independent mat-


ter.


boldness, John, who was careful to do right,
would be able to help them in their rights.
John, although he received them with kindness,
and treated them with honor, and did not forbid
them to pray in the church, refused to admit
them to participation in the mysteries, for it
was not lawful to do this before the investiga-
tion. He wrote to Theophilus, desiring him to
receive them back into communion, as their
sentiments concerning the Divine nature were
orthodox ; requesting him, if he regarded their
orthodoxy as doubtful, to send some one to act
as their accuser. Theophilus returned no reply
to this epistle. Some time subsequently, Am-
monius and his companions presented themselves
before the wife of the emperor, as she was riding
out, and complained of the machinations of
Theophilus against them. She knew what had
been plotted against them ; and she stood up in
honor of them ; and, leaning forward from her
royal chariot, she nodded, and said to them,
" Pray for the emperor, for me, for our children,
and for the empire. For my part, I shall shortly
cause a council to be convened, to which The-
ophilus shall be summoned." A false report
having prevailed in Alexandria, that John had
received Dioscorus and his companions into
communion, and had afforded them every aid
and encouragement in his power, Theophilus
began to reflect upon what measures it would be
possible to adopt in order to eject John from his
episcopate.


CHAP. XIV. PERVERSITY OF THEOPHILUS. ST.

EPIPHANIUS : HIS RESIDENCE AT CONSTANTI-
NOPLE AND PREPARATION TO EXCITE THE PEO-
PLE AGAINST JOHN.

Theophilus kept his designs against John as
secret as possible ; and wrote to the bishops of
every city, condemning the books of Origen.^
It also occurred to him that it would be advan-
tageous to enlist Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis,
in Cyprus, on his side, a man who was revered
for his life, and was the most distinguished of
his contemporaries ; and he therefore formed a
friendship with him, although he had formerly
blamed him for asserting that God possessed a
human form. As if repentant of having ever
entertained any other sentiment, Theophilus
wrote to Epiphanius to acquaint him that he
now held the same opinions as himself, and to
move attacks against the books of Origen, as
the source of such nefarious dogmas. Epipha-
nius had long regarded the writings of Origen
with peculiar aversion, and was therefore easily
led to attach credit to the epistle of Theophilus.
He soon after assembled the bishops of Cyprus

- Mainly after Soc. vi. 10, 13, 14; Pallad. Dialog. 8.


4o8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 14.


together, and prohibited the examination of the
books of Origen. He also wrote to the other
bishops, and, among others, to the bishop of
Constantinople, exhorting them to convene
Synods, and to make the same decision. The-
ophilus, perceiving that there could be no
danger in following the example of Epiphanius,
who was the object of popular praise, and who
was admired for the virtue of his life, whatever
his opinion might be, passed a vote similar to
that of Epiphanius, with the concurrence of the
bishops under his jurisdiction. John, on the other
hand, paid little attention to the letters of Epipha-
nius and Theophilus. Those among the powerful
and the clergy, who were opposed to him, per-
ceived that the designs of Theophilus tended to
his ejection from the bishopric, and therefore en-
deavored to procure the convention of a council
in Constantinople, in order to carry this measure
into execution. Theophilus, knowing this, ex-
erted himself to the utmost in convening this
council. He commanded the bishops of Egypt
to repair by sea to Constantinople ; he wrote
to request Epiphanius and the other Eastern
bishops to proceed to that city with as little
delay as possible, and he himself set off on the
journey thither by land. Epiphanius was the
first to sail from Cyprus; he landed at Heb-
domos, a suburb of Constantinople ; and after
having prayed in the church erected at that
place, he proceeded to enter the city. In order
to do him honor, John went out with all his
clergy to meet him. Epiphanius, however,
evinced clearly by his conduct that he believed
the accusations against John ; for, although
invited to reside in the ecclesiastical residences,
he would not continue there, and refused to meet
with John in them. He also privately assembled
all the bishops who were residing in Constanti-
nople, and showed them the decrees which he
had issued against the discourses of Origen.
He persuaded some of the bishops to approve
of these decrees, while others objected to them.
Theotimus, bishop of Scythia, strongly opposed
the proceedings of Epiphanius, and told him
that it was not right to cast insult on the memory
of one who had long been numbered with the
dead ; nor was it without blasphemy to assail the
conclusion to which the ancients had arrived on
the subject, and to set aside their decisions.
While discoursing in this strain, he drew forth a
book of Origen's which he had brought with him ;
and, after reading aloud a passage conducive to
the education of the Church, he remarked that
those who condemned such sentiments acted
absurdly, for they were in danger of insulting
the subjects themselves about which these words
treated. John still had respect for Epiphanius,
and invited him to join in the meetings of his
church, and to dwell with him. But Epiphanius


declared that he would neither reside with John
nor pray with him publicly, unless he would
denounce the works of Origen and expel Dioscorus
and his companions. Not considering it just to
act in the manner proposed until judgment had
been passed on the case, John tried to postpone
matters. When the assembly was about to be
held in the Church of the Apostles, those ill-
disposed to John planned that Epiphanius should
go beforehand and publicly decry the books of
Origen to the people, and Dioscorus and his
companions as the partisans of this writer ; and
also to attack the bishop of the city as the
abetter of those heretics. And some concerned
themselves in this ; for by this means it was
supposed that the affections of the people would
be alienated from their bishop. The following
day, when Epiphanius was about entering the
church, in order to carry his design into execu-
tion, he was stopped by Serapion, at the com-
mand of John, who had received intimation of
the plot. Serapion proved to Epiphanius that
while the project he had devised was unjust in
itself, it could be of no personal advantage to
him ; for that if it should excite a popular
insurrection, ke would be regarded as respon-
sible for the outrages that might follow. By
these arguments Epiphanius was induced to
relinquish his attack.


CHAP. XV. THE SON OF THE EMPRESS AND ST.

EPIPHANIUS. CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE " LONG
brothers" and EPIPHANIUS, AND KIS RE-EM-
BARKATION FOR CYPRUS. EPIPHANIUS AND
JOHN.

About this time, the son of the empress was
attacked by a dangerous illness, and the mother,
apprehensive of consequences, sent to implore
Epiphanius to pray for him.^ Epiphanius re-
turned for answer, that the sick one would live,
provided that she would avoid all intercourse
with the heretic Dioscorus and his companions.
To this message the empress rephed as follows :
"If it be the will of God to take my son. His
will be done. The Lord who gave me my child,
can take him back again. You have not power
to raise the dead, otherwise your archdeacon
would not have died." She alluded to Chrispion,
the archdeacon, who had died a short time pre-
viously. He was brother to Fuscon and Salama-
nus, monks whom I had occasion to mention '
when detailing the history of events under the
reign of Valens ; he had been companion of
Epiphanius, and had been appointed his arch-
deacon.

Ammonius and his companions went to

> Independent chapter. Cf. Soc. vi. 14.
' Sec above, vi. 32.


VIII. 17.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


409


Epiphanius, at the permission of the empress.
Epiphanius inquired who they were, and Ammo-
nius replied, " We are, O father, the Long
Brothers ; we come respectfully to know whether
you have read any of our works or those of our
disciples ? " On Epiphanius replying that he had
not seen them, he continued, " How is it, then,
that you consider us to be heretics, when you
have no proof as to what sentiments we may
hold?" Epiphanius said that he had formed his
judgment by the reports he had heard on the
subject ; and Ammonius replied, " We have pur-
sued a very different line of conduct from yours.
We have conversed with your disciples, and read
your works frequently, and among others, that
entitled ' The Anchored.' When we have met
with persons who have ridiculed your opinions,
and asserted that your writings are replete
with heresy, we have contended for you, and de-
fended you as our father. Ought you then to
condemn the absent upon mere report, and of
whom you know nothing with assured certitude, or
return such an exchange to those who have spoken
well of you ? " Epiphanius was measurably con-
vinced, and dismissed them. Soon after he
embarked for Cyprus, either because he recog-
nized the futility of his journey to Constantino-
ple, or because, as there is reason to believe,
God had revealed to him his approaching death ;
for he died while on his voyage back to Cyprus.
It is reported that he said to the bishops who
had accompanied him to the place of embarka-
tion, " I leave you the city, the palace, and the
stage, for I shall shortly depart." I have been
informed by several persons that John predicted
that Epiphanius would die at sea, and that this
latter predicted the deposition of John. For it
appears that when the dispute between them
was at its height, Epiphanius said to John, " I
hope you will not die a bishop," and that John
replied, " I hope you will never return to your
bishopric."

CHAP. XVI. THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE EMPRESS

AND JOHN. ARRIVAL OF THEOPHILUS FROM EGYPT.
CYRINUS, BISHOP OF CHALCEDON.

After the departure of Epiphanius, John,
when preaching in the church as usual, chanced
to inveigh against the vices to which females are
peculiarly prone.^ The people imagined that his
strictures were enigmatically directed against the
wife of the emperor. The enemies of the bishop
did not fail to report his discourse in this sense
to the empress ; and she, conceiving herself to
have been insulted, complained to the emperor,
and urged the necessity for the speedy presence
of Theophilus and the convocation of a council.

* Soc. VI. 15; Pallad. Dialog;. 3, 8-io: also Chrysostom's letter
to Innocent, ibid. 2. Cf. Theodoret, H. £. v. 34.


Severian, bishop of Gabala, who had not yet
changed his former resentment against John, co-
operated in the promotion of these measures. I
am not in possession of sufficient data to deter-
mine whether there was any tnith in the current
report that John delivered the discourse above
mentioned with express allusion to the empress,
because he suspected her of having excited
Epiphanius against him. Theophilus arrived
soon after at Chalcedon in Bithynia, and was
followed thither by many bishops. Some of the
bishops joined him in compliance with his own
invitation, and others in obedience to the com-
mands of the emperor. The bishops whom
John had deposed in Asia repaired to Chalcedon
with the utmost alacrity, as likewise all those
who cherished any feeling of hostility against
him. The ships which Theophilus expected
from Egypt had already come to Chalcedon.
When they had convened again in the same
place, and when they had deliberated how the
attempt against John might be judiciously for-
warded by them, Cyrinus, leader of the church
of Chalcedon, who was an Egyptian and a rela-
tive of Theophilus, and who had besides some
other difficulties with John, spoke very abusively
of him. Justice, however, seemed to follow him
speedily ; for Maruthas, a native of Mesopo-
tamia, who had accompanied the bishops, hap-
pened to tread on his foot ; and Cyrinus suffered
so severely from this accident that he was unable
to repair with the other bishops to Constanti-
nople, although his aid was necessary to the
execution of the designs that had been formed
against John. The wound assumed so alarming
an appearance, that the surgeons were obliged
to perform several operations on the leg ; and
at length mortification took place, and spread
over the whole body, and even extended to the
other foot. He expired soon afterwards in great
agony.

CHAP. XVII. COUNCIL HELD BY THEOPHILUS AND

THE ACCUSERS OF JOHN IN RUFINIAN^. JOHN IS
SUMMONED TO ATTEND, AND NOT BEING PRESENT,
WAS DEPOSED BY THEM.

When Theophilus entered Constantinople,
none of the clergy went out to meet him ; for
his enmity against the bishop had become pub-
hcly known.- Some sailors from Alexandria,
however, who chanced to be on the shore, both
from the com vessels as well as other ships, hav-
ing collected together, received him with great
acclamations of joy. Passing by the church,
he proceeded directly to the palace, where
a lodging had been prepared for his accommo-
dation. He soon perceived that many people

* References in preceding chapter. Soz. has independent ma-
terial.


410


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN. [viii. 17.


of the city were strongly prejudiced against
John, and ready to bring accusations against
him ; and taking his measures accordingly, he
repaired to a place called "The Oak," in the
suburbs of Chalcedon. This place now bears
the name of Rufinus ; for he was a consul, and
erected here a magnificent palace, and a great
church in honor of the apostles, Peter and Paul,
and therefore named it the Apostolium ; and ap-
pointed a congregation of monks to perform the
clerical duties in the church. When Theophilus
and the other bishops met for deliberation in
this place, he judged it expedient to make no
further allusion to the works of Origen, and called
the monks of Scetis to repentance, promising
that there would be no recollection of wrongs
nor infliction of evil. His partisans zealously
seconded his efforts, and told them that they
must ask Theophilus to pardon their conduct ;
and as all the members of the assembly con-
curred in this request, the monks were troubled,
and believing that it was necessary to do what
they were desired by so many bishops, they
used the words which it was their custom to use
even when injured, and said " spare us." Theo-
philus willingly received them into favor, and
restored them to communion ; and the question
concerning the injuries done to the monks of
Scetis was ended. I feel convinced that this
matter would not have been so quickly settled,
had Dioscorusand Ammonius been present with
the other monks. But Uioscorus had died
some time previously, and had been interred in
the church dedicated to St. Mocius the martyr.
Ammonius, also, had been taken ill at the very
time that preparations were being made for the
convocation of the council ; and although he
insisted upon repairing to " The Oak," yet his
malady was thereby greatly increased : he died
soon after his journey, and had a splendid en-
tombment among the monks of that vicinity,
and there he lies. Theophilus, it is said, shed
tears on hearing of his death, and declared that
although he had been the cause of much per-
plexity, there was not a monk to be found of
more exalted character than Ammonius. It
must, however, be admitted, that the death of
this monk tended much to promote the success
of the designs of Theophilus.

The members of the council summoned all
the clergy of Constantinople to appear before
them, and threatened to depose those who did
not obey the summons. They cited John to
appear and answer ; as likewise Serapion, Ti-
grius a presbyter, and Paul a reader. John
acquainted them, through the medium of Deme-
trius, bishop of Pisinus, and of some of the
other clergy, who were his friends, that he would
not avoid investigation, but that he was ready, if
the names of his accusers and the subject of


his accusations were made known to him, to
justify his proceedings before a larger council ;
for he did not choose to be considered insane,
and to recognize his manifest enemies as judges.
The bishops testified so much indignation at
the non-compliance of John, that some of the
clergy whom he had sent to the council were
intimidated and did not return to him. Deme-
trius, and those who preferred his interests to
all other considerations, quitted the council, and
returned to him. The same day, a courier and
a shorthand writer were dispatched from the
palace to command John to repair to the bish-
ops, and to urge the bishops to decide his
cause without further delay. After John had
been cited four times, and had appealed to a
general council, no other accusation could be
substantiated against him, except his refusal to
obey the summons of the council ; and upon
this ground they deposed him.

CHAP. XVIII. SEDITION OF THE PEOPLE AGAINST

THEOPHILUS ; AND THEV TRADUCED THEIR RULERS.
JOHN WAS RECALLED, AND AGAIN CAME TO THE
SEE.

The people of Constantinople were made
acquainted with the decree of the council towards
the evening ; and they immediately rose up in
sedition.^ At the break of day they ran to the
church, and shouted, among many other plans,
that a larger council ought to be convened to
take cognizance of the matter ; and they pre-
vented the officers, who had been sent by the
emperor to convey John into banishment, from
carrying the edict into execution. John, appre-
hensive lest another accusation should be pre-
ferred against him, under the pretext that he
had disobeyed the mandate of the emperor, or
excited an insurrection among the people, when
the multitude was dispersed, secretly made his
escape from the church at noon, three days after
his deposition. When the people became aware
that he had gone into exile, the sedition became
serious, and many insulting speeches were
uttered against the emperor and the council ;
and particularly against Theophilus and Severian,
who were regarded as the originators of the plot.
Severian happened to be teaching in the church
at the very time that these occurrences were
taking place ; and he took occasion to commend
the deposition of John, and stated that, even
supposing him guiltless of other crimes, John
deser\'ed to be deposed on account of his
pride ; because, while God willingly forgives men
all other sins, he resists the proud. At this

' Soc. vi. 16: Pallad. Dialog, ibid., and Chrysostom's Efi. ad
Innocentem ; Chrys. Sermories antequam iret in Exsilium ;
Sermo cum iret in Exsilium ; orationes et Sfrmones post Redi-
tum ab Exsilio, iii. 427-448. Soz., while guided by the order of Soc,
works the material in a different form. Cf. Zos. v. 35.


VIII. 19.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


411


discourse the people became restive under the
wrong, and renewed their wrath, and fell into
unrestrainable revolt. They ran to the churches,
to the market-places, and even to the palace of
the emperor, and with howls and groans de-
manded the recall of John. The empress was
at length overcome by their importunity ; and
she persuaded her husband to yield to the wishes
of the people. She quickly sent a eunuch,
named Briso, in whom she placed confidence,
to bring back John from Prenetus, a city of
Bithynia ; and protested that she had taken no
part in the machinations that had been carried
on against him, but had, on the contrary, always
respected him as a priest and the initiator of
her children.

When John, on his journey homeward, reached
the suburbs belonging to the empress, he
stopped near Anaplus ; and refused to re-enter
the city until the injustice of his deposition had
been recognized by a larger synod of bishops ;
but as this refusal tended to augment the popu-
lar excitement, and led to many public declama-
tions against the emperor and the empress, he
allowed himself to be persuaded to enter the
city. The people went to meet him, singing
psalms composed with reference to the circum-
stances ; many carried light wax tapers. They
conducted him to the church ; and although he
refused, and frequently affirmed that those who
had condemned him ought first to reconsider
their vote, yet they compelled him to take the
episcopal throne, and to speak peace to the
people according to the custom of the priests.
He then delivered an extemporaneous discourse,
in which, by a pleasing figure of speech, he de-
clared that Theophilus had meditated an injury
against his church, even as the king of Egypt
had contemplated the violation of Sarah, the
wife of the patriarch Abraham, which is re-
corded in the books of the Hebrews : he then
proceeded to commend the zeal of the people,
and to extol the emperor and the empress for
their good will to him ; he stirred the people to
much applause and good acclaim for the em-
peror and his spouse, so that he had to leave his
speech half ended.

CHAP. XIX. OBSTINANCV OF THEOPHILUS. ENMITY

BETWEEN THE EGYPTIANS AND THE CITIZENS OF
CONSTANTINOPLE. FLIGHT OF THEOPHILUS. NIL-
AMMON THE ASCETIC. THE SYNOD CONCERNING
JOHN.

Although Theophilus would fain have brought
an accusation against John,^ under the plea that
he had unlawfully reinstated himself in his bish-
opric, yet he was deterred from doing so by the
fear of offending the emperor, who had been


• Soc. vi. 17; Pallad. ibid.; and Chrys. Efi. ad I?in.
independent material.


Soz. has


compelled to recall John, as the means of sup-
pressing the popular insurrection. Theophilus,
however, received an accusation against H era-
elides during the absence of the accused, in the
hope of thereby authorizing the sentence of con-
demnation which had been issued against John.
But the friends of Heraclides interposed, and de-
clared that it was unjust, and contrary to ecclesi-
astical law, to condemn one who was absent.
Theophilus and his partisans maintained the op-
posite side of the question : the people of Alex-
andria and of Egypt sided with them, and were
opposed by the citizens of Constantinople. The
strife between the two parties became so vehement
that bloodshed ensued ; many were wounded, and
others slain in the contest. Severian, and all the
bishops at Constantinople who did not support
the cause of John, became apprehensive for
their personal safety, and quitted the city in
haste. Theophilus, also, fled the city at the
commencement of the winter ; and, in com-
pany with Isaac the monk, sailed for Alexandria.
A wind arose which drove the vessel to Gera, a
small city about fifty stadia from Pelusium. The
bishop of this city died, and the inhabitants, I
have been informed, elected Nilammon to pre-
side over their church ; he was a good man, and
had attained the summit of monastic philosophy.
He dwelt without the city, in a cell of which
the door was built up with stones. He refused
to accept the dignity of the priesthood ; and
Theophilus, therefore, visited him in person, to
exhort him to receive ordination at his hands.
Nilammon repeatedly refused the honor ; but,
as Theophilus would take no refusal, he said to
him, " To-morrow, my father, you shall act as
you please ; to-day it is requisite that I should
arrange my affairs." Theophilus repaired, on
the following day, to the cell of the monk, and
commanded the door to be opened ; but Nil-
ammon exclaimed, " Let us first engage in
prayer." Theophilus complied and began to
pray. Nilammon likewise prayed within his cell,
and in the act of prayer he expired. Theophilus,
and those who were standing with him without
the cell, knew nothing at the time of what had
occurred ; but, when the greater part of the day
had passed away, and the name of Nilammon
had been loudly reiterated without his returning
any answer, the stones were removed from the
door, and the monk was found dead. They
honored him with a public burial after they had
clothed him in the necessary vestments, and the
inhabitants built a house of prayer about his
tomb ; and they celebrate the day of his death, in
a very marked way, until this day. Thus died
Nilammon, if it can be called death to quit this
life for another, — rather than accept a bishopric
of which, with extraordinary modesty, he con-
sidered himself unworthy.


412


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN. [Viii. 19.


After his return to Constantinople, John ap-
peared to be more than ever beloved by the
people. Sixty bishops assembled together in
that city, and annulled all the decrees of the
council of " The Oak." They confirmed John in
the possession of the bishopric, and enacted
that he should officiate as a priest, confer ordi-
nation, and perform all the duties of the church
usually devolving on the president. At this
time Serapion was appointed bishop of Heraclea
in Thrace.


CHAP. XX. THE STATUE OF THE EMPRESS ; WHAT

HAPPENED THERE ; THE TEACHING OF JOHN ;
CONVOCATION OF ANOTHER SYNOD AGAINST JOHN ;
HIS DEPOSITION.

Not long after these occurrences the silver
statue of the empress, which is still to be seen
to the south of the church opposite the grand
council-chamber, was placed upon a column
of porphyry- on a high platform,^ and the event
was celebrated there with applause and popular
spectacles of dances and mimes, as was then
customary on the erection of the statues of the
emperors. In a public discourse to the people
John charged that these proceedings reflected
dishonor on the Church. This remark recalled
former grievances to the recollection of the
empress, and irritated her so exceedingly at the
insult that she determined to convene another
council. He did not yield, but added fuel to
her indignation by still more openly declaiming
against her in the church ; and it was at this
period that he pronounced the memorable dis-
course commencing with the words, " Herodias
is again enraged ; again she dances ; again she
seeks to have the head of John in a basin."

Several bishops arrived soon after at Con-
stantinople, and amongst them were Leontius,
bishop of Ancyra, and Acacius, bishop of Berea.
The festival of our Lord's Nativity was then at
hand, and the emperor, instead of repairing to
the church as usual, sent to acquaint John that
he could not hold communion with him until
he had cleared himself of the charges. John
spiritedly replied that he was ready to prove
his innocence ; and this so intimidated his ac-
cusers that they did not dare to follow up the
charges. The judges decided that, having been
once deposed, he ought not to be admitted to
a second trial. But they called on John to de-
fend himself on this point only, that after he
had been deposed, he had sat on the episcopal
throne before a synod had reinstated him. In
his defense he appealed to the decision of the
bishops who had, subsequently to the council
of " The Oak," held communion with him. The


' Soc. vi. 18; Pallad. Dialog. 9-12; Chrys. Ep. ad Inn. ibid. 2.


judges waived this argument, under the plea that
those who had held communion with John were
inferior in point of number to those who had
deposed him, and that a canon was in force by
which he stood condemned. Under this pre-
text they therefore deposed him, although the
law in question had been enacted by heretics ;
for the Arians, after having taken advantage of
various calumnies to expel Athanasius from the
church of Alexandria, enacted this law from
the apprehension of a change in public affairs,
for they struggled to have the decisions against
him remain uninvestigated.


CHAP. XXI. CALAMITIES SUFFERED BY THE PEOPLE

AFTER THE EXPULSION OF JOHN. THE PLOT;>
AGAINST HIM OF ASSASSINATION.

After his deposition, John held no more
assemblies in the church, but quietly remained
in the episcopal dwelling-house.^ At the termina-
tion of the season of Quadragesima, on the same
holy night in which the yearly festival in commem-
oration of the resurrection of Christ is celebrated,
the followers of John were expelled from the
church by the soldiers and his enemies, who at-
tacked the people while still celebrating the mys-
teries. Since this occurrence was unforeseen, a
great disturbance arose in the baptistery. The
women wept and lamented, and the children
screamed ; the priests and the deacons were
beaten, and were forcibly ejected from the
church, in the priestly garments in which they
had been officiating. They were charged with
the commission of such disorderly acts as can
be readily conceived by those who have been
admitted to the mysteries, but which I consider
it requisite to pass over in silence, lest my work
should fall into the hands of the uninitiated.

When the people perceived the plot, they did
not use the church on the following day, but
celebrated the Paschal feast in the very spacious
public baths called after the Emperor Constan-
tius. Bishops and presbyters, and the rest,
whose right it is to administer church matters,
officiated. Those who espoused the cause of
John were present with the people. They were,
however, driven hence, and then assembled on
a spot without the walls of the city, which the
Emperor Constantine, before the city had been
built, had caused to be cleared and intlosed
with palisades, for the purpose of celebrating
there the games of the hippodrome. From that
period, the people held separate assemblies,
sometimes, whenever it was feasible, in that
locality, and sometimes in another. They ob-
tained the name of Johnites. About this
time, a man who was either possessed of a

* Soc. vi. 18; Pallad. ibid. Soz. has much distinctive material.


VIII. 23.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


413


devil, or who feigned to have one, was seized,
having a poniard on his person, with the inten-
tion of assassinating John. He was apprehended
by the peo[)le as one who had been hired for
this plot, and led to the prefect ; but John sent
some bishops of his party to free him from
custody before he had been questioned by tor-
ture. Some time afterwards, a slave of Elpidius
the presbyter, who was an avowed enemy of the
deacon, was seen running as swiftly as possible
towards the episcopal residence. A passer-by
endeavored to stop him, in order to ascertain
the cause of so much haste ; but instead of
answering him, the slave plunged his poniard
into him. Another person, who happened to
be standing by, and who cried out at seeing the
other wounded, was also wounded in a similar
way by the slave; as was likewise a third by-
stander. All the people in the neighborhood,
on seeing what had occurred, shouted that the
slave ought to be arrested. He turned and fled.
When those who' were pursuing called out to
those ahead to seize the fugitive, a man, who
just then came out from the baths, strove to
stop him, and was so grievously wounded that
he fell down dead on the spot. At length, the
people contrived to encircle the slave. They
seized him, and conveyed him to the palace of
the emperor, declaring that he had intended to
have assassinated John, and that the crime ought
to be visited with punishment. The prefect
allayed the fury of the people by putting the
delinquent into custody, and by assuring them
that justice should have its course against him.

CHAP. XXII. UNLAWFUL EXPULSION OF JOHN FROM

HIS BISHOPRIC. THE TROUBLE WHICH FOLLOWED.
CONFLAGRATION OF THE CHURCH BY FIRE FROM
HEAVEN. EXILE OF JOHN TO CUCUSUS.

From this period the most zealous of the peo-
ple guarded John alternately, stationing them-
selves about the episcopal residence by night
and by day.' The bishops who had condemned
him complained of this conduct as a violation
of the laws of the Church, declared that they
could answer for the justice of the sentence that
had been enacted against him, and asserted that
tranquillity would never be restored among the
people until he had been expelled from the city.
A messenger having conveyed to him a mandate
from the emperor enjoining his immediate de-
parture, John obeyed, and escaped from the
city, unnoticed by those who had been appointed
to guard him. He made no other censure than
that, in being sent into banishment without a
legal trial or any of the forms of the law, he was
treated more severely than murderers, sorcerers,

> Soc. vi. 18; Patlad. ibid, and Chrys. Ep. ad Inn.; Theodoret,
H. E. V. 34. Soz. has distinct material. Cf. Zos. v. 24.


and adulterers. He was conveyed in a little
bark to Bithynia, and thence immediately con-
tinued his journey. Some of his enemies were
apprehensive lest the people, on hearing of his
departure, should pursue him, and bring him
back by force, and therefore commanded the
gates of the church to be closed. When the
people who were in the public places of the city
heard of what had occurred, great confusion
ensued ; for some ran to the seashore as if they
would follow him, and others fled hither and
thither, and were in great terror since the wrath
of the emperor was expected to visit them for
creating so much disturbance and tumult. Those
who were within the church barred the exits still
further by rushing together upon them, and by
pressing upon one another. With difficulty they
forced the doors open by the use of great vio-
lence ; one party shattered them with stones,
another was pulling them toward themselves, and
was thus forcing the crowd backward into the
building. Meanwhile the 'church was suddenly
consumed on all sides with fire. The flames
extended in all directions, and the grand house of
the senatorial council, adjacent to the church on
the south, was doomed. The two parties mutually
accused each other of incendiarism. The ene-
mies of John asserted that his partisans had been
guilty of the deed from revenge, on account of
the vote that had been passed against him by
the council. These latter, on the other hand,
maintained that they had been calumniated, and
that the deed was perpetrated by their enemies,
with the intention of burning them in the church.
While the fire was spreading from late afternoon
until the morning, and creeping forward to the
material which was still standing, the officers who
held John in custody conveyed him to Cucusus,
a city of Armenia, which the emperor by letter
had appointed as the place of residence for the
condemned man. Other officers were commis-
sioned to arrest all the bishops and clerics who
had favored the cause of John, and to imprison
them in Chalcedon. Those citizens who were
suspected of attachment to John were sought
out and cast into prison, and compelled to pro-
nounce anathema against him.


CHAP. XXIII. ARSACIUS ELECTED TO SUCCEED

JOHN. THE EVILS WROUGHT AGAINST THE FOI<-
LOWERS OF JOHN. ST. NICARETE.

Arsacius, brother of Nectarius, who had ad-
ministered the bishopric before John, was, not
long afterwards, ordained as bishop of Con-
stantinople.^ He was of a very mild disposition,
and possessed of great piety ; but the reputation
he had acquired as a presbyter was diminished

* Soc. vi. 19; VMzA. Dialog. 11-20. Cf. Theodoret, .^. .£. v.

34. Soz. has much separate material.


414


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN. [viii. 23.


by the conduct of some of the clergy to whom
he delegated his power, and who did what they
pleased in his name ; for their evil deeds were
imputed to him. Nothing, however, operated
so much to his disadvantage as the persecution
that was carried on against the followers of John.
They refused to hold communion, or even to
join in prayer with him, because the enemies of
John were associated with him ; and as they
persisted, as we have before stated, in holding a
church in the further parts of the city, he com-
plained to the emperor of their conduct. The
tribune was commanded to attack them with a
body of soldiers, and by means of clubs and
stones he soon dispersed them. The most dis-
tinguished among them in point of rank, and
those who were most zealous in their adherence
to John, were cast into prison. The soldiers,
as is usual on such occasions, went beyond their
orders, and forcibly stripped the women of
their ornaments, and carried off as booty their
chains, their golden girdles, necklaces, and
their collars of rings ; they pulled off the lobes
of the ear with the earrings. Although the whole
city was thus filled with trouble and lamentation,
the affection of the people for John still re-
mained the same, and they refrained from ap-
pearing in public. Many of them absented
themselves from the market-place and public
baths, while others, not considering themselves
safe in their own houses, fled the city.

Among the zealous men and excellent women
who adopted this latter measure was Nicarete, a
lady of Bithynia. She belonged to a noted fam-
ily of the nobility, and was celebrated on ac-
count of her perpetual virginity and her virtu-
ous life. She was the most modest of all the
zealous women that we have ever known, and
was well ordered in manner and speech and in
behavior, and throughout her life she invariably
preferred the service of God to all earthly con-
siderations. She showed herself capable of en-
during with courage and thought the sudden
reversals of adverse affairs ; she saw herself un-
justly despoiled of the greater part of her ample
patrimony without manifesting any indignation,
and managed the little that remained to her with
so much economy, that although she was ad-
vanced in age, she contrived to supply all the
wants of her household, and to contribute
largely to others. Since she loved a humane
spirit, she also prepared a variety of remedies
for the needs of the sick poor, and she fre-
quently succeeded in curing patients who had
derived no benefit from the skill of the custom-
ary physicians. With a devout strength which
assisted her in reaching the best results, she
closed her lips. To sum up all in a few words, we
have never known a devoted woman endowed
with such manners, gravity, and every other vir-


tue. Although she was so extraordinary, she
concealed the greater part of her nature and
deeds ; for by modesty of character and philos-
ophy she was always studious of concealment.
She would not accept of the office of deaconess,
nor of instructress of the virgins consecrated to
the service of the Church, because she accounted
herself unworthy, although the honor was fre-
quently pressed upon her by John.

After the popular insurrection had been
quelled, the prefect of the city appeared in pub-
lic, as if to inquire into the cause of the confla-
gration, and the burning of the council-hall, and
punished many severely ; but being a pagan, he
ridiculed the calamities of the Church, and de-
lighted in its misfortunes.


CHAP. XXIV. EUTROPIUS THE READER, AND THE

BLESSED OLVMPIAS, AND THE PRESBYTER TIGRIUS,
ARE PERSECUTED ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR AT-
TACHMENT TO JOHN. THE PATRIARCHS.

EuTROPius, a reader,^ was required to name the
persons who had set fire to the church ; but al-
though he was scourged severely, although his
sides and cheeks were torn with iron nails, and
although lighted torches were applied to the
most sensitive parts of his body, no confession
could be extorted from him, notwithstanding his
youth and delicacy of constitution. After hav-
ing been subjected to these tortures, he was cast
into a dungeon, where he soon afterwards ex-
pired.

A dream of Sisinius concerning Eutropius
seems worthy of insertion in this history. Sisi-
nius, the bishop of the Novatians, saw in his
sleep a man, conspicuous for beauty and stature,
standing near the altar of the church which the
Novatians erected to the honor of Stephen, the
proto-martyr ; the man complained of the rarity
of good men, and said that he had been search-
ing throughout the entire city, and had found
but one who was good, and that one was Eutropius.
Astonished at what he had seen, Sisinius made
known the dream to the most faithful of the
presbyters of his church, and commanded him
to seek Eutropius wherever he might be. The
presbyter rightly conjectured that this Eutropius
could be no other than he who had been so bar-
barously tortured by the prefect, and went from
prison to prison in quest of him. At length he
found him, and in conversation with him made
known the dream of the bishop, and besought
him with tears to pray for him. Such are the
details we possess concerning Eutropius.

Great fortitude was evinced in the midst of
these calamities by Olympias, the deaconess.


' Pallad. Dialog., ibid. Soz. has an independent chapter in
large part.


VIII. 26.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


415


Being dragged for this reason before the tribunal,
and interrogated by the prefect as to her motives
in setting fire to the church, she replied, " My
past life ought to avert all suspicion from me,
for I have devoted my large property to the
restoration of the temples of God." The pre-
fect alleged that he was well acquainted with
her past course of life. " Then," continued
she, " you ought to appear in the place of the
accuser and let another judge us." As the ac-
cusation against her was wholly unsubstantiated
by proofs, and as the prefect found that he had
no ground on which he could justly blame her, he
changed to a milder charge as if desirous of advis-
ing her, finding fault with her and the otherwomen,
because they refused communion with his bishop,
although it was possible for them to repent
and to change their own circumstances. They
all through fear deferred to the advice of the
prefect, but Olympias said to him, " It is not just
that, after having been publicly calumniated, with-
out having had anything proved against me in the
courts, I should be obliged to clear myself of
charges totally unconnected with the accusation
in question. Let me rather take counsel con-
cerning the original accusation that has been
preferred against me. For even if you resort
to unlawful compulsion, I will not hold commun-
ion with those from whom I ought to secede,
nor consent to anything that is not lawful to the
pious." The prefect, finding that he could not
prevail upon her to hold communion with Arsa-
cius, dismissed her that she might consult the
advocates. On another occasion, however, he
again sent for her and condemned her to pay
a heavy fine, for he imagined by this means
she would be compelled to change her mind.
But she totally disregarded the loss of her prop-
erty, and quitted Constantinople for Cyzicus.
Tigrius, a presbyter, was about the same period
stripped of his clothes, scourged on the back,
bound hand and foot, and stretched on the rack.
He was a barbarian by race, and a eunuch, but
not by birth. He was originally a slave in the
house of a man in power, and on account of his
faithful services had obtained his freedom. He
was afterwards ordained as presbyter, and was
distinguished by his moderation and meekness
of disposition, and by his charity towards stran-
gers and the poor. Such were the events which
took place in Constantinople.

Meanwhile Siricius had died, after having
administered the bishopric of Rome fifteen
years. Anastasius held the same bishopric three
years, and then died, and was succeeded by
Innocent. Flavian, who refused his consent to
the deposition of John, was also dead ; and Por-
phyry, being appointed to succeed him in the
church of Antioch, where he agreed with those
who had condemned John, many of those in


Syria seceded from the church in Antioch, and
because they made congregations among them-
selves, they were subjected to many cruelties.
For the purpose of enforcing fellowship with Ar-
sacius, and with this Porphyry and Theophilus,
the bishop of Alexandria, a law was established,
by the zeal of the powerful at court, that those
who were orthodox should not assemble outside
of the churches, and those who were not in
communion with them should be expelled.


CHAP. XXV. SINCE THESE ILLS EXISTED IN THE

CHURCH, SECULAR AFFAIRS ALSO FELL INTO DIS-
ORDER. THE AFFAIRS OF STILICHO, THE GEN-
ERAL OF HONORIUS.

About this period ^ the dissensions by which
the Church was agitated were followed, as is
frequently the case, by disturbances and com-
motions in the state. The Huns crossed the
Ister and devastated Thrace. The robbers in
Isauria gathered in great numbers and ravaged
cities and villages as far as Caria and Phoenicia.
Stilicho, the general of Honorius, a man who
had attained great power, if any one ever did,
and had under his sway the flower of the Ro-
man and of the barbarian soldiery, conceived
feelings of enmity against the rulers who held
office under Arcadius, and determined to set the
two empires at enmity with each other. He
caused Alaric, the leader of the Goths, to be
appointed by Honorius to the office of general
of the Roman txoops, and sent him into lUyria;
whither also he dispatched Jovius, the praetorian
prefect, and promised to join them there with
the Roman soldiers in order to add that prov-
ince to the dominions of Honorius. Alaric
marched at the head of his troops from the
barbarous regions bordering on Dalmatia and
Pannonia, and came to Epirus ; and after waiting
for some time there, he returned to Italy. Stil-
icho was prevented from fulfilling his agreement
to join Alaric, by some letters which were trans-
mitted to him from Honorius. These events
happened in the manner narrated.


CHAP. XXVI. — TWO EPISTLES FROM INNOCENT, THE
POPE OF ROME, OF WHICH ONE WAS ADDRESSED
TO JOHN CHRYSOSTOM, AND THE OTHER TO THE
CLERGY OF CONSTANTINOPLE CONCERNING JOHN.

Innocent,'' bishop of Rome,^ was extremely
indignant when apprised of the measures that
had been adopted against John, and condemned


* Cf. Claudianus in prt'mum constilatutn PI. Stilichonis, i.,
ii. ; de secundo consulatu Fl. Stilichonis ; de bello Geiico ; de
sexto consulatu Honorii Aiigusti panegyris, ^-j — v. 3S; Olymp.
beginning with Fragitt. 1; Eiinap. Fragm. ii. 72.

' Independent chapter; cf. Pallad. Dialog. 1-3.

' Innocent I., a.d. 402-417,


4i6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 26.


the whole proceedings. He then turned his
attention to the convocation of an oecumenical
council, and wrote to John and to the clergy of
Constantinople in part. Subjoined are the two
letters, precisely as I found them, translated
from the Latin into Greek.

" Innocent, to the beloved brother John.

" Although one conscious of his own inno-
cence ought to expect every blessing and to ask
for mercy from God, yet it seems well to us to
send you a befitting letter by Cyriacus, the dea-
con, and to counsel you to long-suffering, lest the
contumely cast upon you should have more
power in subduing your courage than the testi-
mony of a good conscience in encouraging you
to hope. It is not requisite to teach you, who
are the teacher and pastor of so great a people,
that God always tries the best of men to see
whether they will continue in the height of
patience, and will not give way to any labor of
suffering ; and how true it is that the conscience
is a firm thing against all that befalls us unjustly,
and unless one be moved in these misfortunes
by patience, he furnishes a ground for evil sur-
mising. For he ought to endure everything,
who first trusts in God, and then in his own con-
science. Especially when an excellent and
good man can exercise himself in endurance, he
cannot be overcome ; for the Holy Scriptures
guard his thoughts, and the devout lections,
which we expound to the people, abound in
examples. These Scriptures assure us that al-
most all the saints are variously and continu-
ously afflicted, and are tested by some investi-
gation, and so have come to the crown of
patience. Let thy conscience encourage thy
love, O most honored brother ; for that faculty
amid tribulations possesses an encouragement
for virtue. For since Christ, the Master, is
observing, the purified conscience will station
you in the haven of peace."

" Innocent, the bishop, to the presbyters,
deacons, and all the clergy, and to the people
of the church of Constantinople under John, the
bishop, greeting to you, beloved brethren.

" From the letters of your love that you for-
warded to me through Germanus, the presbyter,
and Cassianus, the deacon, I have learned, with
anxious solicitude, the scenes of evil which you
have placed before our eyes. I have frequently
seen during its repeated reading with what
calamities and labors the faith is wearied. Only
the consolation of patience heals such a state
of affairs. Our God will shortly put an end to
such tribulations, and they will eventually tend
to your profit. But we recognized with appro-
bation your proposition, placed at the beginning
of the letter of your love ; to wit, that this very
consolation is necessary, and embraces many
proofs of your patience ; for our consolation.


which we ought to have conveyed, you have
anticipated in your epistle. Our Lord is wont
to furnish this patience to the suffering, in order
that when they fall into tribulations, the ser-
vants of Christ may encourage themselves ; for
they should reason within themselves that what
they suffer has happened previously to the saints.
And even we ourselves derive comfort from
your letters, for we are not strangers to your
sufferings ; but we are disciphned in you. Who,
indeed, can endure to witness the errors intro-
duced by those who were bound especially to
be enthusiasts for the quiet of peace and for
its concord? But far from maintaining peace,
they expel guiltless priests from the front seat
of their own churches. John, our brother and
fellow-minister and your bishop, has been the
first to suffer this unjust treatment without
being allowed a hearing. No accusation was
brought, none was heard. What proposition
was it that was nullified, so that no show of judg-
ment might arise or be sought? Others were
seated in the places of living priests, as though
any who began from such discord would be able
to possess anything or do anything rightly in
any one's judgment. We have never known
such audacities to have been done by our fa-
thers. They rather prohibited such innovations
by refusing to give power to any one to be
ordained in another's place while the occupant
was living, since he is unable to be a bishop who
is unjustly substituted.

" With respect to the obser\'ance of canons,
we declare that those defined at Nicaea are
alone ' entitled to the obedience and recogni-
tion of the Catholic Church. If any individuals
should attempt to introduce other canons, at
variance with those of Nicaea, and such as are a
compilation by heretics, such canons ought to be
rejected by the Catholic Church, for it is not lawful
to add the inventions of heretics to the Catholic
canons. For they always wish to belittle the
decision of the Nicene fathers through oppo-
nents and lawless men. We say, then, that the
canons we have censured are not only to be
disregarded, but to be condemned with the
dogmas of heretics and schismatics, even as
they have been formerly condemned at the
council of Sardica by the bishops who were our
predecessors. For it would be better, O most
honored brethren, that these transactions be
condemned, than that any actions should be con-
firmed contrary to the canons.

" What measures ought we to adopt now in
the present circumstances against such deeds?
It is necessary that there be a synodical investi-
gation, and a synod we long ago said should be
gathered. There are no other means of arrest-

• The reckless historical sense of the West has a strong proof
here.


VIII. 28.] THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


417


ing the fury of the tempest. In order that we
may attain this it will be profitable meanwhile
for that healing to be exalted which comes by
the will of the great God and of His Clirist, our
Lord. We shall thus behold the cessation of
all the woes which have been excited by the
envy of the devil, and which have served as
trials for our faith. If we remain steadfast in
the faith, there is nothing that we ought not
to expect from the Lord. We are constantly
watching for the opportunity of convening an
oecumenical council, whereby, in accordance
with the will of God, an end may be put to
these harassing commotions. Let us, then, en-
dure in the interval, and, fortified by the wall
of patience, let us trust in the help of our God
for the restoration of all things.

" We had previously been made acquainted
with all that you have related concerning your
trials, by our fellow-bishops Demetrius, Cyriacus,
Eulysius, and Palladius, who visited Rome at
different periods and are now with us ; from
them we had learned all the details by a com-
plete inquiry."


CHAP. XXVII. — THE TERRIBLE EVENTS WHICH RE-
SULTED FROM THE TREATMENT OF JOHN. DEATH
OF THE EMPRESS EUDOXIA. DEATH OF ARSACIUS.
AND FURTHER CONCERNING ATTICUS, THE PATRI-
ARCH, HIS BIRTHPLACE, AND CHARACTER.

Such were the letters of Innocent from which
the opinion which he entertained of John may
readily be inferred. About the same period
some hailstones of extraordinary magnitude
fell at Constantinople and in the suburbs of
the city.^ Four days afterwards, the wife of
the emperor died. These occurrences were
by many regarded as indications of Divine
wrath on account of the persecution that had
been carried on against John. For Cyrinus,
bishop of Chalcedon, one of his principal cal-
umniators, had long previously terminated his
life in the midst of great bodily agony, arising
from the accident that had occurred to his foot,
and the consequent necessary amputation of the
leg by the physicians. Arsacius, too, died after
he had presided but a very short period over the
church of Constantinople. Many candidates
were proposed as his successor ; and four
months after his decease, Atticus, a presbyter,
of the clergy of Constantinople, and one of the
enemies of John, was ordained. He was a
native of Sebaste in Armenia. He had been
instructed from his youth in the principles of
monastic philosophy by monks of the Macedo-
nian heresy. These monks, who then enjoyed


' Soc. vi. 19, 20, vii. 2 ; Pallad. Dialog, ibid. Soz. has new
facts, and a sobered judgment of Atticus.


a very high reputation at Sebaste for philosophy,
were of the discipline of Eustathius, to whom
allusion has been already made as bishop there,
and a leader of the best monks. When Atticus
attained the age of manhood, he embraced the
tenets of the Catholic Church. He possessed
more by nature than by learning, and became a
participant in affairs, and was as skillful in car-
rying on intrigues as in evading the machinations
of others. He was of a very engaging dis-
position, and was beloved by many. The dis-
courses which he delivered in the church did
not rise above mediocrity ; and although not to-
tally devoid of erudition, they were not accounted
by his auditors of sufficient value to be preserved
in writing. Being intent, if an opportunity
offered itself anywhere, he exercised himself in
the most approved Greek authors ; but lest, in
conversation about these writers, he might ap-
pear unlettered, he frequently concealed what
he did know. It is said that he manifested
much zeal in behalf of those who entertained
the same sentiments as himself, and that he ren-
dered himself formidable to the heterodox.
When he wished he could easily throw them
into alarm ; but he at once transformed himself
and would appear meek. Such is the informa-
tion which those who knew the man have
furnished.

John acquired great celebrity even in his exile.
He possessed ample pecuniary resources, and
being besides liberally supplied with money by
Olympias, the deaconess, and others, he pur-
chased the liberty of many captives from the
Isaurian robbers, and restored them to their
families. He also administered to the neces-
sities of many who were in want ; and by his
kind words comforted those who did not stand
in need of money. Hence he was exceedingly
beloved not only in Armenia, where he dwelt,
but by all the people of the neighboring coun-
tries, and the inhabitants of Antioch and of the
other parts of Syria, and of Cilicia, who fre-
quently sought his society.


CHAP. XXVIII. — EFFORT OF INNOCENT, BISHOP OF
ROME, TO RECALL JOHN THROUGH A COUNCIL.
CONCERNING THOSE WHO WERE SENT BY HIM
TO MAKE TRIAL OF THE MAITER. THE DEATH
OF JOHN CHRVSOSTOM.

Innocent, bishop of Rome, was very anxious,
as appears by his former letter, to procure the
recall of John.^ He sent five bishops and two
presbyters of the Roman church, with the
bishops who had been delegated as ambassadors
to him from the East, to the emperors Honorius

2 Pallad. Dialog, ibid.; Soc. vi. 21; Theodoret, H. E. v. 34.
Soz. has new material. Cf. Chrys. Epp. in exil., vol. iii. - PGM.


4i8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[VIII. 28.


and Arcadius, to request the convocation of a
council, and solicit them to name time and
place. The enemies of John at Constantinople
framed a charge as though these things were
done to insult the Eastern emperor, and caused
the ambassadors to be ignominiously dismissed
as if they had invaded a foreign government.
John was at the same time condemned by an
imperial edict to a remoter place of banishment,


and soldiers were sent to conduct him to Pityus ;
the soldiers were soon on hand, and effected
the removal. It is said that during this journey,
Basiliscus, the martyr, appeared to him at
Comani, in Armenia, and apprised him of the
day of his death. Being attacked with pain in
the head, and being unable to bear the heat of
the sun, he could not prosecute his journey, but
closed his life in that town.


BOOK IX.


CHAP. I. — DEATH OF ARCADIUS, AND GOVERNMENT
OF THEODOSIUS THE YOUNGER. HIS SISTERS.
PIETY, VIRTUE, AND VIRGINITY, OF THE PRIN-
CESS PULCHERIA ; HER DIVINELY LOVED WORKS ;
SHE EDUCATED THE EMPEROR BEFITTINGLY.

Such are the details that have been trans-
mitted concerning John. Not long after his
death, and three years after the elevation of
Atticus to the bishopric of Constantinople, and
during the consulate of Bassus and Philip, Arca-
dius died. He left Theodosius, his son,^ who
was just weaned, as his successor to the empire.
He also left three daughters of tender age,
named Pulcheria, Arcadia, and Marina.

It appears to me that it was the design of
God to show by the events of this period, that
piety alone suffices for the salvation of princes ;
and that without piety, armies, a powerful em-
pire, and every other resource, are of no avail.
The Divine Power which is the guardian of the
universe, foresaw that the emperor would be
distinguished by his piety, and therefore deter-
mined that Pulcheria, his sister, should be the
protector of him and of his government. This
princess was not yet fifteen years of age, but had
received a mind most wise and divine above her
years. She first devoted her virginity to God,
and instructed her sisters in the same course of
life. To avoid all cause of jealousy and intrigue,
she permitted no man to enter her palace. In
confirmation of her resolution, she took God,
the priests, and all the subjects of the Roman
empire as witnesses to her self-dedication. In
token of her virginity and the headship of her
brother, she consecrated in the church of Con-
stantinople, a holy table, a remarkable fabric
and very beautiful to see ; it was made of gold
and precious stones ; and she inscribed these
things on the front of the table, so that it might
be patent to all. After quietly resuming the care
of the state, she governed the Roman empire
excellently and with great orderliness ; she con-
certed her measures so well that the affairs to be
carried out were quickly decreed and completed.
She was able to write and to converse with perfect
accuracy in the Greek and Latin languages. She


1 Soc. vi. 23 ; Philost. xii. 7 ; Theodoret, H. E. v. 36. Soz. is
independent. Cf. Zos. v. 31; Olymp. Fragm. i and 2.


caused all affairs to be transacted in the name
of her brother, and devoted great attention to
bringing him up as a prince in the best possible
way and with such information as was suitable
to his years. She had him taught by the most
skilled men, in horsemanship, and the practice
of arms, and in letters. But he was systemati-
cally taught by his sister to be orderly and princely
in his manners ; she showed him how to gather
up his robes, and how to take a seat, and how
to walk ; she trained him to restrain laughter, to
assume a mild or a formidable aspect as the
occasion might require, and to inquire with
urbanity into the cases of those who came before
him with petitions. But she strove chiefly, to
lead him into piety, and to pray continuously ;
she taught him to frequent the church regularly,
and to honor the houses of prayer with gifts and
treasures ; and she inspired him with reverence
for priests and other good men, and for those
who, in accordance with the law of Christianity,
had devoted themselves to philosophy. She
provided zealously and wisely that religion might
not be endangered by the innovation of spurious
dogmas. That new heresies have not prevailed
in our times, we shall find to be due especially
to her, as we shall subsequently see. With how
much fear she worshiped God, it would take
long for any one to say ; and how many houses
of prayer she built magnificently, and how
many hostelries and monastic communities she
established, the arrangement for the expenses
for their perpetual support, and the provision
for the inmates. If any one pleases to examine
the truth from the business itself, and not to be
convinced by my words, he will learn that they
are not falsely described by me for my own
favor, if he will investigate the testimonial docu-
ments written up by the stewards of her house,
and if he will inquire from the true records
whether the facts agree with my history. If
these proofs alone do not satisfy him so as to
make him believe, let God himself persuade him
who had her in favor altogether and everywhere
on account of her conduct, so that He heard her
prayer readily, and frequently directed before-
hand the things which ought to be done. Such
indications of Divine love are not conferred
upon men unless they have merited them by
their works. But I willingly pass over for the


420


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IX. I.


present the many separate manifestations of Di-
vine favor that were granted to the sister of the
emperor as proofs that she was loved of God,
lest anybody should blame me for having set
out to do other things, and yet had turned to
the use of encomiums. One incident relating
to her seems, however, so fitting in itself and to
my ecclesiastical history, and so evident a dem-
onstration of her love for God, that I will relate
it here, although it happened some time after-
wards. It is as follows : —


CHAP. II. — DISCOVERY
HOLY


OF THE REUCS
MARTYRS.


OF FORTY


A WOMAN by name Eusebia,^ who was a dea-
coness of the Macedonian sect, had a house and
garden without the walls of Constantinople, in
which she kept the holy remains of forty soldiers,-'
who had suffered martyrdom under Licinius at
Sebaste in Armenia. When she felt death ap-
proaching, she bequeathed the aforesaid place
to some orthodox monks, and bound them by
oath to bury her there, and to hew out sepa-
rately a place above her head at the top of her
coffin, and to deposit the relics of the martyrs
with her, and to inform no one. The monks
did so ; but in order to render due honor to the
martyrs secretly, according to the agreement
with Eusebia, they formed a subterranean house
of prayer near her tomb. But open to view, an
edifice was erected above the foundation, in-
closed with baked bricks, and a secret descent
from it to the martyrs. Soon after, Caesar, a
man among those in power, who had formerly


been advanced to the dignity of consul and pre
feet, lost his wife, and caused her to be interred
near the tomb of Eusebia ; for the two ladies
had been knit together by the most tender
friendship, and had been of one mind on all
doctrinal and religious subjects. Caesar was
hence induced to purchase this place so that he
might be entombed near his wife. The afore-
said monks settled elsewhere, and without divulg-
ing anything about the martyrs. After this,
when the building was demolished, and when
the earth and refuse were scattered about, the
whole place was smoothed off. For Caesarius him-
self erected there a magnificent temple to God to
the honor of Thyrsus, the martyr. It appears
probable that God designedly willed the afore-
said place to disappear, and so long a time to
elapse in order that the discovery of the martyrs
might be regarded as more marvelous and a more
conspicuous event, and as a proof of the Divine
favor towards the discoverer. The discoverer


was, in fact, no other than the Empress Pulcheria,
the sister of the emperor. The admirable
Thyrsus appeared to her three times, and re-
vealed to her those concealed beneath the earth ;
and commanded that they should be deposited
near his tomb, in order that they might share in
the same position and honor. The forty mar-
tyrs themselves also appeared to her, arrayed in
shining robes. But the occurrence seemed too
marvelous to be credible, and altogether impos-
sible ; for the aged of clergy of that region,
after having frequently prosecuted inquiries, had
not been able to indicate the position of the
martyrs, nor indeed had any one else. At length,
when everything was hopeless, Polychronius, a
certain presbyter, who had formerly been a ser-
vant in the household of Caesar, was reminded
by God that the locality in question had once
been inhabited by monks. He therefore went
to the clergy of the Macedonian sect to inquire
concerning them. All the monks were dead,
with the exception of one, who seemed to have
been preserved in life for the express purpose
of pointing out the spot where the relics of
the holy martyrs were concealed. Polychronius
questioned him closely on the subject, and find-
ing that, on account of the agreement made with
Eusebia, his answers were somewhat undecided,
he made known to him the Divine revelation and
the anxiety of the empress, as well as the failure
of her recourses. The monk then confessed
that God had declared the truth to the empress ;
for at the time when he was an overgrown boy,
and was taught the monastic life by its aged
leaders, he remembered exactly that the relics
of the martyrs had been deposited near the
tomb of Eusebia ; but that the subsequent lapse
of time, and the changes which had been car-


> This chapter is independent.

' Cf. Acta Satict. noil, under March lo, where the names,
acts, orations of Basil, and Soz.'s story of the invention .ire given.
Basil, Oratio in landem ss. Quadraginia Martyrum, vii. 749.


ried on in that locality, deprived him of the
power of recalling to his recollection whether
the relics had been deposited beneath the church
or in any other spot. And further said Poly-
chronius, " I have not suffered a like lapse of
memory, for I remember that I was present at
the interment of the wife of Caesar, and, as well
as I can judge from the relative situation of the
high road, I infer that she must have been
buried beneath the ambo " ; this is the plat-
form for the readers. "Therefore," subjoined
the monk, "it must be near the remains of
Caesar's wife that the tomb of Eusebia must
be sought ; for the two ladies lived on terms of
the closest friendship and intimacy, and mutu-
ally agreed to be interred beside each other."
When it was necessary to dig, according to
the aforesaid intimations, and to track out the
sacred relics, and the empress had learned
the facts, she commanded them to begin the
work. On digging up the earth by the ambo,
the cofiin of Caesar's wife was discovered ac-


IX. 4.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


421


cording to the conjecture of Polychronius. At
a short distance on the side they found the
pavement of baked bricks, and a marble tab-
let of equal dimensions, each the measure of
the bricks, under which the coffin of Euse-
bia was disclosed ; and close by was an oratory,
elegantly inclosed with white and purple mar-
ble. The cover of the tomb was in the form
of a holy table, and at the summit, where the
relics were deposited, a small orifice was visible.
A man attached to the palace, who happened to
be standing by, thrust a cane which he held in
his hand into the orifice ; and on withdrawing the
cane he held it to his nose, and inhaled a sweet
odor of myrrh, which inspired the workmen and
bystanders with fresh confidence. When they
had eagerly opened the coffin, the remains of
Eusebia were found, and near her head was the
prominent part of the tomb foshioned exactly
in the form of a chest, and was concealed
within by its own cover ; and the iron which
inclosed it on each side at the edges was firmly
held together by lead. In the middle, the same
orifice again appeared, and still more clearly
revealed the fact of the relics being concealed
within. As soon as the discovery was announced,
they ran to the church of the martyr, and sent
for smiths to unfasten the iron bars, and easily
drew off the lid. A great many perfumes were
found thereunder, and among the perfumes two
silver caskets were found in which lay the holy
relics. Then the princess returned thanks to
God for having accounted her worthy of so great
a manifestation and for attaining the discovery
of the holy relics. After this she honored the
martyrs with the costliest casket ; and on the
conclusion of a public festival which was cele-
brated with befitting honor and with a proces-
sion to the accompaniment of psalms, and at
which I was present, the relics were placed
alongside of the godlike Thyrsus. And others
who were present can also bear testimony that
these things were done in the way described, for
almost all of them still survive. And the event
occurred much later, when Proclus governed the
church of Constantinople.

CHAP in. THE VIRTUES OF PULCHERIA ; HER

SISTERS.

It is said that God frequently in many other
cases revealed to the princess what was about
to happen, and that the most occurred to her
and her sisters as witnesses of the Divine love.'
They all pursue the same mode of life ; they
are sedulous about the priests and the houses of
prayer, and are munificent to needy strangers
and the poor. These sisters generally take their

' This chapter is independent. For an opposite estimate, see
Eunap. Fragm. ii. 70, 71, and the allegations in Suidas, s.v.


meals and walks together, and pass their days
and their nights in company, singing the praises
of God. As is the custom with exemplary women,
they employ themselves in weaving and in simi-
lar occupations. Although princesses, born and
educated in palaces, they avoid levity and idle-
ness, which they think unworthy of any who
profess virginity, so they put such indolence far
from their own life. For this reason the mercy of
God is manifested and is conquering in Ijehalf
of their house ; for He increases the emperor in
years and government ; every conspiracy and
war concocted against him has been overthrown
of itself.


CHAP. IV. TRUCE WITH PERSIA. HONORIUS AND

STILICHO. TRANSACTIONS IN ROME AND DAL-

MATIA.

Although the Persians had prepared to take
up arms, they were induced to conclude a tnice
with the Romans for a hundred years.^

Stilicho, the general of the troops of Hono-
rius, was suspected of having conspired to pro-
claim his son Eucherius emperor of the East,
and was, in consequence, slain by the army at
Ravenna. He had, at a former period, while
Arcadius was still living, conceived bitter feel-
ings of enmity against his officers, and was
hence impelled to bring the two empires into
collision. He caused Alaric, the leader of the
Goths, to secure the office of general of the
Romans, and advised him to seize Illyria ; and,
having sent forward Jovian, the appointed pre-
fect, he agreed to join him shortly with Roman
troops, and to reduce its subjects under the rule
of Honorius. Alaric quitted the barbarous
region bordering on Dalmatia and Pannonia,
where he had been dwelling, and marched at
the head of his soldiery to Epirus ; after remain-
ing for some time in that country, he retreated
to Italy, without having accomplished anything.
For he was about to migrate according to the
agreement, but he was restrained by the letters of
Honorius. After the death of Arcadius, Hono-
rius projected a journey to Constantinople, in
behalf of his nephew, to appoint officers faithful to
his security and empire ; for he held his nephew
in the place of his son, and he was fearful lest
the boy might suffer on account of his youth,
since he would be exposed to plots ; but when
Honorius was on the very point of setting out
on this journey, Stilicho dissuaded him from his
design, by proving to him that his presence was
requisite in Italy, to repress the schemes of Con-
stantine, who sought to possess himself of the
sovereign power at Aries. Stilicho then took

' Independent; cf. Poems of Clatidianus, as above; Olymp.

Fragm. 2-1 1; Zos. v. 4-38; Philost. xii. 1-3.


422


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IX. 4.


that one of the sceptres which the Romans
call Labarum, obtained some letters from the
emperor, with which he set out, at the head of
four legions, to carry on war in the East ; but a
report having been spread that he had conspired
against the emperor, and had formed a scheme,
in conjunction with those in power, to raise his
son to the throne, the troops rose up in sedition,
and slew the praetorian prefect ' of Italy and of
Gaul, the military commanders, and the chief
officers of the court. Stilicho himself was slain
by the soldiers at Ravenna. He had attained
almost absolute power ; and all men, so to
speak, whether Romans or barbarians, were
under his control. Thus perished Stilicho, on
a suspicion of having conspired against the
emperors. Eucherius, his son, was also slain.


CHAP. V. — THE DIFFERENT NATIONS TOOK UP
ARMS AGAINST THE ROMANS, OF WHOM SOME
WERE, THROUGH THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD,
DEFEATED, AND OTHERS BROUGHT TO TERMS
OF AMITY.

It happened about the same time that the
Huns, who were encamped in Thrace, retreated
disgracefully and cast off many of their number,
although they had neither been attacked nor
pursued.^ Uldis, the leader of the barbarous
tribes who dwell near the Ister, crossed that
river at the head of a large army, and encamped
on the frontiers of Thrace. He took possession
by treachery of a city of Moesia, called Castra
Martis, and thence made incursions into the rest
of Thrace, and insolently refused to enter into
terms of alliance with the Romans. The pre-
fect of the Thracian soldiers made propositions
of peace to him, but he replied by pointing to
the sun, and declaring that it would be easy to
him, if he desired to do so, to subjugate every
region of the earth that is enlightened by that
luminary. But while Uldis was uttering men-
aces of this description, and was ordering as
large a tribute as he pleased, and that on this
condition peace could be established with the
Romans or the war would continue, — when
affairs were so helpless, God gave manifest
proofs of special favor towards the present
reign ; for, shortly afterwards, the immediate
attendants and the leaders of the tribes of Uldis
were discussing the Roman form of government,
the philanthropy of the emperor, and his
promptitude and liberality in rewarding the best
and good men. It was not without God that
they turned to the love of the points so dis-
cussed and seceded to the Romans, to whose
camp they joined themselves, together with the

' His name was Longinianus. Zos. v. 32.
* Independent chapter; cf. Zos. v. 22.


troops ranged under themselves. Finding him-
self thus abandoned, Uldis escaped with difficulty
to the opposite bank of the river. Many of his
troops Were slain ; and among others the whole
of the barbarous tribe called the Sciri. This
tribe had been very strong in point of numbers
before falling into this misfortune. Some of
them were killed ; and others were taken pris-
oners, and conveyed in chains to Constantinople.
The governors Were of opinion that, if allowed
to remain together, they would probably make
a revolution. Some of them were, therefore,
sold at a low price ; while others were given
away as slaves for presents, upon condition that
they should never be permitted to return to
Constantinople, or to Europe, but be separated
by the sea from the places familiar to them.
Of these, a number was left unsold ; and they
were ordered to settle in different places. I have
seen many in Bithynia, near Mount Olympus,
living apart from one another, and cultivating
the hills and valleys of that region.


CHAP. VI. ALARIC THE GOTH. HE .\SSAULTED

ROME, AND STR.\ITENED IT BY WAR.

Thus was the Eastern Empire preserved from
the evils of war,'' and governed with high order,
contrary to all expectations, for its ruler was still
young. In the meantime, the Western Empire
fell a prey to disorders, because many tyrants
arose. After the death of Stilicho, Alaric, the
leader of the Goths, sent an embassy to Hono-
rius to treat of peace ; but without avail. He
advanced to Rome, and laid siege to it ; and by
posting a large army of barbarians on the banks
of the Tiber, he effectually prevented the trans-
mission of all provisions into the city from Portus.
After the siege had lasted some time, and fearful
ravages had been made in the city by famine and
pestilence, many of the slaves, and most of the
barbarians by race within the walls, deserted to
Alaric. Those among the senators who still
adhered to pagan superstition, proposed to offer
sacrifices in the Capitol and the other temples ;
and certain Tuscans, who were summoned by
the prefect of the city, promised to drive out
the barbarians with thunder and lightning ; they
boasted of having performed a similar exploit at
Lamia, a city of Tuscany, which Alaric had
passed by for Rome, and had not taken. The
event, however, proved that, no advantage could
be derived from these persons for the city. All
persons of good sense were aware that the
calamities which this siege entailed upon the
Romans were indications of Divine wrath sent
to chastise them for their luxury, their debauch-

' Independent; cf. Olymp. Fragm. 3-10: Zos. v. 37-40; Soc.
vii. 10.


IX. 8.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


423


ery, and their manifold acts of injustice towards
each other, as well as towards strangers. It is
said that, when Alaric was marching against
Rome, a good monk of Italy besought him to
spare the city, and not to become the author of
so many calamities. Alaric, in reply, assured
him that he did not feel disposed to commence
the siege, but that some resistless influence com-
pelled and commanded him to go against Rome ;
and this he eventually did. While he was be-
sieging the city, the inhabitants presented many
gifts to him, and for some time he raised the
siege, when the Romans agreed to persuade the
emperor to enter into a treaty of peace with
him.


CHAP. VII. INNOCENT THE BISHOP OF THE PRESBY-
TERY OF ROME. HE SENT AN EMBASSY TO ALARIC.
JOVIUS, PREFECT OF FTALY. EMBASSY DISPATCHED
TO THE EMPEROR. EVENTS CONCERNING ALARIC.

Although ambassadors were dispatched to
treat of peace,^ the enemies of Alaric at the
court of the emperor sedulously guarded against
the conclusion of any treaty with him. But
after this, when an embassy had been sent to
him by Innocent, bishop of Rome, and Alaric
was summoned by a letter of the emperor,
he repaired to the city of Ariminum, which is
two hundred and ten stadia distant from Ra-
venna.

He encamped beyond the walls of the city ;
and Jovius, the prefect of Italy, held a confer-
ence with him and conveyed his demands to the
emperor, one of which was, that he might be
appointed by an edict to the generalship of the
cavalry and infantry. The emperor gave full
power to Jovius to grant Alaric as much money
and provision as he might desire, but refused
ever to confer this dignity upon him. Jovius
unadvisedly awaited the messenger from the
palace, in the camp of Alaric ; and commanded
the decision of the emperor to be read in the
presence of all the barbarians. On finding that
the dignity was denied him, Alaric was enraged
at the result, ordered the trumpets to be sounded,
and marched towards Rome. Jovius, apprehen-
sive of being suspected by the emperor of siding
with Alaric, committed a still greater act of im-
prudence by taking an oath on the safety of the
emperor, and compelling the principal officers
to swear that they would never consent to any
terms of peace with Alaric. The barbarian
chief, however, soon after changed his mind, and
sent word he did not desire any post of dignity,
but was willing to act as an ally of the Romans,
provided that they would grant him a certain

1 Independent chapter; cf. Olymp. Fragyn. 3; Zos. v. 41-51.


quantity of com, and some territory of secondary
importance to them, in which he might establish
himself.


CHAP. Vm. REBELLION OF ATFALUS AND HIS

GENERAL HERACLEAN ; AND HOW HE EVENTU-
ALLY CRAVED FORGIVENESS AT THE FEET OF
HONORIUS.

After having sent some bishops as ambassa-
dors, on two different occasions, to treat on this
subject, but without effect, Alaric returned to
Rome, and besieged the city ; he took posses-
sion of one part of Portus, and compelled the
Romans to recognize Attalus, then prefect of
the city, as their king.^ When the Romans had
been nominated for the other offices, Alaric was
appointed general of the cavalry and infantry,
and Ataulphus, the brother of his wife, was
raised to the command of the force called the
domestic cavalry. Attalus assembled the sen-
ators, and addressed them in a long and very
elaborate discourse, in which he promised to
restore the ancient customs of the senate, and
also to bring Egypt and the other Eastern prov-
inces under the sway of Italy. Such was the
boastfulness of a man, who was not destined to
bear the name of sovereign during the space of
a single year. He was deceived by the repre-
sentations of some diviners, who assured him
that he would be able to conquer Africa without
a battle ; he disobeyed Alaric, who urged him
to send a moderate force to Carthage, to slay
the officers of Honorius, in case of their attempt-
ing any resistance. He also refused to follow
the counsels of John, to whom he had given the
command of the royal cohorts about his own
person, and who advised him to entrust Constans,
on his proposed departure for Libya, with a
document which they call edict, as though sent
by Honorius, by which Heraclean might be
dispossessed of office ; he had been entrusted
with the rule of the soldiers in AO'ica. Had
this artifice been adopted, it would probably
have proved successful, for the designs of Attalus
were unknown in Libya. But as soon as Con-
stans had set sail for Carthage, according to the
advice of the diviners, Attalus was so weak in
mind that he did not think it doubtful, but
believed that the Africans would be his subjects,
according to the prediction of the diviners, and
marched at the head of his army towards
Ravenna. When it was announced that Attalus
had reached Ariminum, with an army composed
partly of Roman and partly of barbarian troops,
Honorius wrote to him to acknowledge him as
emperor, and deputed the highest officers of his


* Independent chapter: cf. Olymp. Fragyn. 3. 13; Zos. vi. 6-13;
Soc. vii. 10; Philost. xii. 3.


424


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IX. 8.


court to wait upon him, and offer him a share in
the empire. Attalus, however, refused to share
power with another, and sent word that Honorius
might choose an island or any spot of ground
that he pleased for his private residence, and
that he would be allowed every imperial service.
The affairs of Honorius were reduced to so
critical a condition, that ships were kept in
readiness to convey him, if it were necessary, to
his nephew, when an army of four thousand men
which had started from the west arrived unex-
pectedly during the night at Ravenna ; Honorius
caused the walls of the city to be guarded by
this reinforcement, for he distrusted the native
troops as inclined to treachery.

In the meantime rferaclean had put Constans
to death, and had ranged troops along the ports
and coasts of Africa to hinder the merchant
vessels from going to Rome. When, as a con-
sequence, a famine seized the Romans, they sent
a deputation to Attalus about it. Being at a
loss what measures to adopt, he returned to
Rome to consult the senate. The famine was
so grievous that chestnuts were used by the
people to supply the place of corn, and some
persons were suspected of having partaken of
human flesh. Alaric advised that five hundred
barbarians should be sent into Africa against
Heraclean, but the senators and Attalus objected
that Africa ought not to be entrusted to barba-
rians. It then became evident to Alaric that
God disapproved of the rule of Attalus ; and
finding that it would be futile to labor for a mat-
ter which was beyond his power, and after re-
ceiving certain pledges, he agreed with Honorius
to deprive Attalus of his sovereignty. All the
parties concerned assembled together without
the walls of the city, and Attalus threw aside
the symbols of imperial power. His officers
also threw aside their girdles, and Honorius
granted pardon to all for these occurrences, and
each was to hold the honor and office which
he had first had. Attalus retired with his son
to Alaric, for he thought his life would not be
in safety as yet, if he continued t& dwell among
the Romans.


CHAP. IX. — THE DISTURBANCE WHICH THE GREEKS
AND CHRISTIANS HAD ABOUT ATTALUS. THE
COURAGEOUS SAROS ; ALARIC, BY A STRATAGEM,
OBTAINS POSSESSION OF ROME, AND PROTECTED
THE SACRED ASYLUM OF THE APOSTLE PETER.

The failure which had attended the designs
of Attalus was a source of deep displeasure to
the pagans and Christians of the Arian heresy.'
The pagans had inferred from the known predi-

' Independent chapter. Soc. vii. lo; Philost. xii. 3; Oros.
vii. 39.


lections and early education of Attalus, that he
would openly maintain their superstitions, and
restore their ancient temples, their festivals, and
their altars. The Arians imagined that, as soon
as he found his reign firmly established, Attalus
would reinstate them in the supremacy over the
churches which they had enjoyed during the
reigns of Constantius and of Valens ; for he had
been baptized by Sigesarius,^ bishop of the Goths,
to the great satisfaction of Alaric and the Arian
party.

Soon after, Alaric stationed himself among
the Alps, at a distance of about sixty stadia
from Ravenna, and held a conference with the
emperor concerning the conclusion of a peace.
Saros, a barbarian by birth, and highly practiced
in the art of war, had only about three hundred
men with him, but all well disposed and most
efficient. He was suspicious of Alaric on account
of their former enmity, and reasoned that a
treaty between the Romans and Goths would be
of no advantage to him. Suddenly advancing
with his own troops, he slew some of the bar-
barians. Impelled by rage and terror at this
incident, Alaric retraced his steps, and returned
to Rome, and took it by treachery. He per-
mitted each of his followers to seize as much of
the wealth of the Romans as he was able, and to
plunder all the houses ; but from respect towards
the Apostle Peter, he commanded that the large
and very spacious church erected around his
tomb should be an asylum. This was the only
cause which prevented the entire demolition of
Rome ; and those who were there saved, and they
were many, rebuilt the city.


CHAP. X. — A ROMAN LADY WHO MANIFESTED A
deed of MODESTY.

It is obvious that the capture of so great a
city as Rome must have been attended with
many remarkable circumstances. I shall, there-
fore, now proceed to the narration of such events
as seem worthy of a place in ecclesiastical his-
tory.'' I shall recount a pious action performed
by a barbarian, and record the bravery of a
Roman lady for the preservation of her chastity.
The barbarian and the lady were both Christians,
but not of the same heresy, the former being an
Arian, and the latter a zealous follower of the
Nicene doctrines. A young man of Alaric's
soldiers saw this very beautiful woman, and was
conquered by her loveliness, and tried to drag
her into intercourse ; but she drew back, and
exerted herself that she might not suffer pollu-
tion. He drew his sword, and threatened to


' He is called Sieesarus by Olympiodorus, Fragm. 26, who
speaks of him as having endeavored in vain to rescue the sons of
Ataulph, the king of the Goths, from death.

' Independent narrative. Oros. vii. 39.


IX. 12.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


425


slay her ; but he was restrained by the passion
which he entertained toward her, and merely
inflicted a slight wound on her neck. The
blood flowed in abundance, and she offered
her neck to the sword ; for she preferred to die
in her chastity than to survive, after having con-
sorted lawfully with a husband, and then to be
attempted by another man. When the barba-
rian repeated his purpose, and followed it with
more fearful threats, he accomplished nothing
further ; struck with wonder at her chastity, he
conducted her to the church of Peter the apos-
tle, and gave six pieces of gold for her support
to the officers who were guarding the church, and
commanded them to keep her for her husband.


CHAP. XI. THE TYRANTS WHO IN THE WEST AT

THAT TIME REBELLED AGAINST HONORIUS. THEY
ARE WHOLLY DESTROYED ON ACCOUNT OF THE
emperor's LOVE OF GOD.

During this period many tyrants rebelled
against Honorius in the Western government.
Some fell upon one another, while others were
apprehended in a marvelous way, and so evi-
denced that the Divine love toward Honorius
was not common. The soldiers in Britain^ were
the first to rise up in sedition, and they pro-
claimed Mark as tyrant. Afterwards, however,
they slew Mark, and proclaimed Gratian. Within
four months subsequently they killed Gratian,
and elected Constantine in his place, imagining
that, on account of his name, he would be able
to reduce the empire firmly under his authority ;
and for no other reason than this, several other
persons of the same name were elected to the
tyranny. Constantine passed over from Britain
to Bononia, a maritime city of Gaul ; and after
inducing all the troops in Gaul and Aquitania
to espouse his cause, he reduced to obedience
the inhabitants of the regions extending to the
mountains which divide Italy from Gaul, and
which the Romans have named the Cottian Alps.
He then sent his oldest son, Constans, whom
he had already nominated Csesar, and whom
he afterwards proclaimed emperor, into Spain.
Constans, after making himself master of this
province, and appointing his own governors over
it, commanded that Didymus and Verinian, rela-
tives of Honorius, should be loaded with chains,
and brought before him. Didymus and Verinian
had at first differed among themselves, but a
reconcihation was effected between them, when
they found themselves menaced by the same
danger. They combined their forces, which
consisted, chiefly of armed peasants and slaves.
They attacked Lusitania in common, and slew

* Independent chapter. Olymp. Fragm. 12; Zos. vi. 1-5; Oros.
vii. 39.


many of the soldiers sent by the tyrant for their
capture.


CHAP. XII. — THEODOSIOLUS AND LAGODIUS. THE
RACES OF THE VANDALS AND SUEVI. DEATH OF
AI^RIC. FLIGHT OF THE TYRANTS CONSTAN-
TINE AND CONSTANS.

The troops of Constans were shortly after-
wards strengthened by reinforcements, and
Didymus and Verinian, with their wives, were
taken prisoners, and were eventually put to
death.^ Their brothers, Theodosiolus and Lago-
dius, who were living in other provinces, fled
the country \ the former escaped to Italy, to the
Emperor Honorius ; the latter fled to the East,
to Theodosius. After these transactions, Con-
stans returned to his father, after he had posted
a guard of his own soldiers for the road to
Spain ; for he did not permit the Spaniards to
act as guard, according to the ancient custom, a
privilege for which they had petitioned. This
precaution was probably afterwards the cause of
the ruin of the country ; for when Constantine
was deprived of his power, the barbarous races
of the Vandals, Suevi, and Alani took confidence
and conquered the road, and took possession
of many forts and cities in Spain and Gaul, and
arrested the officers of the tyrant.

In the meantime, Constantine, who still
thought that matters would go according to
his purpose, caused his son to be proclaimed
emperor instead of Caesar, and determined to
possess himself of Italy. With this view, he
crossed the Cottian Alps, and entered Liverona,
a city of Liguria. He was on the point of cross-
ing the Po, when he was compelled to retrace
his steps, upon being informed of the death of
Alavicus. This Alavicus was the commander
of the troops of Honorius, and being suspected
of conspiring to place the entire Western gov-
ernment under the domination of Constantine,
he was slain when returning from a procession, in
which, according to custom, it was his office to
march in advance of the emperor. Immedi-
ately after this occurrence, the emperor de-
scended from horseback, and publicly returned
thanks to God for having delivered him from
one who had openly conspired against him.
Constantine fled and seized Aries, and Constans,
his son, hastened from Spain, and sought refuge
in the same city.

On the dechne of the power of Constantine,
the Vandals, Suevi, and Alani eagerly took the
Pyrenees when they heard that it was a prosper-
ous and most abundant region. And since
those who had been entrusted by Constans

' Independent chapter. Olymp. Fragm. 10, 15, 29, 30; Zos. vi.
4; Oros. vii. 40-42.


426


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


[IX. 12.


„UK .he guard o. .he .^s^JftJ^S^^^'lT^t^VTl^:^^^''^^^ -


their duty, the invaders passed by into Spain.

CHAP. Xm. CONCERNING GERONTIUS, MAXIMUS,

AND THE TROOPS OF HONORIUS. CAPTURE OF
GERONTIUS AND HIS WIFE ; THEIR DEATH.

Meanwhile Gerontius, from being the most
efficient of the generals of Constantme, became
his enemy ; ' and beUeving that Maximus, his
intimate friend, was well qualified for the tyranny
he invested him with the impenal robe, and
permitted him to reside in Tarracona. Ge-
rontius then marched against Constantme, and
took care to put Constans, the son of Constan-
tine, to death at Vienna.

\s soon as Constantine heard of the usurpa-
tion of Maximus, he sent one of his generals,
named Edovicus, beyond the Rhine, to levy an
army of Franks and Alemanni ; and he sent his
son Constans to guard Vienna and the neigh-
boring towns. Gerontius then advanced upon
Aries and laid siege to it ; but directly, when the
arniy of Honorius had come to hand against
the tyrant, under the command of Constantius,
the father of that Valentinian who subsequently
became emperor of Rome, Gerontius retreated
precipitately with a few soldiers ; for the greater
number of his troops deserted to the army of
Constantius. The Spanish soldiery conceived
an utter contempt for (ierontius, on account of
his retreat, and took counsel how to slay him.
They gathered in close ranks and attacked his
house at night ; but he, with one Alanus, his
friend, and a few servants, ascended to the top
of the house, and did such execution with their
arrows that no less than three hundred of the
soldiers fell. When the stock of arrows was
exhausted, the servants made their escape by
lettincr themselves down secretly from the build-
ing • and Gerontius, although he might have
been saved in a similar fashion, did not choose
to do so, because he was restrained by his affec-
tion for Nonnichia, his wife. At daybreak of the
next day, the soldiers cast fire into the house ;
when he saw that there was no hope of safety lett,
he cut off the head of his companion, Alanus, in
compliance with his wish. After this, his own wife
was lamenting, and with tears was pressing her-
self with the sword, pleading to die by the hand
of her husband before she should be subjected
to others, and was supplicating for this last gift
from him. And this woman by her courage
showed herself worthy of her religion, for she
was a Christian, and she died thus mercifully ;
she handed down to time a record of hersel ,
too strong for oblivion. Gerontius then struck
himself thrice with his sword; but perceiving

t Independent chapter. Cf. Olymp. Frarm. 16; Zos. vi. 5;
Oros. vii. 42.


drew forth his poniard, which he wore at his
side, and plunged it into his heart.

CHAP. XIV. — CONSTANTINE. THE ARMY OF HONO-
RIUS AND EDOVICUS HIS GENERAL. DEFEAT OF
EDOVICUS BY ULPHILAS, THE GENERAL OF CON-
STANTINE. DEATH OF EDOVICUS.

Although the city of Aries was closely be-
sieged by the army of Honorius, Constantme
still resisted the siege, because Edovicus was
announced as at hand with many allies. Ihis
frightened the generals of Honorius beyond
measure. Then they determined to return to
Italy and to carry on the war there. When
they had united on this plan, Edovicus was an-
nounced as in the neighborhood, so they crossed
the river Rhone. Constantius, who commanded
the infantry, quietly awaited the approach of the
enemy, while Ulphilas, the fellow-general of Con-
stantius, remained not far off in ambush with his
cavalry. Th£ enemy passed by the army of
Ulphilas, and were about to engage with the
troops of Constantius, when a signal was given
and Ulphilas suddenly appeared and assaulted
the enemy from the rear. Their flight was im-
mediate. Some escaped, some were slain, while
others threw down their arms and asked for
pardon, and were spared. Edovicus mounted
his horse and fled to the lands of one Ecdicius,
a landed proprietor, to whom he had formerly
rendered some important service, and whom he
therefore imagined to be his friend. Ecdicius,
however, struck off his head, and presented it
to the generals of Honorius, in hope of receivmg
some great reward and honor. Constantius, on
receiving the head, proclaimed that the public
thanks were due to Ecdicius for the deed of
Ulphilas ; but when Ecdicius was eager to ac-
company him he commanded him to depart,
for he did not consider the companionship of a
malicious host to be good for himself or the
army And the man who had dared to commit the
most unholy murder of a friend and a guest who
was in an unfortunate situation, — this man went
away, as the proverb says, gaping with emptiness.

CHAP XV. — CONSTANTINE THROWS ASIDE THE EM-
BLEMS OF IMPERIAL POWER, AND IS ORDAINED AS

presbyter; his subsequent death, death

OF THE OTHER TYRANTS WHO HAD CONSPIRED
AGAINST HONORIUS.

After this victory the troops of Honorius
again laid siege to the city.' When Constantme
heard of the death of Edovicus he cast aside
his purple robe and imperial ornaments, and
repaired to the church, where he caused him-


IX. 17.]


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SOZOMEN.


427


self to be ordained as presbyter. Those within
the walls, having first received oaths, opened
the gates, and their lives were spared. From
that period the whole province returned to its
allegiance to Honorius, and has since been obe-
dient to the rulers of his appointment. Constan-
tine, with his son Julian, was sent into Italy, but
he was waylaid and killed. Not long afterwards
Jovianus and Maximus, the tyrants above men-
tioned, Saros, and many others who had conspired
against Honorius, were unexpectedly slain.

CHAP. XVI. HONORIUS THE RULER, A LOVER OF

GOD. DEATH OF HONORIUS. HIS SUCCESSORS,
VALENTINU.N, AND HONORIA HIS DAUGHTER;
THE PEACE WHICH WAS THEN WORLD-WIDE.

This is not the proper place to enter into the
details concerning the deaths of the tyrants ; ^
but I considered it necessary to allude to the
circumstance in order to show that to insure the
stability of imperial power, it is sufficient for an
emperor to serve God with reverence, which
was the course pursued by Honorius. Galla
Placidia, his sister, born of the same father as
himself, dwelt with him, and likewise distin-
guished herself by real zeal in the maintenance of
religion and of the churches. After Constantius,
who was a brave and able general, had destroyed
the tyrant Constantine, the emperor rewarded him
by giving him his sister in marriage ; he also
bestowed upon him the ermine and purple, and
admitted him to a share in the government.
Constantius did not long survive the promotion ;
he died soon after, and left two children, Valen-
tinian, who succeeded Honorius, and Honoria.
Meanwhile the Eastern Empire was free from
wars, and contrary to all opinion, its affairs were
conducted with great order, for the ruler was
still a youth. It seems as if God openly mani-
fested His favor towards the present emperor,
not only by disposing of warlike affairs in an
unexpected way, but also by revealing the sacred
bodies of many persons who were of old most
distinguished for piety; among other relics, those
of Zechariah, the very ancient prophet, and of
Stephen, who was ordained deacon by the apos-
tles, were discovered ; and it seems incumbent
upon me to describe the mode, since the dis-
covery of each was marvelous and divine.^

CHAP. XVn. — discovery of THE REUCS OF
ZECHARIAH THE PROPHET, AND OF STEPHEN
THE PROTO -MARTYR.


» Independent chapter. Cf. Philost. xii. 4-13; Olymp. Fragm.
; 39. 4°-

* if '■^'^°""*s ^^^ discovery of Zechariah only, while all the lan-
lage here, and that of the beginning of the next chapter, indicates his

tentton to describe both. Could the work then have he<-n rr>nrIiia/.H ?


guage


guagc ijcrc, aiiu inai 01 me oeginning 01 the next chapter, indicates his
intention to describe both. Could the work then have been concluded?


I SHALL first speak of the relics of the
prophet.^ Caphar-Zechariah is a village of the
territory of Eleutheropolis, a city of Palestine.
The land of this district was cultivated by
Calemerus, a serf; he was well disposed to the
owner, but hard, discontented, and unjust
towards his neighboring peasants. Although
he possessed these defects of character, the
prophet stood by him in a dream, and mani-
fested himself; pointing out a particular gar-
den, he said to him, " Go, dig in that garden
at the distance of two cubits from the hedge
of the garden by the road leading to the city
of Bitheribis. You will there find two coffins,
the inner one of wood, the other of lead. Beside
the coffins you will see a glass vessel full of
water, and two serpents of moderate size, but
tame, and perfectly innoxious, so that they
seem to be used to being handled." Calemerus
followed the directions of the prophet at the des-
ignated place and zealously applied himself to the
task. When the sacred depository was disclosed
by the afore-mentioned signs, the divine prophet
appeared to him, clad in a white stole, which
makes me think that he was a priest. At his feet
outside of the coffin was lying a child which
had been honored with a royal burial ; for on its
head was a golden crown, its feet were encased
in golden sandals, and it was arrayed in a costly
robe. The wise men and priests of the time
were greatly perplexed about this child, who
and whence he might be and for what reason he
had been so clothed. It is said that Zechariah,
the superior of a monastic community at Gerari,
found an ancient document written in Hebrew,
which had not been received among the canoni-
cal books. In this document it was stated that
when Zechariah the prophet had been put to
death by Joash, king of Judah, the family of the
monarch was soon visited by a dire calamity ;
for on the seventh day after the death of the
prophet, one of the sons of Joash, whom he ten-
derly loved, suddenly expired. Judging that
this affliction was a special manifestation of
Divine wrath, the king ordered his son to be
interred at the feet of the prophet, as a kind of
atonement for the crime against him. Such are
the particulars which I have ascertained on the
subject.

Although the prophet had lain under the
earth for so many generations, he appeared
sound ; his hair was closely shorn, his nose was
straight ; his beard moderately grown, his head
quite short, his eyes rather sunken, and con-
cealed by the eyebrows.

^ An independent chapter, built on local story.


THE END, WITH THE AID OF THE HOLY TRINITY.


INDEXES,


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Abdas, bishop of Persia, 157.

Abgarus, unknown person, excom-
municated, 70.

Ablabius, an eminent orator, ordained
a Novatian presbyter, 159.

Abramius of Urimi, 95.

Abundantius, a military commander,
156.

Acacians, a sect, explanation of their
views, 70; meet at Constanti-
nople, 71; meet at Antioch and
assent to the Nicene Creed, 94.

Acacius, bishop of Amida, 164.

Acacius, bishop of Beroea, 150.

Acacius, bishop of Gijsarea, 37; helps
eject Maximus, 65; composes a
creed, 68, 69; deposed, 70; be-
comes head of sect (see Acaci-
ans), 72; with Eudoxius deposes
Macedonius, Eleusius, Basil of
Ancyra, Dracontius, Neonas,
Sophronius, Elpidius, and Cyril,
72, 84.

Acacius, martyr, 153.

Acesius, a Novatian bishop; his con-
versation with Constantine, 17.

Achab (called John), a false accuser
of Athanasius, escapes, 31.

Achrea, singular custom among the
clergy of, 132.

Achetas, a deacon, 50.

Achillas, bishop of Alexandria, suc-
ceeds Peter, 3.

Achillas, companion of Arius, 5.

Acis of the Apostles, quoted, 133.

Adamantius, a bishop in the reign of
Constantine, t^t,.

Adamantius, Jewish physician of
Alexandria, 159.

Adelphius, a bishop, exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Adrianople, battle of, 1 1 7.

Adultery, peculiar punishment of, in
Rome, 127.

Adytum of the Mithreum cleared, 79.

Aetius (called Atheus), a heresiarch,
60; character of his heresy, 61,
98, 103, 134.

Africanus, an early writer, 60.

Agapetus, a Macedonian bishop, ac-
cepts the homoousion and sup-
plants Theodosius at Synada, 155.

Agapius, an Arian bishop of Ephesus,

134-

Agatho, a bishop, exiled under Con-
stantius, 55.

Agelius, Novatian bishop, 66; ex-
pelled by Valens, 99 ; absent from
the Synod of Pazum, 113; ad-


vises Nectarius, 122, 123; his
death, 124; was bishop for forty
years, 129.

Agilo, a general under the rebel Pro-
copius, killed, 97.

Alamundarus, a Saracen chief, 162.

Alaric, a barbarian chieftain, makes
war against Rome, 157; takes
and sacks Rome, 158; proclaims
one Attalus mock emperor, 158.

Alemanni, a northern race, 120, 124.

Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, suc-
ceeds Achillas, 3; writes circu-
lars on Arian heresy, 3; collects
opinions favorable to himself, 6;
commended by the Nicene Coun-
cil, 13; present at the Nicene
Council, 19; his death, 20; had
deposed Euzoius, 28.

Alexander, bishop of Antioch, 157,

173-
Alexander, bishop of Constantinople,
opposes Arius, 34; his death,

38.

Alexander, bishop of Jerusalem, 1 73.

Alexander, bishop of Helenopolis, 1 73.

Alexander, th^ Macedonian (the
Great), date from, 19; Julian
compares himself to him, 90;
oracle uttered to him, 93; Jews
dwelt in Alexandria since his
day, 159.

Alexander, the Paphlagonian, a Nova-
tian presbyter, 66.

Alexandrians, an irritable people, 105.

Altar, alleged desecration of, by Ma-
carius, 29; desecration of, by
slaves, 171 ; usually set toward
the east, 132; the holy table so
called, 132, 140.

Alypius, a presbyter of the Alexan-
drian church, 29.

Amachius, governor of Phrygia, per-
secutes the Christians, 86.

Ambrose, a consul, proclaimed bishop
of Milan, 113, 114; persecuted
by Justina, 124.

Ammonius, three bishops of the name
exiled under Constantius, 55.

Ammonius, a companion of Athana-
sius and unworldly monk, 108,
109.

Ammonius, a Nitrian monk, 160.

Ammonius, a pagan grammarian, 126.

Ammonius, a poet, 142.

Ammonius, one of the " Tall Broth-
ers," 143.

Ammonius, bishop of Laodicea, 150.

Ammoun, a monk, history of, 106.


Amphilochius,bishopof Iconium, 122.

Amphion, bishop of Nicomedia, dis-
placed by Eusebius, 20.

Amphitheatre, sports of the, 165.

Anagamphus, a bishop, exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Anastasia, daughter of the emperor
Valens, 99.

Anastasia, church of the Novatians
so called, 66.

Anastasia, church of Gregory of
Nazianzus, 120.

Anastasian baths, 99.

Anastasius, bishop of Rome, 157.

Anastasius, a presbyter, friend of
Nestorius, 170.

Anatolius, Semi-Arian bishop of Be-
roea, 95.

Ancoratus, book so called, 135.

Andragathius, a philosopher, instruc-
tor of John Chrysostom, 138.

Andragathius, a general under Maxi-
mus, slays Gratian, 1 24.

Angarum, Novatian Council of, 129.

Angels, visions of, 142, 162, 166.

Anianus, Semi-Arian bishop of An-
tioch, exiled, 71.

Anicetus, bishop of Rome, 130.

Anomoion, term first used at Sardica,
47; again, 69, 84.

' Anomoeans,' 74, 95, 100.

Anthusa, mother of John Chrysostom,

138.

Anthemius, praetorian prefect during
the minority of Theodosius the
Younger, 154.

Anthony, a monk of the Egyptian
desert, 25; study of nature, by,
107; congratulates Didymus, no.

Anthony, bishop of Germa, perse-
cutes the Macedonians, 170.

' Anthropomorphitae,' 144.

Antichrist, 3.

Antioch, Synods of, 27, 38, 73, 94;
a canon of, 150, 173; creed of,
39, 40, 70, 84, 97; the Emperor
Constantius resides in, 41 ; divis-
ions at, 73, 80, 83, 119, 121,
122, 125, 126.

Antiochenes, irritable temper of, 88.

Antiochicus and Misopogon, book so
called, 88.

Antiochus, bishop of Ptolemais in
Phoenicia, 146.

Antipater, Semi-Arian bishop of Rhe-
sus, 95.

Antiphonal singing, 144, 165.

Antirrkcticus, treatise of Evagrius,
107.


432


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Anubion, a bishop in the reign of

Constantine, 2^.
Aphaca, 22.

ApoUinaris, bishop of Hierapolis, 81.
ApoUinaris, the elder, a learned man,

74-

ApoUinaris of Laodicea (son of the
former), 74, 75; peculiar views
of, 86.

ApoUinarians, a sect, 74, 75.

Apostles, church so called, 21, 35,
14S, 177.

Apostles, mission-fields of, 23; coun-
cil of, 133.

Apotheoses, pagan, 93, 94.

Applauding a preacher, 159.

Arabian, Semi-Arian bishop of An-
dros, 95.

Aratus, the Astronomer, 88.

Arbathion, a bishop in the reign of
Constantine, 33.

Arbogastes, a commander under Val-
entiiiian the Younger with Eu-
genius murders his master, 135;
commits suicide, 136.

Arcadius, emperor, son of Theodosius
the Great, 1 14; proclaimed
Augustus, 122; left with impe-
rial authority at Constantinople,
124; assumes the government
of the East, 137; summons John
Chrysostom to Constantinople to
become bishop, 138; commits
the charge of affairs among the
Goths to Gainas, 141; makes
terms with him after he had
rebelled, 141; proclaims him a
public enemy, defeats and slays
him, 142; his son Theodosius,
the good, is born, 142; banishes
John Chrysostom, 149; refuses
to attend church on account of
John, 151; banishes him again,
151 ; his death, 153.

Archdeacon, office of, 156.

Archelaus, governor of Syria, 30.

Archelaus, opponent of Manichaeism,
26.

Ardaburius, Roman general, wages
war with the Persians, 162, 163;
sent against the usurper John,
165.

Areobindus, a Roman general, 162.

Arian controversy, beginning of, 3;
occasion of, the misunderstand-
ing of the word kornoousios, 27;
revival of, 36.

Arians, dissensions among, 72-74,
123, 134; inconsistency of, 74;
persecutions by, 57, 66, 103,
105; expelled from the churches
by Theodosius, 129; excite a
tumult in Constantinople, 125;
set on fire the bishop's residence,
125; their meetings and noctur-
nal singing, 1 44.

Ariminum, 56; council of, 61, 67,
84, lOl, 102; creed of, 61, 62;
epistle of, to the Emperor Con-
stantius, 63.

Aristotle, the ancient philosopher, 60,

93-
Arius, a presbyter in Alexandria, in-


cited to controvert the unity of
the Trinity, 3; relations to Meli-
tianisni,6; anathematized by the
Nicene Council, 10; exiled, lO;
writes a book Thalia which is
condemned, 13; procures his
recall by feigning repentance,
20; goes to Constantinople, ob-
tains interview with the emperor,
feigns assent to the Nicene Creed,
28; recantation, 28, 29; returns
to Alexandria, 29; Athanasius
refuses to receive him, 29, 33;
renews his efforts to spread his
views, 29; is reinstated, 34; ex-
cites commotion in the church of
Alexandria, 34; is summoned
by the emperor to Constanti-
nople, 34; his death, 34, 35;
his dissimulation, 60.

Arius, partisans of, denounced by
Alexander, bishop of Alexan-
dria, 3.

Arrenius, bishop of Jerusalem, suc-
ceeds Cyril, 74.

Arsacius, bishop of Constantinople,
succeeds John Chrysostom, 151.

Arsenius, Melitian bishop, alleged
victim of Anthanasius' witch-
craft, 30; appears before the
council of Tyre, 31.

Arsenius, Egyptian monk, 106.

Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica,
attends the Synod of Constanti-
nople, 121.

Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, expelled,
42; restored to his see, 51.

Asclepiades, Novatian bishop, his
defense of their views, 167.

Aspar, son of Ardaburius, delivers
his father and seizes the usurper
John, 166.

Asterius, an Arian rhetorician, 33;
excommunicated, 70.

Athanaric, king of the Goths, 115;
submits to Theodosius, 122; his
death, 122.

Athanasius, Semi-Arian bishop of
Ancyra, 95.

Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria,
opposes Arianism in the Council
of Nicaea while yet a deacon, 9;
quoted, 19; succeeds to the see
of Alexandria, 20; incident in
his childhood, 20; Life of An-
thony by, 25, 106; his ordination
objected to, 26; refuses to re-
ceive Arius, 29; is therefore
threatened by Constantine and
conspired against, 29; accused
of treason, declared innocent by
the emperor, course taken by
his opponents, 29, 30; hesitates
to appear before the Council of
Tyre, but does so when menaced
by the emperor, 30; confounds
his enemies, 31 ; protests against
the participation of his personal
enemies in the council which
was trying him and withdraws
from their jurisdiction, 31 ; ap-
peals to the emperor, 32; the
Synod deposes him, 32 ; banished


by Constantine, 33; recalled and
reinstated by Constantine the
Younger, 37; returns to Alexan-
dria and is joyfully welcomed,
but is again banished, 37; es-
capes, 40; is accused of pecula-
tion, threatened with death, and
flies to Rome, 42 ; appeals to the
emperor and returns to Rome,
43; demands that a Synod should
be convened to take cognizance
of his deposition, 46; reinstated
by the Council of Sardica, 47;
recalled by Constantius, 49 ; re-
pairs to Rome, 50; returns to the
East, is admitted to an interview
by Constantius, and restored by
him to his see, 51; proceeds to
Jerusalem, proposes a council of
bishops, which is convened there
by Maximus, 52; arouses hos-
tility among the Arians by this
course, 53; passes to Alexandria
and on the way performs ordi-
nations, thus occasioning fresh
accusations against himself, 53;
convenes a council of bishops in
Egypt, 53; the emperor with-
draws the immunities granted
him and commands that he be
put to death, 54; escapes by
flight, 54; his account of the
atrocities inflicted on Christians
by George, 54, 55; a council of
bishops assembles at Milan to
condemn him, 60; their object is
thwarted, 60; his attack on the
creed of Ariminum, 62, 63; re-
stored to the see of Alexandria,
80; with Eusebius of Vercellae
calls a council together, 81; his
Apology for his Flight, 82, 83;
Julian issues an edict for his ar-
rest, but he escapes by flight and
secretly returns to Alexandria,
86; after the death of Julian he
is restored to the see of .'\lexan-
dria, 94, 96; hides himself in his
father's tomb for four months,
103; the emperor reinstates him,
103; his influence over Valens,
105; his death, 105; quoted,
106, 108.

Athenai's, the pagan name of the
empress Eudocia, 164.

Athenodorus, a bishop, exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Athens, school of, 77.

Attalus, made mock-emperor by Al-
aric, 158.

Atticus, bishop of Constantinople, or-
dained, 151 ; friendship of, with
Sisinnus the Novatian, 153; his
character and learning, 154;
progress of Christianity during
his administration, 155; receives
Persian suppliants, 162; his
Christian benevolence, 166; la-
bors to abolish superstitions,
167; changes the names of cer-
tain places, 167; his death, 167;
succeeded by Sisinnius, 168.

Atys, a pagan priest, the founder of


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


433


certain Phrygian rites, deified,

93-
Aurelian, a consular, delivered up to

Gainas, 141.
Auxanon, a Novatian presbyter, 19;

cruelly treated, 66.
Auxentius, Arian bishop of Milan,

refuses to anathematize Arius,

62; deposed by the Synod of

Ariminum, 63; death of, 1 13.
Azazene, captives from, ransomed by

Acacius of Amida, 164.

Babylas, martyr, the relics of, 88.

Babylon, 25.

Bacurius, a prince among the Ibe-
rians, 25.

Bacurius, an officer under Theodo-
sius, 135.

Baptism, of Constantine the Great, 35 ;
of Constantius, 75; of Theodo-
sius the Great, 120; of Eudocia,
164; customs respecting, 132,
155, 161, 170; form of, changed
by some Arians, 135; name
given at, 164; great sins after,
treatment of, 17, 1 1 2, 128, 132,
152, 167.

Barbas, .\rian bishop, succeeds Doro-
theus, 156; his death, 170.

Barlamenus, Semi-Arian bishop of
Pergamus, 95.

Bartholomew, the apostle, goes to
India, 23.

Basil, bishop of Ancyra, sent to An-
cyra, 34, 51, 55, 56; opposes
Photinus, 58; fails to appear at
the Synod of Seleucia, 68; de-
posed by Acacius, 72; petitions
Jovian, 94.

Basil, bishop of Cappadocia, quoted,
108.

Basil, bishop of Caesarea, labors
against the Arian heresy, no;
a pupil of Himerius and Pro-
hoeresius, iio; also of Libanius,
III; studies Origen, in; or-
dained a 'deacon, in; becomes
bishop. III; is threatened with
martyrdom, but escapes, 1 1 1 ;
companion of John Chrysostom,

139-

Basilicus, excommunicated, 70.

Beryllus, bishop of Philadelphia,
heresy of, 81.

Berytus, 3, 27; school of, 74.

Bethlehem, church built in, 21.

Bishops, contentiousness of many, 26,
27, 118; dress of, 72, 152;
thrones used by, 73, 149, 155;
translations irregular, 73; not
forbidden, 173; strife at election
of, 113, 138, 169, 172, 177; not
to interfere with one another,
121,148; respect shown to, 146;
benediction given by, 149; only
one in a city, 152; departed,
mention of, in church service, 166.

Boniface, bishop of Rome, succeeds
Zosimus, 158.

Briso, bishop of Philippi, 150.

Briso, eunuch in the service of Eu-
doxia, 149.


Britain, Christians of, 15; a Novatian
Ijishop lord-lieutenant of, 158.

Buddas (previously called Terebin-
thus), his fleath, 25.

Burgundians, conversion of, 169, 170.

By/.antium, enlarged by Constantine
the Great and called Constanti-
nople, 19-21.

Coesarea in Palestine, Eusebius Pam-
philus writes to, 11, 39.

CiEsareum, church called so in Alex-
andria, 1 60.

Casars, the, Julian's work entitled, 92.

Caius, bishop, exiled under Constan-
tius, 55.

Callicrates, bishop of Claudiopolis, 94.

Callinicus, a Melitian, used as tool
against Athanasius, 29.

Calliopius, a presbyter, 166.

Callistus, one of Julian's body-guards,
writes poetry, 90.

Calvary, a temple of Venus erected
on its summit by Hadrian, 21.

Candles, lighted, used at prayers in
the churches of Achasa, 132;
of Thessaly, and among the Nova-
tians of Constantinople, 132.

Canons, passed by the Nicene Coun-
cil, 19; Athanasius charged of
violating, 38; Macedonius in-
stalled contrary to, 43.

Carosa, daughter of the Emperor
Valens, 99.

Carterius, an ascetic, 139.

Carterius, a Macedonian, 135.

Carya, building called, 153.

' Cataphrygians,' the, a sect, 63.

Catechising, 10.

Catechumens, in the ancient church,
114, 132.

Celestinus, bishop of Rome, succeeds
Boniface, 158.

Ceras, bay of Constantinople, 66.

Ceremonial law abrogated, 130.

Chalcedon, walls of, destroyed, 99.

Chalice, story of the broken, 30.

Chanters in the ancient church, how
chosen, 132.

Chrestus, bishop of Nicjea, displaced
by Theognis, 20.

Christianity, ridiculed on account of
the Arian controversy, 5; its dis-
semination among the ' Indians '
(Ethiopians), 23; the Iberians,
24; the Goths, 1 15; the Persians,
157; the Burgundians, 170.

Christians, their dissensions charac-
terized by outrages, 40 ; ex-
posed to persecution and torture,
55; real and spurious made
manifest by Julian's treatment,
85; persecuted under Julian, 85,
86, 89; a philosopher's opinion
on differences between them,
115; slaughtered by the Jews at
Alexandria, 159; those in Persia
persecuted, 162.

Chrysanthus, Novatian bishop of
Constantinople, succeeds Sisin-
nius, 156, 158; his character
and virtues, 158; his death, 161.

Chrysopolis, 2.


Church, history of, written by Euse-
bius, I; relations to State, 118.

Churches, at Nicx'a, 8; at Constanti-
nople, 21, 38, 43, 66, 67, 73, 96,
99, 120, 140, 141, 146, 147, 148,
150, 171, 175, 177; at Bethle-
hem, 21; at Jerusalem, 21 ; at
Heliopolis, 22; near the Oak of
Mamre, 22; in 'India' (Ethi-
opia), 23; in Iberia, 24; at
Antioch, 38, 97, 119, 120, 126;
at Alexandria, 40, 51, 55, 78, 80,
156, 159, i6o; at Seleucia, 67,
68; at Cyzicus, 85; at Edessa,
104; at Rome, 109, 158; at
Milan, 113; at Chalcedon, 141,
1 50; at Ancyra, 152.

Cinaron, place where Hypatia's limbs
were burnt, 160.

Clearchus, governor of Constanti-
nople under Valens, 99.

Clemens of Alexandria, an early
writer, 60, 81.

Cleomedes, a pugilist, deified, 94.

Clergy, marriage of, 18, 132.

Coeternity of the Son of God, 4, 48,
60, 123.

Co-inoriginacy of the Son, 45.

Colossians, Epistle to the, 130.

Comana, death of Chrysostom at, 15 1.

Comet of a prodigious magnitude,
141.

Conflict between the Constantinopoli-
tans and the Alexandrians, 149;
between the Jews and Christians
at Alexandria, 159.

Constans, the youngest son of Con-
stantine the Great, 35; favors
Athanasius and Paul, 42, 44;
threatens war against his brother
Constantius, 49; treacherously
slain by Magnentius, 53; is pre-
sented a creed, 72.

Constantia, wife of Licinius and sister
of Constantine the Great, 2;
interests herself in behalf of
Arius, 28; death of, 28.

Constantia, a town in Palestine, 22.

Constantianoe, bath so named, 99.

Constantino, the Great, his life writ-
ten by Eusebius, i ; proclaimed
emperor, l; conversion of, 2;
conflict with Licinius, 2; pro-
claimed Autocrat, 3; sends Ho-
sius to Alexander and Arius, 6;
convokes the Synod of Nica;a, 8;
his letters against Arius, Eu-
sebius of Nicomedia, and Theog-
nis, 13-15; his letter to Eusebius
Pamphilus on copying the
Scriptures, 16; to Macarius on
building a church, 16; exhorts
the Nicomedians to choose
another bishop, 17; summons
Acesius the Novatian to the Sy-
nod, 17; his devout character,
18; transfers the government of
the empire to Constantinople
and names the city Xnu Rovte,
20; builds churches in it, 20;
adorns it, 21; appropriates the
nails of the Saviour's cross, 21;
abolishes gladiatorial combats,


434


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


22; effects various reforms, 22;
progress of Christianity under
him, 25; receives an Arian
presbyter and invites Arius to
his presence, 26; orders Atha-
nasius to receive Arius, 29; sum-
mons the Council of Tyre to
the New Jerusalem, 32; ban-
ishes Athanasius, T^y, receives
Arius, 34; baptism, happy death,
and obsequies, 35; tomb and
ashes removed by Macedonius,
67.
Constantine II., eldest son of Con-
stantine the Great, 35; recalls
and reinstates Athanasius, 37;
writes to the church of Alex-
andria, 37; again banishes Ath-
anasius, 37; invades the domin-
ions of Constans, and is slain, 37,

53-

Constantino's Forum, 35.

Constantinople, named Neio Rome,
21; embellished, 21 ; disturbance
at, about the choice of a bishop,
38, 41; councils held at, 71, 73,
121, 122, 129, 150; populous-
ness of, 104, 174; patriarchial
dignity of its see, 121, 168.

Constantius I., father of Constantine
the lireat, his death, I.

Constantius II., second son of Con-
stantine the Great, 35; succeeds
his father and favors an Arian
presbyter, 36; transfers Euse-
bius of Nicomedia to Constanti-
nople, 38; expels Paul, 38^ de-
prives the inhabitants of Con-
stantinople of aid granted by his
father, 41 ; orders Paul to be
expelled by force, 42; summons
the Eastern bishops to a con-
ference, 49; sustains a check in
the war with Persia, 53; pro-
claimed sole emperor of the
East, 53; persecutes opponents
of Arianism, 54; makes Gallus
Cajsar, 55; resides at Sirmium,
59; goes to Rome, 59; convokes
a synod, 59; puts Gallus to death
and raises his brother to the
dignity of C^nesar, 59; favors the
Arian heresy and writes a letter
to the Synod of Ariminum, 64;
is baptized by Euzoius anrl dies
of apoplexy, 75, 77.

Constantius, brother of Constantine
the Great, and father of Julian,
76.

Cordova in Spain, 6.

Corinth, metropolitan see subject
to Rome, 173.

Corinthians, First Epistle to, 106.

Cornelius, bishop of Rome, 1 1 2.

Council, an ecumenical first sum-
moned, 8; appeal to,. 149.

Councils, the largest, convoked by
emperors, 118; provincial, 122.

Creed, original form of, propounded
at the Nicene Council, 10, 1 1 ;
propounded by Narcissus, Theo-
dore, Maris and Mark, 44; the
• Lengthy,' 45, 46; the ' Dated,'


61 ; form of, drawn up by Aca-
cius, 69; revised form of the
'Dated,' 70, 71; are approved
by Ullilas, 72.

Creeds, of Antioch, 39, 40; of Sir-
mium, 56, 57, 61 ; list of, 72.

Cross, appearance of, in the sky, to
Constantine, 2; to Gallus, 55;
discovery of the true, 21; sign
of, appears on Jews' cloaks, 89;
discovered among the hiero-
glyphics of the Serapeum, 126,
127; used in processions, 144.

Crucifixion, of a boy, 161 ; of Chris-
tians at Alexandria, 79.

Cubricus, also called Manes, 25.

Cucusus, Paul, bisliop of Constanti-
nople strangled at, 54, 122.

Cyprus, Council of bishops of, 145.

Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, succeeds
Theophilus, 156; persecutes and
plunders the Novatians, 156; ex-
pels the Jews, 159; seeks the
approval of Orestes, the prefect,
159; guilt of, for the murder of
Hypatia, 160; deposed by John
of Antioch, 172.

Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, installed,
65 ; appeals to the emperor
against the decision of a synod,
70; ejected by Acacius, 72;
reinstated, 74; recognizes ful-
fillment of prophecy, 89, 96; still
bishop at the accession of Theo-
dosius the Great, 119; attends the
Synod of Constantinople, 121;
his death, 126.

Cyrinus, bishop of Chalcedon, 148,
151.

Cyrus, bishop of Beroea, 27, 39.

Dalmatius, brother of Constantine
the Great, 76.

Dalmatius, nephew of Constantine
the Great, appointed to investi-
gate charges against Athanasius,
30; slain, 53.

Dalmatius, an ascetic, ordained bishop
of Cyzicus, 168.

Damasus, bishop of Rome, receives
the deposed bishop of Alexan-
dria, 106; occasions commotion
at Rome, 113; furnishes Peter
with letters, 117; still occupies
his see at the accession of Theo-
dosius, 119; reconciled to Fla-
vian, 126; his death, 157.

Daphne, Apollo of, 88, 89.

Deacon, a, announces a prayer in
church, 40; a messenger of
Lucifer, 80; a, brings scandal
upon the Constantinople church,
128.

Decentius, brother of Magnentius,
hangs himself, 59.

Decius, persecutes the church, 17,
112, 128.

Demophilus, Arian bishop, vacillation
of, 61 ; refuses to anathematize
Arius, 62; deposed, 63; in-
stalled bishop of Constantinople,
103; retains his see at the time
of Theodosius, 119; prefers to


leave Constantinople rather than
accept the komoousion, 120;
his death, 124.

Desecration of the altar of the Great
Church, 171.

Deserter, a Persian, his false report,
and the burning of the provis-
ion-ships, 91.

Didymus, a celebrated blind scholar,
quoted, 108; account of, no.

Didymus, a monk, lived to be ninety
years old, 106.

Digamists, 132.

Dio-Caesarea, Jews revolt at, and occa-
sion the destruction of, by Gallus,

59-
Diocletian, persecution under, i, 85,

87; goes into retirement, 2;

death of, 2.

Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, invested
with the administration of the
churches in the East, 122, 139.

Diogenes, the cynic philosopher, con-
demns Apollo, 94.

Dionysius, the consul, summons the
Council of Tyre, 30.

Dionysius, bishop of Alba, exiled by
Constantius, 60.

Dionysius, author of Corona, 93.

Dioscorus, bishop of Hermopolis, one
of the 'Tall Monks,' 143; ac-
cepts Origan's views, 143; comes
to Constantinople, 144; incurs
the anger of Theophilus, 145;
excommunicated by Epiphanius,
148; his death, 150.

Dioscorus, a presbyter, exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Discipline, among Novatians, 17, 112;
among Macedonians and Quarto-
decimans, 132, 133.

Discussion, religious, bad effect of,
22, 26, 123; general, proposed
by Theodosius, 122; between
Theophilus of Alexandria and
the monks, 142, 143.

Ditheism, disclaimed, 4^ ; condemned,
56.

Divination, pagan, infamous rite at,
86; incites V'alens to slay many,
105.

Dominica, wife of Valens, impressed
with visions respecting the bishop
Basil interce<les with the emperor
on his behalf, 1 1 1 ; distributes
pay to volunteers, 1 1 8.

Domitian, pnetorian prefect, 59.

Dorotheus, Arian bishop of Antioch,
119; transferred to Constantino-
ple, 124; his views, 134.

Dorotheus, a presbyter, 70.

Dositheus, bishop of Seleucia, 173.

Dracilian, charged to embellish the
church at Jerusalem, 17.

Dracontius, Semi- Arian bishop of Per-
gamus deposed by Acacius, 72,

73-
Drepanum, called Helenopolis by

Constantius the Great, 21, 22.

Drownings in the Orontes, 97, 104.

Earthquakes, at Antioch, 40; in Bi-
thynia, 67; at Jerusalem prevent-


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


435


ing the rebuilding of the temple
of the Jews, 89; at Constantino-
ple and other cities, doing great
damage, 97; in Bithynia and
elsewhere taken as an t)men, 100.

Easter, discussions as to right time of
observance of, 8, 15, 131 ; week
of, 55; o!)Sj;rvance among No-
vatians, 1 12, 129, 130; among
other peoples in various places,
131; time not changed by the
Nicene Council, 133.

Eastern bishops disclaim the inter-
ference of the see of Rome, 42.

Eastern and Western churches, sepa-
ration of, 49.

Ecclesiastical History, the author's
reasons for revising this work on,
36; tit style for, 76; bound up
with civil affairs, 118.

Ecebolius, the sophist, 76; his hy-
pocrisy, 85.

'Economy,' the, of incarnation, 46,

48, 75-

Edesius, visits 'India' (Ethiopia),
aids in the dissemination of
Christianity, and is appointed
bishop of Tyre, 23.

Edessa, study of Greek at, 39;
Athanasius' presbyters at, 50;
persecutions at, 104.

Eleusius, Semi-Ariiin bishop of Cyzi-
cus, 66; his cruel persecution
of the orthodox, 67-69; de-
posed by Acacius, 72; asso-
ciated with Macedonius, 72, 73;
professes the Arian creed, re-
pents and advises his people to
choose another bishop, but is
persuaded by them to remain
among them, 97, 98; his flock
erect an edifice without the city,
98; superseded by Eunomius at
Cyzicus, 98; attends Synod of
Constantinople, 121 ; draws up
views for Theodosius I., 123.

Elpidius, bishop of Satala, deposed
by Acacius, 72.

Empedocles, a heathen philosopher,
25.

Ephesus, school of, 76; visited by
Chrysostom, 146; Council of, 172.

Epicureans, a sect of philosophers,
87.

Epimenides, a philosopher of Crete,
88.

Epiphanius, a sophist, 74.

Epiphanius, bishop of Cyprus, au-
thor of AncoraUis, 1 35 ; insti-
gated by Theophilus of Alexan-
dria, condemns Origen and calls
on John to do so, 145; goes to
Constantinople and performs un-
canonical ordinations, 147; is
warned by John, departs from
Constantinople, and dies on the
return voyage, 148.

Epistle, of Alexander, bishop of
Alexandria, denouncing the Arian
heresy, 3-5; of Constantine to
Arius and Alexander, 6, 7; of
the Nicene Council, announcing
its decisions, 12, 13; of Con-


stantino, to the bishojis and peo-
ple against the impiety of Por-
phyry and Arius, 13, 14; of the
same, to the churches relative to
Easter, 14-16; of the same,
to Eusehius Pamphilus and
bishops elsewhere relative to the
erection and maintenance of
church etiifices, 16; of the same,
to Eusebius Pamphilus relative
to the preparation of copies
of the Scriptures, 16; of the
same, to Macarius, relative to the
site of the holy sepulchre, 16,
17; of the same, to the Synod
of Tyre, 32; of the Synod of
Antioch to bishops, 39; another,
40; of Constantius to Athanasius,
49, 50; of Julius, bishop of
Rome, to Alexandria on behalf of
Athanasius, 50, 51; of Constan-
tius, announcing the restoration
of Athanasius, 51, 52; of the
same, to the laity, 52; of the
same, rescinding the enactments
against Athanasius, 52; of the
Council of Ariminum to Con-
stantius, 63; of Constantius to
the Council of Ariminum, 64;
second, of the Council of Ari-
minum to Constantius, 65; of
Julian to the citizens of Alexan-
dria, on the murder of George,
79, 80; of the Synod of Mace-
donians and Acacians convened
at Antioch to Jovian, 94, 95; of
the Arians to Liberius, bishop of
Rome, loi; of Liberius to the
Arians, loi, I02; of the apostles
and elders at Jerusalem to the
church at Antioch, 134; of At-
ticus to Calliopius, 166.

' Eternal Fatherhood,' denied by
Arius, 4 ; admitted verbally by
later Arians, 134.

Ethiopica, Oook under that title, 132.

Eucharist, celebrated on Saturday
and Sunday, 131, 158; received
fasting, 131; not administered
to heretics, 143; nor to those
under censure, 144; variously
celebrated, 131.

Eudaemon, a Melitian, used as a tool
against Athanasius, 29.

Eudaemon, a presbyter of the Con-
stantinopolitan church, counsels
the abolition of the penitentiary
presbyterate, 128; remarks by
the author, 128.

Eudocia, wife of the Emperor Theo-
dosius II., writes poem, 164; goes
to Jerusalem, 178.

Eudoxia, wife of the Emperor Arca-
dius, provides silver crosses for
the Homoousians, 144; incites
Epiphanius against John, 148;
her silver statue, 150; her death,

151-
Eudoxia, daughter of Theodosius II.,

177.
Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia, 44;

installs himself in the see of

Antioch, 61 ; deposed, 68, 70;


gives place to Anianus, 71 ; pro-
moted to the see of Constanti-
nople, 73, 96; his impious jest-
ing, 73; disturbs the church of
Alexandria, 103; his fleath, 103.

Eugenius, a usurper, appointed chief
secretary to Vaiciitinian II.,
causes his master t(j jje stran-
gled and assumes supreme au-
thority, 135; is defeated and be-
headed by Theodosius I., 136.

Eulalius, Ijishop of Cx-sarea, 72.

Eunomians, a sect, 6; formerly
called Aetians, 60.

Eunomieutychians, followers of
Eutychius, 135.

Eunomiotheophronians, followers of
Theophronius, 135.

Eunomius, Anomoean bishop of Cyzi-
cus, head of the sect of Euno-
mians, 60; appointed to super-
sede Eleusius in Cyzicus, 98; his
heretical views, 98; seeks refuge
in Constantinople, 98; speci-
mens of his impiety, 98; sep-
arates from Eudoxius, 103;
leader of Arians, 1 1 1 ; draws
up statement of the faith for
Theodosius I., 123; holds meet-
ings privately, 128, 129; his fol-
lowers divided, 134.

Eunuchs, influence of, at court, 36.

Euphemia, a martyr, 14 1.

Euphronius, bishop of .Antioch, 27;
succeeded by Placitus, 38.

Euripides, ancient tragic poet, 88.

Eusebia, wife of Constantius, 77.

Eusebius, bishop of Csesarea, sur-
named Pamphilus, v\'rites a his-
tory of the Church, i ; quoted,
6, 8, 9; retracts his dissent from
the Nicene Creed, 10 ; his views
of the Creed, 10-12; written to
by Constantine, 16; undertakes
to record Constantine's deeds,
21; censured by some, 22;
treated of Manes, 25; quoted,
26; denies accusation by Eu-
stathius and makes a counter-
charge, 27; refuses the vacant
see of Antioch and is com-
mended therefor by Constan-
tine, 27; refutes the heresy of
Marcellus, 34; his death, 37;
review and defense of his writ-
ings, and quotations from the
same, 47, 48; refuted Julian's
writings, 93; quoted, 131, 171,

173-

Eusebius, bishop of Emisa, early
career, 39; made bishop of
Alexandria, 39.

Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, pre-
viously of Berytus, 3; indorses
Arius, 3, 5, 6, 8; refuses his as-
sent to the Nicene Creed, lO;
exiled, lO; recalled from exile,
20; copy of his recantation, 20;
returns to his heretical course,
26; conspires against Athana-
sius, 29, 33; renews efforts to
introduce .\rianism, 36; is trans-
ferred to the see of Constanti-


436


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


nople, 38; sends a deputation to
Rome, 40; his death, 41.
Eusebius, bishop of VercelUe, exiled
by Constantius, 60 ; recalled
from exile, 80; goes to Alexan-
dria, 80; travels through the East
to bring unity in the Church, 83,

Eusebius, eunuch, Arian, introduces

Arianism into the palace, 36;

put to death by the Emperor

Julian, 78.
Eusebius, ' ScholastiSus,' author of

the Gatnea, 142.
Eusebius, one of the ' Tall Monks,'

143-

Eusebius, unknown person, excom-
municated, 70.

Eusebius, a consul, 68.

Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, 17;
accuses Eusebius Pamphilus, 27;
deposed, 27, 39; various reasons
for this, 27; a follower of Mace-
donius, 84; ordains. Evagri us to
the see of Constantinople, 103;
is banished by Valens, 103; a
reviler of Origen, 147.

Eustathius, bishop of Sebastia in
Armenia, present at the Synod
of Seleucia, 68; deposed for im-
pious practices, 72; joins the
Marathonians, 74; heads a dep-
utation to the Emperor Valen-
tinian, 100-102; proceeds to
Sicily, 102.

Eustathius, an unknown person, de-
posed, 70.

Eustolium, an immoral woman, 54.

Euthymius, one of the ' Tall Monks,'

»43-
Eutropius, a Macedonian presbyter,

>35-

Eutropius, chief eunuch of the im-
perial bed-chamber under Arca-
dius, opposes Chrysostom, 138;
provokes him to write an ora-
tion against himself, 140; incurs
the emperor's displeasure and
is beheaded, 140.

Eutychian, a Novatian presbyter, 19;
miraculous effects attributed to
his sanctity, 19.

Eutychius, unknown person excom-
municated, 70.

Eutychius, Semi-Arian bishop of Eleu-
theropolis, 95.

Eutychius, leader among the Euno-
mians, founds the faction of the
• Eunomioeutychians,' 135.

Euxine Sea, 24.

Euzoius, Arian bishop of Antioch, as
deacon associates with Arius and
is exiled, 28; returns from exile,
28; recants, 29; received by the
Synod of Tyre, 32; promoted
to the see of Antioch, 73; bap-
tizes Constantine, 75; holds the
churchesat Antioch, 84; attempts
to depose Peter and install Lu-
cius, 105; his death, 1 16; suc-
ceeded by Dorotheus, 1 19.

Evagrius, bishop of Mitylene, de-
posed, 70; elected bishop of


Constantinople by the orthodox,
but banished by the emperor,

Evagrius, a Christian writer, disciple
of two Egyptian monks, both
named Macarius, 107; deacon
in the church of Constantinople,
107; titles of his books, 81, 107;
quotations from, 107, 108, 161;
avoids l)ishopric, his excuse, 109.

Evagrius, bishop of Antioch, suc-
ceeds Paulinas, 125, 138, 139.

Evagri uSi, Semi-Arian bishop of Sicily,

95-
Excommunication, 74, 130, 158.

Exemption of clerics from civil office,

5?. 7«-
Exorcism, 109.

' Expansion,' Marcellus' theory of, 57.

' Exucontians,' a sect, 74.

Famine, in Phrygia, 104; among the
Persian prisoners, 164.

Fasting, in distress, 34; prescribed
by Eustathius, 72; forbidden on
Sundays, 72, 131 ; imposed as
penance, 128; various customs
relative to, 131 ; required before
baptism, 161.

Fatalism, taught by Manes, 26.

Felix, Arian bishop of Rome, af)-
pointed, 65; expelled, 65.

Festivals, Christian, origin of, 130.

Fidelis, a person of the name, excom-
municated, 70.

Fire, causes destruction at Constanti-
nople, 17; from heaven con-
sumes the iron tools of the Jews,
89; Persians worship, 157.

Firmus, bishop of Caesarea, 178.

Flaccilla, first wife of Theodosius the
Great, 114; bears him a son, 124.

Flavian, bishop of Antioch, a candi-
date for the episcopacy, 119;
made bishop, 122; other bishops
combine against him, 123; uses
all means to counteract their in-
fluence, 123; his death, 157.

' Fortune,' goddess of, 85.

Franks, a northern race, invade the
Roman territories, 40; subdued
by the consul Constans, 41.

Fravitus, a Goth, honored with the
office of consul, 142.

Fritigernes, chief of a division of the
Goths, 115.

Frumentius, missionary bishop in ' In-
dia' (Ethiopia), 23; appointed
bishop, 23.

Funeral rites, of Constantine the
Great, 35; of Paul, bishop of
Constantinople, 122; of Theo-
dosius the Great, 137; of the
'Tall Monk ' Dioscorus, 150; of
Maximian, bishop of Constanti-
nople, 175; of John Chrysostom,
177; of Paul the Novatian, 177.

Gainas, a Goth, commander-in-chief
of the Roman army, 140; rebels
against the Romans, 141 ; ap-
proaches Constantinople with an
army, 141 ; is proclaimed a pub-


lic enemy, 142; defeated, flees
tp Thrace, and is slain, 142.

Gatnea, a book written by Eusebius
Scholasticus, 142.

Galus, Arian bishop, refuses to anathe-
matize Arius, 62; deposed by the
Synod of Ariminum, 63.

Galates, son of Valens, HI.

Galatiatis, Epistle of the, 130.

Galerius, surname of Maximus, T.

' Galilaeans,' Christians called by Ju-
lian, 85.

Galla, wife of Theodosius the Great,
and daughter of Valentinian I.,
114.

Gallus, Caesar, nephew of Constantine
the Great, invested with the sov-
ereignty of Syria, 55; destroys
Dio-Caesarea, 59; attempts inno-
vations, and is slain therefor by
order of Constantius, 59, 77.

Gangra, Synod of, 72.

' Generation, the Eternal,' },},.

George, a learned Arian presbyter,
156.

George, Arian bishop of Laodicea,
27; gives an account of Euse-
bius of Emisa, 39; leads the
purely Arian faction at the Coun-
cil of Seleucia, 68; author of the
' Exucontian sophism,' 74.

George, Arian bishop of Alexandria,
installed, 41 ; raises tumult at the
arrival of Athanasius at Alexan-
dria, 42, 54; commits horrible
atrocities, 54-56; one of the
Semi-Arian leaders at the Council
of Seleucia, 68; persecutes his
opponents, 74; burnt by pagans,
79; his death resented by the
Emperor Julian, 79, 80.

Germinius, Arian bishop, 57; vacil-
lates, 61 ; refuses to anathema-
tize Arius, 62; deposed by the
Synod of Ariminum, 63.

Gladiatorial games, caused to cease
by Constantine, 22.

Gnostic, the, a book written by
Evagrius, 107.

Gold, used for churches, 17; for
sacred vessels, 164.

Gomarius, a rebel general put to
death by order of Valens, 97.

Gospels, hook of the, 159.

Goths, invade the Roman territories,
and being defeated embrace
Christianity, 22; many accept
Christianity under Valens, 115;
renew their attack against Con-
stantinople and are repulsed.

Grammarians, 74, 76, 87, 126, 135.

Grata, daughter of Valentinian I.,
114.

Gratian, proclaimed Augustus, 100;
recalls the orthodox bishops,
118; excludes Eunomians, Pho-
tinians, and Manichreans from
the churches, 1 19; takes Theo-
dosius as a colleague, 119; ob-
tains a victory over barbarians,
120; slain by Maximus, 124.

Greek literature, studied, 39, 156;
defense of, 86, 87.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


437


Gregory, Arian bishop of Alexandria,
designated as such, 39; his in-
stallation resisted and resented
by the people, 40; ejected from
the see of Alexandria, and suc-
ceeded by George, 41, 112.

Gregory, bishop of Neo-Caesarea,
called Thaumaturgus, ill, 112.

Gregory, the Just, recognizes three
virtues, 108.

Gregory, bishop of Nazianzus, his
sketch of the Emperor Julian, 92;
associated with Basil, 100, 1 10;
ordains Evagrius, 107; pupil of
Himerius and Prohifiresius, no;
also of Libanius, in; studies
Origen, 11 1; made bishop of
Nazianzus, ill; transferred to
Constantinople, 120; abdicates,
1 20; transference of, 173.

Gregory, bishop of Nyssa, brother of
Basil, III, 112; becomes patri-
arch of the diocese of Pontus,
122; pronounces a funeral ora-
tion on Melitius of Antioch, 122.

Hades, descent of Christ into, 61.
Hail of prodigious size falls and is

considered ominous, 100.
Harpocration, bishop of Cynopolis,

Heathen temples in Alexandria de-
molished, 126.

Hebrew, study of, 156.

Hebrews, Epistle to the, ascribed to St.
Paul, 109, 130.

Helena, mother to Constantine the
Great, erects a magnificent church
on the site of the Holy Sepul-
chre, 21, 22; also at Bethlehem
and on the Mount of Ascension,
21; her death, 21.

Helenopolis, previously Drepanum,

21,35-
Heliodorus, bishop of Tricca in

Thessaly, reputed author of the

Ethiopica, 132.

Helion, a Roman of distinction, ne-
gotiates with the Persians, 163;
conveys the crown to Valen-
tinian, 166.

Heliopolis, corrupt practices at, 22.

Helladius, bishop of Pontus, 121,
122.

Helladius, a pagan, grammarian, hav-
ing slain nine Christians, flies
from Alexandria to Constanti-
nople and becomes the teacher
of the author, 126.

Hellespont, the stronghold of Mace-
donianism, 74, 97.

Heraclides, bishop of Ephesus, a
Cypriot by birth, ordained by
Chrysostom, 146; his case in-
vestigated by a council, 149,
150.

Heraclius, bishop of Jerusalem, 74.

Heraclius, a priest of Hercules at
Tyre, ordained a deacon, 72.

Herculius, the surname of Maxim-
ian, I.

Heresy, why allowed to arise, 26.

Heretics, hostility towards, 169.


Hermes, a bishop exiled under Con-
stantius, 55.

Hermugcnes, a general under Con-
stantius, slain, 41.

Hermogenes, a Novatian bishop, 158.

Hierax, presbyter, exiled under Con-
stantius, 55.

Hierax, a teacher of letters at Alex-
andria, 159.

I lieroglyphics, found in the Serapeum,
126.

Hierophilus, bishop of Trapezopolis,

173-

Hilary, bishop of Jerusalem, 74.

Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, confutes
Arianism, 84.

Himerius, a sophist of Athens, no.

Hippodrome, place in Constantinople,
21; sports of the, 117, 136, 165,
166.

Holy Spirit, divinity of, 74, 81.

Homoion, first used at the Council of
Ariminum, 61 ; again by Acacius,
69, 70, 74.

Hotnoiousion, first used by Acacius,
69; again as a counterfeit of
honioonsion, by Macedonius, 73.

Homoousion, first used in the Nicene
Council, 10,94, lOi; discussion
of the meaning of, 10, 11, 12,
27; accepted, 94, 101-103; re-
jected by Arians, 68, 84, 1 19.

Honoratus, first prefect of Constanti-
nople, 71.

Honorius, emperor, son of Theodo-
sius the Great, 124; his birth,
124; assumes the government
of the Western Empire, 137; his
death, 165.

Hosius, bishop of Cordova in Spain,
takes letter from Constantine to
Arius and Athanasius, 6; present
at the Nicene Council, 19; re-
fuses to put out Athanasius from
the Council of Sardica, 47; at-
tends the Council of Sirmium, 56;
compelled to assent to its decis-
ions, 58, 59; originated the
controversy concerning theologi-
cal terms, 8i.

Huns, the, vanquish the Goths, 115;
ravage Armenia, 138; invade
and devastate the territories of
the Burgundians, 170.

Hymns, processional, sung nightly by
the orthodox, origin of, 144.

Hypatia, a female philosopher of
Alexandria, murdered by the
monks, 150.

Hypatian, bishop of Heraclea, 56.

Hypostasis, used with the meaning of
' essence ' or ' subsistence,' 3, 10,
44, 45, 56, 81 ; with the meaning
of 'personality' 27, 40; various
meanings in various authors, 81 ;
rejected by the Acacians, 71 ;
used in the Nicene Council, 10,
102.

Hypselopolis, 32.

Iberians, converted to Christianity, 24.

Ignatius, called 'Theophorus,' third

bishop of Antioch, introduces


nocturnal hymn-singing into the
church, 144.

Image of the Father, Christ the, 40.

' Immortals, the,' Persian troops
called so, 163.

Impostor, miraculous detection of a
Jewish, 161; a Jewish, causes
great sacrifice of life under the
name of Moses, 175.

Incomprehensibility of God, denied
by Anomreans, 98.

'Indians' (Ethiopians) converted to
Christianity, 23.

' Indifferent Canon,' the, of the Nova-
tians, 129.

Inferiority of the Son, asserted by the
Arians, 58.

Inmestar, sports of the Jews at, 161.

Innocent, bishop of Rome, 157, 158.

Innovation, in doctrine, to be avoided,
81.

Interment, magnificent, of Constan-
tine the Great, 35; of Theodo-
sius the CJreat, 137; of Atticus,
bishop of Constantinople, 167.

Irenaeus, grammarian, 81.

Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons, 81, 130.

Irene, virgin daughter of Spyridon of
Cyprus, 18.

Irene, church so called, 21, 34, 38, 43.

Irenion, Semi-Arian bishop of Gaza,

95-

Isacocis, Semi-Arian bishop of Arme-
nia Major, 95.

Ischyras, pretended presbyter, ma-
ligns Athanasius, 30; exposed,
31; made a bishop, 47.

Isdigerdes, king of Persia, converted
to Christianity, 157; his death,
157, 161.

Isidore, an Egyptian monk, professes
perfection, 107.

Isidore, a presbyter of Alexandria,
opposes the ordination of John,

138.
Ision, a Melitian used as a tool

against Athanasius, 29.

Jerusalem, visited by Helena, 21;
church erected in, 21, 30, 32;
synod held in, 32, 52, 54; visited
by Eudocia, 178.

Jews, of Dio-Csesarea, revolt, 59;
attempt to rebuild the temple of
Solomon, 89, 90; irregular ob-
servance of Passover by, 15, 130,
131, 133; not converted by the
healing of a paralytic, 155;
expelled from Alexandria, 159;
outrageous conduct of, at Jeru-
salem, 161; many converted in
Crete in consequence of the do-
ings of the Pseudo-Moses, 175.

Johannitcs, the, adherists of John
Chrysostom, so called, 151; con-
ciliated by Atticus, 166.

John, called also .'\chab, Melitian, 31.

John, bishop of Jerusalem, succeeds
to the see. 126.

John, bishop of Gordium, 173.

John, bishop of Constantinople, called
Chrysostom, ordained bishop,
138; his birth and previous edu-


438


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


cation, 138, 139; his works, 139;
ordained presbyter by I'aulinus,
139; draws on himself the dis-
pleasure of many, 140; his treat-
ment of Eutropius, 140; becomes
increasingly celebrated, 144; in-
stitutes processional singing, 144;
ordains Heraclides bishop of
Ephesus, 146; warns Epipha-
nius, 148; expelled by the Synod
'at the Oak,' 148, 149; banished,
149; returns on account of sedi-
tion among the people, 149;
preaches against Eudoxia, the
empress, 150; exiled a second
time, 150; dies in exile at
Comana, 151; his name regis-
tered in the diptychs, 166; his
remains removed to Constanti-
nople, 177.
John, secretary of Theodosius II.,
usurps the sovereign power, 165;
put to death, 166.
John, bishop of Antioch, deposes
Cyril, but is reconciled to him,
172.
John, the Apostle, First Catholic

Epistle of, 171.
Josephus, author of "Jewish Anti-
quities, 131.
Jovian, Emperor, prefers, while still
an officer in the army, to resign
his office rather than renounce
Christianity, 85; proclaimed em-
peror, 90; closes the Persian
war, 91 ; publicly accepts the
' homoousian ' creed, and shuts
up the pagan temples, 94; pro-
claims general tolerance, 95; is
declared consul at Antioch, but
dies suddenly, 95.
Judaizing not consistent with Chris-
tianity, 133.
Judgments of God mysterious, 26.
Julian, Emperor, made Ccesar, 59;
rebuilds a Novatian church, 66;
proclaimed emperor, 75; his
early education, 76, 77; is mar-
ried to the emperor's sister, 77;
a civic crown falls upon his head,
77; takes the barbarian king
prisoner, acts independently of
Constantius, throws off Christian-
ity, and excites a civil war against
Constantius, 77; makes a public
entry into Constantinople, 77;
recalls the exiled bishops, 78;
commands the pagan temples to
be opened, enforces economy
in the household, reforms modes
of travelling, patronizes literature
and philosophy, and writes
against the Christians, 78; re-
sents the murder of George of
Alexandria, and writes to the
citizens of Alexandria on the
subject, 79; recalls bishops Luci-
fer and Eusebius from exile, 80;
becomes hostile to C"hristians,
favors pagan superstitions, and
is rebuked by >Iaris, the blind
bishop of Chalcedon, 85; ex-
cludes Christians from the study


of Greek literature to disable
them for argument, and interdicts
their holding official positions,
85; endeavors to bribe their
compliance, goes to war with the
Persians, and extorts money from
the Christians, 85; seeks to ap-
prehend Athanasius, and mocks
the Christians, 86; accelerates
his movements against the Per-
sians, 88; oppresses the trade
of Antioch, opens the pagan
temples of that city, and en-
deavors to obtain an oracle from
Apollo of Daphne, but fails, 88;
commands the prefect to perse-
cute Christians, and cruelly tor-
tures Theodore, 89; receives and
abruptly dismisses the Persian
envoys, orders the Jews to re-
build the temple of Solomon at
the expense of the public treas-
ury, 89; thwarted in this by
earthquakes, fire, etc., 90 ; in-
vades Persia, believes he is sec-
ond Alexander, and refuses to
wear armor, and is mortally
wounded, 90; the pagans lament
his death, 90; Libanius com-
poses funeral oration, 91 ; esti-
mate of his character, 92; his
obsequies, 95, 96.

Julius, bishop of Rome, declines to
appear at the Synod of Antioch,
38; affords Athanasius a refuge,
42; vindicates the privileges of
the see of Rome, 42, 43; defends
Athanasius, 43; censured by
some, 47; writes to Alexandria,
50; his death, 59.

Justa, daughter of Valentinian, 1 14.

Justina, wife of Valentinian I., 114;
persecutes and banishes Ambrose
of Milan, 124.

Justus, father of Justina, his remark-
able dream for which he is assas-
sinated, 114.

Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem, 172.

Kingdom of Christ, everlasting, 44,

45' 56. r r^ ■

Knowledge, complete, of God, Anus

denies the Son to have, 4; Eu-

nomius asserts men to have, 98.

Laity, right of, in episcopal elections,
38, 129, 138.

Lamps, prayers at lighting of, 132.

Lampsacus, Council of, 97.

Lauricius, a military commander un-
der Constantius, 68; at the Coun-
cil of Seleucia, 70; exiles Ani-
anus, 71.

Law, study of, 112, 138, 139.

Layman, a, made arbitrator, 1 74.

Lent, 54; varieties of usage as to,

13'-
Leonas, an official under Constantius,

68, 69; summarily dissolves the

Council of Seleucia, 70; exiles

Anianus, 71.
Leontius, bishop of Antioch, 54, 60;

his death, 61.


Leontius, bishop of Tripolis in Lydia,
deposed, 70.

Leontius, bishop of Comana, 94.

Leontius, Novatian bishop at Rome,
125.

Leontius, bishop of Ancyra, 150, 152.

Leontius, a sophist, father of the Em-
press Eudocia, 164.

Libanius, the Syrian rhetorician, sur-
reptitiously instructs Julian, 76;
address orations to the emperor
and to the Antiochenes, 88;
composes a funeral oration on
Julian, 91; refutation of it, 91-
94; instructs Basil and Gregory,
III; instructs John Chrysostom
and others, 138, 139.

Liberius, bishop of Rome, elevated
to the see, 59, 96; exiled and
reinstated, 65; receives a depu-
tation of bishops and dismisses
them, 100-103, "9-

Licinius, a Dacian, is appointed suc-
cessor to Maximian Galerius, i ;
persecutes the Christians, 2; de-
ceives Constantine by his craft,
but is defeated by him, 2; com-
pelled to live at Thessalonica,
rebels, 3; his death, 3, 16.

Linen vestments, 29.

Loaves of benediction, 158.

Logos, eternal and uncreated, 4 ; per-
sonal, 45.

Lucian of Area, Semi-Arian bishop,
95, 109.

Lucifer, bishop of Carala, appointed
to the see of Antioch, 80; con-
stitutes Paulinus their bishop and
departs to Antioch, 80, 83; his
adherents become a sect, he
leaves them and returns to Sar-
dinia, 84.

Lucius, bishop of Adrianople, ex-
pelled and restored, 42, 51; dies
in prison, 54.

Lucius, Arian bishop at Alexandria,

80, 96; installed in the episcopal
chair of Alexandria, 105; attacks
the Egyptian monasteries, 109;
attempts to ordain the Saracen
Moses, 116; expelled 117; re-
tains authority although absent,
119.

Lyons, city in Gaul, 59.

Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, writ-
ten to by Constantine, 16; pres-
ent at the Nicene Council, 19;
aids Helena in recovering the
cross, 21; dies, 38.

Macarius, a presbyter, conducted in
chains to the Council of Tyre, 30.

Macarius, monk, 'the Egyptian,' 107;
gives lesson in contentment, 108;
exiled, 109.

Macarius, monk, ' the Alexandrian,'
107; exiled, 109.

Macarius, Novatian, 129.

Macedonians, the, sect of, 9, 14, 73,

81, 96, 161 ; correspond with
Liberius of Rome, 100-103; ac-
cept the Nicene Creed, loi ; re-
lapse and reject it again, 1 19, 121.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


439


Macedonius, bishop of Constantino-
ple, a deacon, 38; elected bishop,
41 ; installed as bishop, 43; mas-
sacre on this occasion, 43; holds
meetings separately, 51; perse-
cutes those who differ from him,
54; excites tumults and deso-
lates the churches, 65, 66; be-
comes odious, 67, 68; deposed
by Acacius, 72; conspires to ex-
cite commotions, 73.

Macedonius, bishop of Mopsuestia,

3'. 44-
Macedonius, a Christian who endured

cruel martyrdom, 86.
* Macrostich,' creed so called, 44-46.
Magi, attempt to deceive Isdigerdes,

«57-
Magic, 30, 39, 72, 76, 78, 105.
Magnentius, slays Constans, 53, 56;

becomes master of Rome, 59, 77;

is defeated and commits suicide,

59-

Magnus, a quaestor, 59.

Magnus, an unknown individual, ex-
communicated, 70.

Magnus, Arian bishop of Chalcedon,

95-
Magnus, treasurer, 105.

Mamre, pagan altar at, a church built
instead of, 22.

Mancipes, their office, 127.

Manes (Manichseus), born a slave,
enfranchised and educated, 25;
put to cruel death, 26.

Manichaeans, 55, 119, 144, 171.

Mantinium, inhabitants of, defeat the
troops of Macedonius, 67.

Marathonius, bishop of Nicomedia,
66, 74.

Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra, deposed,
33, 44,45; is restored, 34; ex-
pelled and restored, 42; rein-
stated by the Council of Sardica,
47; refuted by Eusebius Pam-
philus, 48; restored to his see
by Constantius, 51 ; again ejected,
54; succeeded by Basil, 72.

Marcian, a Novatian presbyter, 99.

Marcian, Semi-Arian bishop of Lamp-
sacus, 121.

Marcian, Novatian bishop of Con-
stantinople, 129; his death, 138.

Marcian, Novatian bishop in Scythia,
succeeds Paul at Constantinople,
178.

Marcus Aurelius, emperor, 92.

Mardonius, a eunuch, 76.

Mareotes, a district of Alexandria, so
called, 29, 31, 43.

Marinus, Arian bishop of Constanti-
nople, succeeds Demophilus,
124; his views, 134.

Maris, Arian bishop of Chalcedon,
defends Arianism, 9; refuses to
assent to the Nicene Creed, 10;
conspires against Athanasius,
29. 3i< 41, 44; joins the Aca-
cians, 71; reproves Julian, 85.

Mark, a Syrian bishop under Con-
stantius, 44; exiled, 55.

Mark, another bishop exiled under
Constantius, 55.


Mark, bishop of Arethusa, 56.

Marriage, not allowed after ordina-
tion, 18; condemnation of, heret-
ical, 72.

Martyrdom, eagerness for, 105.

Martyrius, one of the authors of the
' Lengthy Creed,' 44.

Maruthas, bishop of Mesopotamia,
treads on Cyrinus' foot, 148, 151 ;
sent on a mission to the king of
Persia, 156; cures the king by
his prayers, 157.

Mary, the Blessed Virgin, 56, 170.

Massacre at the installation of Mace-
donius, 43.

Matthew, the Apostle, preaches to
the Ethiopians, 23.

Mavia, queen of Saracens, heads a
revolt against the Romans and
offers to lay down arms on cer-
tain conditions, 1 16; the Ro-
man generals consent, 116; gives
her daughter in marriage to Vic-
tor, the commander-in-chief of
the Roman army, 116; enables
the inhabitants of Constanti-
nople to repulse the Goths, 1 18.

Maxentius, made emperor by the
PrKtorians, his atrocious acts, i ;
drowned, 2.

Maxiniian, surnamed Herculius, lays
aside the imperial dignity, i ;
attempts to regain it, I ; dies at
Tarsus, i.

Maximian, bishop of Constantinople,
succeeds Nesforius, 173; his
death and funeral obsequies, 175.

Maximin, Caesar (Maximian Gale-
rius) appointed by Maximian, I.

Maximin, a governor of Rome, 113.

Maximin, assessor in the Roman
armies, accompanies Helion to
Persia, is imprisoned, released,
and concludes a treaty of peace,
163.

Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem, 38,
52; ejected, 65.

Maximus, of Ephesus, a philosopher,
put to death as practicer of
magic, 76; deludes Julian, 90;
taught Sisinnius, 129.

Maximus, of Byzantium, distinguished
from preceding, 76.

Maximus, bishop of Seleucia, 139.

Maximus, usurper, 25; causes Gratian
to be assassinated, 124; is ad-
mitted by Valentinian II. as his
colleague, 124; Theodosius puts
him to death, 125.

Maximus, Novatian bishop of Nicaea,

H3-

Meletius (or Melitius), bishop of

Sebastia, transferred to Beroea
and thence to Antioch, exiled by
Constantius, 72, 73; holds as-
semblies at Antioch, 83, 84; re-
called by Jovian, 94, 95 ; expelled
by Valens, 97; his death, in,
122; funeral oration of, by Greg-
ory of Nyssa, iii, 122; retained
his see at the accession of Theo-
dosius, 1 19, 120.
Meletius (Melitius), bishop of Alex-


andria, deposed, becomes the
head of the sect called Melitians,
5, 6; restored to communion by
the Nicene Council, 12, 13.

Melitians, their origin and union with
the Arians, 5; separated from
the church, 13; accuse Athana-
sius of crimes, 29.

Memnon, bishop of Ephesus, 172.

Menander, Greek poet, 81.

Menedemus, sutlers martyrdom, I04.

Meropius, a Tyrian philosopher, mur-
dered, 23.

Merum, martyrs at, 86.

Methodius, bishop of Olympus in
Lycia, author o( Xenon, 147.

Metrodorus, a philosopher, 23.

Metrophanes, bishop of Constanti-
nople, succeeded by Alexander,

35-
Milan, Synod of, 60; tumult at, and

ordination of Ambrose, 113, 114.
Miracles, 18, 23, 25, 109, in, 112,

161^ 174, 175.
Afisopo^on, book so called written

by Julian, 88.
Mithra, murderous rites in the temple

of, unveiled, 78, 79.
Mithreum, cleansed, 79; demolished,

126.
Modestus, the prefect, burns eighty

pious men in a ship, 104.
Monasticism, extension of, 66, 109,

161 ; harassed by Arians, 106.
Alonk, the, treatise by Evagrius, 107.
Monks, of Egypt, their remarkable

lives, 106, 107; their sufferings

and Christian endurance, 108,

109; the 'Tall,' of Alexandria,

143-

Monks, to the, living in communities,
treatise by Evagrius, 107.

Montanus and Montanism, 27, 63,
171.

Mopsucrene, Constantius dies at, 75.

Mopsuestia, 44.

Moses, bishop of the Saracens, at the
instance of Queen Mavia he is
ordamed, 116.

Mulvian bridge, battle at, 2.

Mursa, battle near, 59.

Mysteries, name applied to the Eu-
charist, 17, 112, 128, 145.

Mythology, the pagan, impure, 93, 94.

Nails of the cross, the, 22.

Names, many persons change their, to
avoid death from suspicion, 105;
Atticus, changes ill-omened, 167.

Narcissus, bishop of Xeronias, under
Constantius, 44, 54, 72.

Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem, 173.

Narsaeus, Persian general, 162.

Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople,
elected, 121; consulted by Theo-
dosius the Great as to points of
difference between the Christian
sects, 122, 123; abolishes the
office of penitentiary presbyter,
128; his death, 138.

Neonas, bishop of Seleucia, ejected,

72-
Nepotian, a usurper, assumes the


440


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


sovereignty of Rome and is slain,

53-
Nestorius, a governor of Alexandria,

52-

Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople,
native of Germania, invited to
Constantinople, 169; persecutes
the Macedonians, 1 70 ; his heresy,
171; deposed by the Synod of
Ephesus, 172; banished to the
Great Oasis, 172.

New yerttsalem, church called by the
name, 21, 32.

' New Rome,' Constantinople called,
21, 22.

Nicaea, Council of, summoned by
Constantine, 8; Eusebius Pam-
philus' account of it, 10-12;
names of bishops present, 19;
period of the assembly of, 19;
did not alter the time of cele-
brating Easter, 1 31.

Nice, town in Thrace, Arians hold a
council at, 65.

Nicene Creed, 10; Arians scheme
to subvert, 39, 47; not to be
changed, 62, 70, 102.

Nicocles, a grammarian, 76.

Nicolaus Damascenus, a Greek writer,
167.

Nilammon, a bishop exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Nile, superstitious views of its inun-
dations, 22; Athanasius on the,
86.

Nisibis, 91, 162.

Nitria, monks of, 106, 160.

Nocturnal services, 144.

Novatianism, principle of, 17; origin
of, 1 12.

Novatians, orthodox as to faith, 18,
66, 100, 123, 125, 128, 167; per-
secuted by the Arians, 66, 100;
alter their Easter, 113; divided
among themselves respecting it,
129, 134.

Novatus, presbyter of the Roman
church, 42, 112; secedes from
it, 112; suffers martyrdom, 112.

Oak, Council of the, 149.

Oak of Mamre, 22.

Oasis, the Great, 55, 172.

Oaths, 35, 99, 112, 130, 141, 146.

CEnomaus, philosopher, condemns
Apollo, 94.

Olympius, a Thracian bishop pro-
scribed by Constantius, 54.

Optatus, pagan prefect of Constanti-
nople under Arcadius, 15 1.

Optimus, bishop of Antioch in Pisidia,
122, 173.

' Oracles, the Christian,' the New
Testament, so called, 60.

Oracles, pagan, 22, 88, 93, 94, 99,
105.

Ordination, necessity of, 30; refused
to the lapsed, 33; the Holy
Spirit conveyed at, 70.

Orestes, prefect of Alexandria under
Theodosius II., 159; opposes
Cyril, bishop of that city, 159;
is attacked by the monks, 160.


Origen, views of, 49, 60, 74, 81, 132,
143, 171; works of, 110; pupils
of, 112, 156; condemned by
Theophilus, 144, 147; defense
of, 147, 148; contrast between
treatment of, and treatment of
Chrysostom, 177.

Origenists, a party in the church so
called, opposed to the Anthro-
pomorphitae, 145.

Origen's principles, on, treatise by
Didymus, 1 10.

Otreius, bishop of Melitena, 122.

Ousia, used by the Nicene Council,
lO; various meanings of, 81;
rejected by Acacians, 58, 62, 71;
accepted later by the same, 95.

Pagan rites, 79, 86, 126.

Palladius, governor of Egypt under

Valens, 105.
Palladius, bishop of Helenopolis,

173-
Palladius, a monk, disciple of Eva-

grius, 109.

Palladius, a celebrated courier, 163.

Pallium (philosopher's cloak), 78,
94.

Pambos, an Egyptian monk, 107.

Pamphilus, 81, 112.

Pancratius, bishop of Pelusium, 56.

Paphlagonia, Arian violence in, 67;
temperament of people of, 112.

Paphnutius, bishop of Upper Thebes,
8; honored by the emperor for
the truth's sake, 18; opposes an
austere view of marriage, 18.

Parembole, a gnostic monk from, 108.

Pasinicus, bishop of Zelce (Zena),
94.

Patricius, Arian bishop of Paltus, 95.

Patripassians, a heretical sect, 46,
loi, 102.

Patrophilus, Arian bishop, conspires
against Athanasius, ;^^; ejects
Maximus, 65; not present at
the Synod of Seleucia, 68; de-
posed, 70; Acacius favors him,

73. loi-
Paul, bishop of Tyre, 31.
Paul of Samosata (' The Samosatan '),

33.45.47. 56. 57. I7>-
Paul, bishop of Constantinople,

elected, 38; ejected by Con-
stantius, 38; reinstated, 41;
again expelled, 42; returns to
Rome, 44; again reinstated by
the Council of Sardica, 47, 49,
51; strangled, 54; his body
honorably interred by Theo-
dosius the Great, 122.

Paul, the Apostle, at Athens, 127;
his opposition to Judaism, 130.

Paul, reader, associated with John
Chrysostom, 149.

Paul, Novatian bishop at Constanti-
nople, 161; exposes a Jewish
impostor, 161 ; his piety, 169;
preserves a church from burn-
ing, through his prayers, 175;
his death, 178.

Paulinus, bishop of Treves, exiled by
Constantius, 60.


Paulinus, bishop of Antioch, ordained
by Lucifer, 80, 93, 96; left un-
molested by Valens, 97; retains
a portion of the church, 119;
protests against the association
with him of Meletius, 119.

Pazum, Novatian Council of, 113, 129.

Pelagius, .Semi-Arian bishop of La-
odica;a,.accepts the Nicene Creed,
95; invested with the adminis-
tration of the churches in the
East, 122.

Pelargus, church at, 66, 175.

Pelusium, 53.

Penitentiary presbyter, office of,
abolished, 128.

Perigenes, bishop of Patrae, 173.

Persia, bishop of, at Nicaea, 8; wars
with, 53, 85, 88, 162; spread of
Christianity in, 156, 157; perse-
cution of Christians in, 162.

Peter, bishop of Alexandria, suffers
martyrdom, 3; deposed by Me-
letius, 5; celebration of martyr-
dom of, 20.

Peter, another bishop of Alexandria,
succeeds Athanasius, 105; is de-
posed and imprisoned, 105; ex-
poses the falsehoods of -Sabinus
the Macedonian, 106; returns
from Rome, 117; his death, 117.

Peter, implicated in accusations
against Athanasius, 23-

Peter, Semi-Arian bishop of Sippi, 95.

Peter, a monk, brother of Basil, in.

Peter, archpresbyter of the church of
Alexandria, 144.

Peter, a reader, ringleader in the
murder of Hypatia, 160.

Pharmaceus, a port in the Euxine,
name of, changed, 167.

Philadelphia, Synod of, 81.

Philip, praetorian prefect under Con-
stantius, entraps the bishop Paul,

42, 43-

Philip, a learned presbyter of Side,
znlhoT of Christian History, 168;
a candidate for the see of Con-
stantinople, 172.

Philippopolis, Arian Council of, 47,

49-

Philo, bishop, exiled under Constan-
tius, 55.

Philosophers, Julian claims to be one
of them, 78, 164; many resort to
him, 78 ; disagreement among,

7. US-
Philosophy, studied among Christians,
87, 88, no, 129, 154; applied
to ascetic life, 24, 107.

Philumenus, 29.

Phnebus, excommunicated, 70.

Photinus, bishop of Sirmium, heresy
of, 44, 45; deposed, 56, 58; ex-
iled, 58; Nestorius accused of
following, 171.

Phrygians, temperament of, n2.

Pilate, tablet of, recovered, 21.

Pior, an Eg>'ptian monk, 106.

Piso, Semi-Arian bishop of Adana,

95-
Piso, Semi-Arian bishop of Augusta,

95-


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


441


Piterus, a learned Egyptian monk,

gave scicntilic lectures, opening

with prayer, 107.
Placidia, mother of Valentinian III.,

and daughter of Theodosius the

Great, 114, 166.
* Placidian,' an imperial palace so

called, 149.
Placitus (Flaccillus), bishop of An-

tioch, 3S, 54, 97.
Plato, ancient philosopher, 60, 87, 90,

92, 1 50, I bo.
Plintha, commander-in-chief under

Theodosius II., 134.
Pliny, a bishop exiled under Constan-

tius, 55.
Plotinus, 160.
Pneumatomachi, party among the

Arians, 74.
Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, suffered

martyrdom under Gordian, 130.
Polycarp, bishop of Sextantaprista,

173-

Polytheism, Arians charged with, 27;
pagan philosophy teaches, 87.

Porphyry, an author, attacks Chris-
tianity, 14; surnamed the 'Ty-
rian old man,' 91; his History
of Philosophers, 91.

Porphyry, bishop of Antioch, 157.

'Porphyry Column,' the, 21, 35.

Prayer, efficacy of, in divers cases, 135,
144, 157, 165, 174, I75._

Prayers, variously performed in differ-
ent churches, 133.

Preaching, Chrysostom's, 140; as a
means of amassing wealth, 146;
Atticus', 154; Proclus', 168, 176.

Presbyter, an (unnamed) Arian, in-
fluence of, 28.

Presbyters, priestly functions of, 30;
benediction given by, 72; repre-
sent bishops, 8, 95; not allowed
to preach at Alexandria, 132.

Probus, a consul, committed with the
chief administration of affairs in
Italy during the minority of Val-
entinian II., 124; leaves Italy
and retires to Thessalonica, 124.

Proclus, bishop of Cyzicus, a presby-
ter, 168; ordained to the bish-
opric, 168; transferred to Con-
stantinople, 175; his virtues,
175, 176; preaches on Ezekiel's
prophecy, 176; conciliates those
who had seceded from the
church, 176; makes an unprec-
edented ecclesiastical appoint-
ment, 178.

Procopius, usurper, seizes the im-
perial throne, 97; marches with
an army against Valens, is de-
feated and put to a horrible
death, 97.

Procopius, a Roman general, holds a
command in the war with the
Persians, 163.

Prohseresius, celebrated rhetorician of
Athens, 1 10.

Protogenes, bishop of Sardica, 47.

Protopresbyter, office of the, 144.

Providence, mysterious counsels of,
26; denied by Epicureans, 87.


Psalmody, 40, 89, 1 77.

I'samathia, 29.

I'sathyrians, a party among the Ari-
ans, 134.

Psenosiris, a bishop exiled under
Constantius, 55.

Psilanthropism, 33, 34, 44, 47, 171.

Pythagoras, ancient philosopher, 25,
90.

Pythonic demon, expelled, 22.

Quartodecimans, exconfmunicated by
Victor, bishop of Rome, 130;
claim to have received their cus-
tom as to Easter from the Apos-
tle John, 131 ; discipline among
the, 132; deprived of their
churches by John, 146, 151 ; per-
secuted by Nestorius, 169.

Queen, the, of Iberia, converted to
Christianity through a captive
maid, spreads the gospel, 24.

Quibbles, of Arians, 73.

Readers, sign the creed of Seleucia,
68; Julian made one, 77; Sisin-
nius as one, 123; at Alexandria,
132; one carries message, 138;
John appointed one, 139; Paul
associated with John Chrysostom,
149; Proclus begins as one, 175.

Reverentius, bishop of Area, 173.

Rheginus, author of the work called
Polyinnemon, 93.

Rhetoric, study of, 76, no, in, 161,

173. 175-

Rings, made use of by the Jews of
Alexandria in a conspiracy
against the Christians, 159.

Romans, Epistle to the, 87, 98, 171.

Rome, church of, has authority, 38,
42; Athanasius visits, 42; Cathe-
dral of Peter and Paul at, 109;
abuses in, suppressed by Theodo-
sius, 127; taken and sacked by
the barbarians, 157, 158.

Rougas, chief of the barbarians who
invaded Rome under Theodo-
sius II., 176.

Rufinus, presbyter, author of Eccle-
siastical History, 20, 25, 36, 89,
109.

Rufinus, prastorian prefect, slain, 138.

Rufus, bishop of Thessalonica, 175.

Rusticula, Novatian bishop at Rome,
158-

Sabbatius, a converted Jew, promoted
by Marcian the Novatian, to the
office of presljyter, 129; occa-
sions division in the church, 129;
separates from the Novatians,
155, 156; procures ordination as
bishop, 158; his death, 167.

Sabbatius, Arian bishop, succeeds
Barbas, 170.

Sabellius (and Sabellianism), heretic,
leader of a heretical sect, 3, 27,
46, 47, 56, 81, loi, 102, 115.

Sabinian, Semi-Arian bishop of
Zeugma, 95.

Sabinus, Macedonian bishop at Hera-
clea and author of the Collection


of Synodical Canons, speaks
slightingly of the Nicene Coun-
cil, 9; praises Constantine, 14;
gross partiality of his work, 42,
44. 47. 68, 95, 103, 105.

Sallust, prwtorian prefect under Ju-
lian, 89.

Samaritans, offslioots from the Jews,

133-

Sanctuary, privilege of, 125, 140, 171,
172.'

Saracens, revolt against the Romans,
u6; peace established, 116;
join with the Persians, 162.

Sardica, Council of, 34, 46, 49, 54.

Sarmatians, invade the Roman terri-
tory, are defeated and Christian-
ized, 22; war with, 114.

Saturday, called 'the Sabbath,' usu-
ally a holiday, 131, 144, 178.

Saturn inus, a consular, delivered up
to Gafnas, 141.

Scitis, 106.

Scriptures, copies of, to be made, 16;
study of, 39, no, 139, 165; (by
the ApoUinares), 87, 88; literal
sense of, 92, 93, 139; mystical
sense of, 108, 120, 121, 132; dif-
ficulties in, 92 ; quoted on both
sides in the Novatian contro-
versy, 112; read and explained
in the churches, 132; comments
on, 165 ; translated by Ulfilas
into the language of the Goths,
115.

Scythian, a Saracen so named, cor-
rupted the truth, 25.

Scythians, a bishop of, present at the
Nicene Council, 8 ; a Novatian
bishop among the, 178; temper-
ament of, 1 1 2.

Scythopolis, 39.

Sebastian, a Manichxan officer, 55

Sects, tendency of, to subdivide, 134.

Secundus, Arian bishop of Ptolemais,
refuses to receive the Nicene
Creed, 10 ; denounced by the
Nicene Council, 12.

Secundus, father of Chrysostom, 138.

Seditious movements at Antioch
occasioned by the deposition of
Eustathius, 27.

Selenas, bishop of the Goths, 134.

Seleucia, Council of, 61, 67, 75;
creed of, 69.

Sepulchre, the Holy, recovered, 21.

Serapion, bishop of Antioch, 81.

Serapion, bishop of Thmuis, 108.

Serapion, deacon in the Constantino-
politan church, 139; his arro-
gance, 146; is ordained bishop
of Heraclea in Thrace, 150.

Serapis, 22; temple of (called Sera-
peum), destroyed, 126; singular
hieroglyphics found in it, 126;
invoked by Julian, 79.

Severa, wife of Valentinian I., 114.

Severian, bishop of Gabala, 146, 148.

Severus, appointed Cxsar by Maxim-
ian, sent to Rome to seize the
Emperor Maxentius, i.

Sicine, Palace of, 113.

Sicily, council held in, 102.


442


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Side, birthplace of Trollus the Sophist
and of Philip the presbyter, i68.

Silvanus, usurper, defeated by Con-
stantius, 59.

Silvanus, Scmi-Arian l^ishop of Tar-
sus, takes part in the Council of
Seleucia, 68 ; petitions Jovian,
94; sent to Rome on a deputa-
tion, 100 ; subscribes a confes-
sion of faith, loi; answered by
Liberius, 102.

Silvanus, bishop of Philippopolis, 1 73 ;
transferred to Troas, 1 74 ; his
praiseworthy administration, 174.

Silver statue of Eudoxia, 150.

Siricius, bishop of Rome, 157.

Sirmium, 55; Council of, 56; creeds
of, 56. 57, 58.

Sisinnius, Novatian bishop of Con-
stantinople, reader to Agelius,
123; ordained bishop, 129; suc-
ceeds Marcian, 129; his learn-
ing, eloquence, grace of person,
and some examples of his wit,
152; his death, 156; succeeded
by Chrysanthus, 156.

Sisinnius, bishop of Constantinople,
succeeds Atticus, 168 ; ordains
Proclus to the see of Cyzicus,
168; his death, 169.

Sislra, places of penal prostitution,
127.

Six Hundred Problems, treatise by
Evagrius, 107.

Slaves, 7?, 117.

Smyrna, Macedonian Synod of, 102.

Socrates, author of the Ecclesiastical
History, personal reminiscences,
19, 67, 126, 128, 132, 156; birth
of, 135; views of, regarding the
abolition of penitentiary pres-
byter's office, 1 28 ; celebration
of Easter, baptism, fasting, mar-
riage, the Eucharist, and other
ordinances, 130-133; on Origen
and his merits, 147, 148 ; on
Philip of Siile's Christian His-
tory, 168 ; on transference of
bishops from one church to an-
other, 173.

Socrates, Athenian philosopher, 87,
91.

Sophia, church so called, 38, 43, 73.

Sophistry of Arians, 60, 74, no.

Sophocles, ancient poet, 81.

Sophronius, Semi-Arian bishop of
Pompeiopolis, declaration of, be-
fore the Synod of Seleucia, 69;
deposed by Acacius, 72; sides
with Macedonius, 73, 84; peti-
tions Jovian, 94.

Sotades, obscene poet, songs of, 13.

Soucis, a mountain, made the bound-
ary between the Eastern and
Western churches, 49.

Spyridon, bishop of Cyprus, 8; two
remarkable incidents in his life,
18, 19.

Stenography, used to record the
sermons and speeches of ora-
tors, 58, 68, 140.

Stephen, bishop of Antioch, 54.

Strabo, Greek writer, 167.


Strategium, public building in Con-
stantinople, 21.

Sycre, a church removed to, 66.

Symmachus, a Roman senator, clem-
ency of Theodosius toward, 125.

Synod (Council), at Niceta, 8, 10-
12, 19; at Antioch, 28, 73,
94; at Tyre, 30-32; of the
Eastern bishops, 44; at Sardica,
34. 46, 49. 54; at Sirmium, 56,
57, 58; appointed to meet at
Rome, 59; at Milan, 60; at-
tempted at Nicomedia, 61; at
Ariminum, 61, 67, 84, loi, 102;
of the Ursacian faction at Nice,
65; at Seleucia in Isauria, 61,
67, 75; at Constantinople, 71-
73; at Alexandria, summoned by
Athanasius and Eusebius, 81, 82;
at Antioch (of bishops), of the
Acacian faction, 94, 95 ; Lamp-
sacus, 97; at Sicily, of Sicilian
bishops, 102 ; at Pazum, of the
Novatian bishops, 1 13; Ecumen-
ical, at Constantinople, 1 21,
122; of Novatians, at Constan-
tinople, 129; at Chalcedon in
Bithynia, 149; at Ephesus, 172.

Synods, provincial, the assembling of,
authorized by the Ecumenical
Synod of Constantinople, 122.

Syrian, a military commander, 40.

Tabernacle, of embroidered linen,
made by Constantius, 22.

Table, the holy, 30, 2,3-

Tarsus, in Cilicia, Synod of Seleucia
transferred to, 67; but prevented
from meeting there, 102, 103.

Tatian, a Christian martyr, 86.

Temples, pagan, closed, 2, 78, 86, 94;
cleansed, 79; destroyed, 2, 22,
126.

Terebinthus, also called Buddas, 25.

Thalassius, bishop of Caesarea, 178.

Thalia, work composed by Arius, con-
demned, 13.

Theatrical entertainments, 112, 159.

Themistius, a philosopher, 95; re-
cords Jovian's religious tolerance
and pronounces a consular ora-
tion before him at Antioch, 95;
induces V^alens to relax the sever-
ity of his persecution, 115.

Theoctistus, leader of the Psathyrians,

134

Theodore, bishop of Heraclea, 31, 41,
44.

Theodore, to whom the History is
dedicated, 36, 137, 178.

Theodore, a young Christian, cruelly
tortured by Julian, 89, 165.

Theodore, a martyr, 104.

Theodore, of Mopsuestia, 139.

Theodosiolus, put to death by Va-
lens on account of his name, 105.

Theodosius, bishop of Philadelphia,
deposed, 70.

Theodosius (the Great), emperor, 25;
a Spaniard of noble ancestry,
made colleague on the throne
by Gratian, 119; obtains a vic-
tory over the barbarians, taken ill


and baptized by the bishop of
Thessalonica, 120; summons a
synod at Constantinople, I2i;
the Goths submit to him, 122;
proclaims Arcadius his son Au-
gustus, 122; secures to the No-
vatians privileges enjoyed by
other sects, 123; makes war on
the usurper Maximus, 124; over-
comes and puts him to death,
125; his clemency towards Sym-
machus, 125; destroys pagan
temples, 126; reforms two in-
famous abuses in Rome, 127;
returns to Constantinople, 128:
tolerates all sects except the
Eunomians, 129; favors the No-
vatians, 129; defeats the usurp-
er Eugenius, 135; falls ill and
sends for his son Honorius, 139;
dies, 136; succeeded by his two
sons, 137; funeral ceremonies,

1 37-.

Theodosius II., birth of, 142; acces-
sion to the throne, 153, 154; re-
ceives intelligence of the news
from Persia in a remarkably
short time, 163; his pre-eminent
virtues, 164, 165; becomes sole
ruler, 165; proclaims Valentin-
ian III. emperor of the West,
166; calls a synod to meet at
Ephesus, 172; appoints Proclus
to the see of Constantinople,
175; his excellent qualities, 176;
offers thanksgiving, i 78.

Theodosius, bishop of Synada, 154,

155-

Theodosius' Porum, 99.

Theodotus, bishop of Laodicea, 74.

Theodulus, Thracian bishop, pro-
scribed by Constantius, 54.

Theodulus, bishop of Chaeretapa,
deposed, 70.

Theodulus, a martyr, 86.

Theognis, Arian bishop of Nicsea, de-
fends Arianism, 9; refuses to re-
ceive the Nicene Creed, lo; ex-
iled, lO; recalled, 20; copy of his
recantation, 20; abuses the em-
peror's clemency, 26; conspires
against Athanasius, 29,33 "' renews
efforts to introduce Arianism, 36.

Theon, father of Hypatia, philoso-
]iher in Alexandria, 160.

Theonas, Arian bishop of Marmarica,
4, 12.

Theopemptus, Novatian bishop of
Alexandria, 156.

Theophilus, bishop of the Goths, 72.

Theophilus, Semi-Arian bishop of
Castabala, 94, 100, loi, 102.

Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria,
desires to make Evagrius bishop,
109; succeeds Timothy in the
see of Alexandria, 124; recon-
ciled to Flavian, 126; effects the
destruction of the Mithreum and
Serapeum, 126; opposes John,
138; plots against him, 140, 145;
enters into controversy with the
monks but dissimulates before
danger, 142; condemns Origen,


GENERAL INDEX TO SOCRATES' HISTORY.


443


143; quarrels with Isidore, 144,
145; continues operations against
John, 148; counter-charges are
made against him, 149; his
death, 156.

Theophilus, bishop of Apamea, 173.

Theophronius, leader of the ' Euno-
miotheophronians,' 135.

Theotimus, Semi-Arian bishop of the
Arabs, 95.

Theotimus, bishop of Scythia, defends
Origen, 147.

Theotocos, discussions concerning the
title, 170-172.

Therapeia, a port in the Euxine,
previously called Pharmaceus,
167.

Thessalonica, Licinius compelled to
live in, 3; Paul exiled to, 43.

Thessaly, ecclesiastical customs in,
132.

Thmuis, a bishop exiled under Con-
stantius, 55.

Thomas, apostle, goes to the Par-
thians, 23; church of, at Edessa,
104.

Thracians, temperament of, 112.

Tigris, a presbyter, 149.

Timothy, bishop of Alexandria, suc-
ceeds his brother Peter, 117, 119;
attends the Synod of Constanti-
nople, 121; becomes patriarch
of Egypt, 122; his death, 124.

Timothy, Arian presbyter, proficient
in the Scripture, 156.

Timothy, archdeacon in Alexandria,
candidate for the episcopacy,
156.

Titles given to bishops and emperors,

137-
Titus, of Bostra, 95.
Toleration, practiced, 95, 96, 128,

176; plea for, 1 15.
Tortures inflicted on Homoousians,

55; on Christian women, 66;

on the martyrs of Merum, 86; on

Theodore, 89.
Tradition, Catholic, 81.
Transference of bishops, question of,

I7,v
Transmigration of souls, theory of, 90.
Treves, a city in Gaul, Athanasius

exiled to, 37.
Tribigildus, a kinsman of Gainas,

rebels, 141.
Trinity, on the, treatise by Didymus,

no.
Troilus, a sophist, 142, 154, 168, 173.


Truth, historical, hard to ascertain,

137-
Tyre, council of, 30, 31, 32.

Ulfilas, bishop of the Goths, 72;
translates the Scriptures into the
Gothic, 115.

Unity in the Trinity, 3; in the Church
between Novatians and Orthodox,
66.

Uptar, King of the Burgundians, 170.

Uranius, bishop of Tyre, 68 ; deposed,
70.

Uranius, Semi-Arian bishop of Apa-
mea, 95.

Uranius, Semi-Arian bishop of Mel-
itina, 95.

Urbanus, martyr under Valens, 104.

Ursacius, Arian bishop of Singid-
num, conspires against Atha-
nasius, 29, T,l; recants, 41, 53,
57 ; refuses to anathematize
Arius, 61 ; deposed by the Coun-
cil of Ariminum, 63; favored by
Constantius, 64.

Ursinus, a deacon of Rome, 1 1 3.

Vacant bishop, 169.

Valens, Arian bishop of Mursa, con-
spires against Athanasius, 29, T^y,
recants, 41, 53, 57 ; refuses to
anathematize Arius, 61 ; deposed
by the Council of Ariminum, 63;
favored by Constantius, 64.

Valens, emperor, as a military officer,
prefers retirement to hypocrisy,
85, 96; raised to share the im-
perial throne, 96; resides at Con-
stantinople, 96 ; is intoleraait and
cruel, 97; orders the walls of
Chalcedon to be razed, and uses
the stones for public baths, 99;
persecutes the Novatians, 99;
leaves Constantinople for Anti-
och, 103; banishes Eustathius
and Evagrius, 103 ; dooms an
entire congregation to death, 104 ;
slaughters many on account of
their names, 105; persecutes the
Christians, 109 ; permits the
Goths to become his subjects,
115, 116; desists from persecut-
ing, 116; departs from Antioch
and arrives at Constantinople,
117; his subjects murmur, he
routs the Goths and is slain, 117,
118.

Valentinian I., emperor, as a military


officer, prefers retirement to hy-
pocrisy, 85, 96; declared em-
peror, 96 ; makes Valens his
colleague, 96; favors the Ho-
moousians, 96; goes to the West,
114; abstains from interfering
with any sect, 114; his territo-
ries invaded, ruptures a blood-
vessel and dies, 114.

Valentinian II., emperor, born, lOO;
proclaimed emperor, 114; Pro-
bus, consul during his minority,
124; compelled to arlmit Maxi-
mus the usurper as a colleague,
Theodosius helps him against the
usurper, 124; triumphal entry
into Rome, 125; strangled, r35.

Valentinian III., proclaimed emperor,
166; marries Eudoxia, daughter
of Theodosius II., 177.

Vararanes, king of Persia, 157; per-
secutes the Christians and pro-
vokes the Romans, 162; impris-
ons the Roman envoys, is routed
and compelled to make peace,
162, 163.

Various reading, a case of, 171.

Venus, temple of, removed, 21 ; at
Aphaca, demolished, 22.

Vessels, sacred, 30, 164.

Vetranio, usurper, 53 ; proclaimed
emperor, 55; deposed, lives hap-
pily in retirement, 55.

Vicentius, presbyter of Rome, 19.

Victor, bishop of Rome, 130.

Virgin, to the, treatise by Evagrius,
107.

Virgins, torture of, 55.

Vitian, Roman general, 163.

Vito, presbyter of Rome, 19.

Wednesday and Friday, observed as

fast-days, 132, 164.
White garments, worn by candidates

for baptism, 161.
Will of Constantine, 35.
' Wisdom, the, of God,' 4.

Xenon, a dialogue by Methodius,
bishop of Olympus, 147.

Xenophon, ancient Greek writer, 92,
167.

Zealots, 137.

Zeno, bishop of Jerusalem, 139.

' Zeuxippus,' bath cajled so, 43.

Zoilus, Semi-Arian bishop of Larissa,

95-
Zosimus, bishop of Rome, 158.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S ECCLESIASTICAL

HISTORY.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Aadas, a presbyter, 391.

Abbos, a monk of Syria, 370.

Abdaleus, a Syrian monk, 370.

Abdas, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Abdiesus, a Persian deacon and mar-
tyr, 267.

Abedechalaas, a Persian presbyter and
martyr, 266.

Abraham, 239; theophany, 261.

Abramius, a Persian bishop and mar-
tyr, 267.

Acacians, 319; confirm formulary read
at Ariminum, 319; depose Aetius
and others, 320; development of
their heresy, 324.

Acacius, bishop of Berea, 380; saintly
character. 396; sent by Chrysos-
tom an embassy to Rome, 400;
becomes enemy of Chrysostom,
412.

Acacius, succeeds Eusebius as bishop
of Caesarea, 284, 294 ; partici-
pates in second council of Anti-
och, 285; deposed by Western
bishops, 290 ; favors Aetian doc-
trines, 311 ; ejects Maximus, 315;
deposed by council of Seleucia,
318; attends council of Antioch,

348.

Acacius, bishop of Tvre, Eunomian,
308.

Acacius, the martyr, church of, 198,
316.

Acepsimus, a Persian bishop, martyr-
dom of, under Sapor, 267.

Acesius, bishop of Novatians, repels
Constantine's overtures, 256.

Achillas, presl)yter of Alexandria, ac-
cepts doctrines of Arius, 251.

/Esculapius, temple of, destroyed, 262.

Aetl^nism, see Eunomianism.

Aeti u. deacon at Antioch, 295, 298;
doctrines, 307; recalled by Ju-
lian, 330.

Africanus, the historian, 240.

Agapius, Arian bishop of Ephesus, 388.

Agas, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Agdelas, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Agelius, Novatian bishop of Constan-
tinople, 352 ; banished, but re-
called, 352 ; takes no part in
Paschal schism, 361 ; makes Si-
sinius his deputy, 382; death, 384.

Aithalas, Persian martyr, 267.

Aithals, Arian presbyter of Alexan-
dria, 251.


Ajax, a monk of Majuma, 396.

Alaphion, 191 ; his family position
and his life, 192; possessed by a
demon, exorcised by Hilarion,
became a Christian, 192, 233, 293.

Alaric, 197; rebukes luxury of Ro-
mans, 204 ; made a general
through influence of Stilicho,
415, 421 ; plots with Stilicho,
415, 421 ; besieges Rome, 422;
raises the siege, 423 ; again
threatens the city, and takes it,
423; is made general, 423;
makes Attalus king, 423; per-
mits sack of Rome, 424.

Alavicus, a traitorous general of Ho-
norius, 425.

Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, 204,
241 ; ejects Arius, after wavering
in opinion, 251 ; attends Nicene
council, 253; death, 269.

Alexander of Constantinople, over-
comes opponent in argument by
a miracle, 254; refuses to re-
ceive Arius into communion, 279,
280; death, succeeded by Paul,
284.

Alexion, Palestinian monk, 293.

Allegory, in interpreting Scripture,
205, 206.

Ambrose, 193, 2og, 211; when gov-
ernor, elevated to bishopric of
Milan, 361 ; persecuted by Jus-
tina, 384; reproaches Theodo-
sius, 394; obtains favor from
Gratian, 394; orders deposition
of Gerontius of Nicomedia, but
is disobeyed, 403.

Ammon, the Egyptian, 365; becomes
an ascetic, * is carried across a
brook by a miracle, miracle at
his death, 250; character, 368.

Ammonius, a Palestinian monk, 370;
successful appeal to tlpiphanius
for himself and the Long Broth-
ers, 408; death, 410.

Amphilochius, rebukes Theodosius,
379; bishop of Iconium, 382.

Amphion, bishop of Epiphania, 246.

Amphion, becomes bishop of Nico-
media, 256; expelled by Euse-
bius, 268.

Analytical criticism of Sozomen, 227.

Anannias, a Persian martyr, 266.

Anastasia, daughter of Valens, 352.

Anastasius, bishop of Rome, 415;
succeeded by Innocent, 415.

Andragathias, philosopher, instructor
of Chrysostom, 399.


Andrathagius, secures death of Gra-
tian, 384; death, 385.
Anomianism, see Eunomianism.
Anomians, 324.
Anthedon, maritime city of Palestine,

332-

Anthedonius, Palestinian monk, 293.

Anthemius, 196; influential, 197.

Anthropomorphism, see Corporeality.

Anthropomorphists, 206.

Antiochus, bishop of Ptolemias in
Syria, 405.

Antiphonal singing, origin among the
Arians, 404.

Antony the Great, an Egyptian monk,
practices asceticism; his mode of
life, 249; sees spirit of Ammon
at latter's death, 250; visits Al-
exander, 270; seeks in vain recall
of Athanasius, 2S0; maintains
Nicene doctrine, 291 ; visited by
Hilarion, 293; praises Didymus,
295; dream of, 349.

Anuph, Egyptian monk, 292.

Aones, monk of Syria, 370.

Apelles, an Egyptian ascetic, 365.

Aphrodite, temple and image of, on
Mt. Calvary, 258; descent from
Lebanon, 262.

Apocalypse, of Paul, 214; 390 ; tra-
dition of its discovery, 390.

Apocalypse of Peter, 390.

Apolinarianism, opposed by Sozomen,
206; christology, 209; con-
demned by a council held at
Rome, 262; geographical distri-
bution, 364.

Apolinarius, bishop of Hierapolis,

340-

Apolinarius, bishop of Laodicea, 207;
doctrine of, concerning the Holy
Ghost, 359, 361 ; friendship for
Athanasius, 362.

Apolinarius the Syrian, 269; learning
and works, 340.

Apollo, statue of, destroyed at Daphne,
262; and temple, 342.

Apollonius, an Egyptian ascetic, 292.

Apollonius, another ascetic, 366.

Apollos, a monk of Thebais, 366.

Apostles, church of, at Constanti-
nople, 198.

Apostolic succession, 217, 398.

Aquilinus, friend of Sozomen, 199;
miraculously cured, 260.

Arcadius, Emperor of the West, suc-
ceeds Theodosius, 398 ; death,
succeeded by Theodosius the
Younger, 419.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S HISTORY.


445


Argo, the, 234.

Argobastes, 392; suicide, 393.

Arg.jnauts, 234, 243.

Arian iJoths, martyrs, 210.

Arianism, opposed by Sozomen, 20C;
divisions of, 2 1 7, 387 ; origin, 25 1 ;
doctrines of, 251 ; re-agitated,
272; dispute not ended by death
of Arius, 280; revival of, 281 ;
again at death of Constantine,
283; defended by Acacians, 323;
favored by Justina, 384.

Arians, inclined to liberal culture,
195; assert conspiracy to elect as
bishop of Alexandria, 269; plot
against Athanasius, 270; unite
with the Meiitians, 271 ; views
of, 272; excite seditions on return
of Athanasius, 284 ; secure ex-
pulsion of Paul from Constanti-
nople, 284; successes of, 286;
bishops displaced by Athanasius,
299; renew attacks on him, 304;
persecute opponents, 322; trans-
late Melitius to Antioch, 323;
expel him thence, 322; persecute
orthodox under Valens, 351-358;
geographical distribution, 358 ;
attempt to gain Theodosius, 379;
divisions among, 388; disorderly
conduct in Constantinople causes
their repression, 404 ; disap-
pointed in hopes of restoration
under Attalus, 424.

Arius, 240; a presbyter of Alexandria,
ordained deacon, defends Meii-
tians, asserts his doctrines, 251;
his following numerous, 251; ap-
peal to bishops against Alexander,
252; gains a point with Paulinus,
Eusebius, and Patrophilus, 252;
summoned before bishops at
Nicaea, 253; appears before the
council, 254 ; loses his case
and is banished, 255, and excom-
municated, 255 ; recalled from
exile, but forbidden to enter
Alexandria, 268; submits, with
Euzoius, statement of belief, and
is reinstated, 277; but not re-
ceived by bishop of Alexandria,
279; manner of death, 279.

Armenians, conversion of, 264.

Arsacius, bishop of Constantinople,
196; replaces Chrysostom, 413;
personal character, 413; death,
417.

Arsacius, king of Armenia, 346.

Arsacius, pagan priest of Galatia, 338.

Arsacius, the Persian, 213; foretells
earthquake at Nicomedia, 310;
performs miracles, 311; death,

311-

Arsenius, 273, 275.

Arsion, monk of Scetis, 368.

Arsisius, an ascetic, 291, 36S.

Ascalon, 233.

Ascetics, mode of life, 291, 293.

Ascholius, bishop of Thessalonica,
378; attends council of Constan-
tinople, 380.

Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, 287; exiled,
but recalled, 300.


Asphalius, Eunomian presbyter of

Antioch, 308.
Asterius, general of the East under

Honorius, 400.
Asterius, a sophist, 282; deposed,

goes to Rome, 282.
Ataulphus, brother-in-law of Alaric,

423-

Athanaric, a Gothic leader, 210, 373;
persecutes Christians, 374.

Athanasius the Great, bishop of Alex-
andria, 204; as deacon attends
Nicene council, 253; becomes
bishop on death of Alexander,
269 ; secretly ordained, 269 ;
character, 269; baptized chil-
dren when a child, 269; traduced
by Arians before Constantine,
272; proves his innocence,^ is
commended by the emperor,
273; is again assailed in vain,
273; again assailed, refuses to
attend council of Cassarea, 275;
appears before council of Tyre,
the charges, 275; is deposed,
276 ; appeals to Constantine,
278; who exiles him to Treves,
279 ; relates circumstances of
death of Arius, 279; recalled to
Alexandria by Constantine, 283;
again deposed by council of An-
tioch, 285; escapes from Alex-
andria and flees to Rome, 286;
received kindly there, 287; re-
instated, 288; again ejected, 288;
summoned to Rome by Julius,
288 ; affirms Nicene doctrine,
291 ; recalled by influence of
Constans, 298; favors Eustathi-
ans, 299; displaces the Arian
bishops, 299; commended by
Synod of Jerusalem, 300; again
deposed by Constantius, 301 ;
again attacked by Arians, 304;
condemned by council of Milan,
305; flees, 306; reappears after
seven years' concealment, 330;
attends council of Alexandria,
335; banished by Julian, 336;
restored by Jovian, 349; flees
again to escape Valens, 354;
returns by Valens' permission,
354; death, 357; held consub-
stantiality of the Holy Ghost, 359.

Athanasius, ijishop of Ancyra, 348;
attends council of Tyana, 353.

Athanasius the historian, a source of
Sozomen's history, 222.

Attalus, made king by Alaric, 423;
acts haughtily toward Honorius,
424; abdicates and leaves Rome,
424 ; baptized by Sigesarius,
bishop of the Goths, 424.

Atticus, bishop of Constantinople,
196, 213; character and tenden-
cies, 417.

Aurelius, Palestinian monk, 293.

Auxentius, bishop of Milan, an Arian,
291, 294, 312, 313, 361; con-
demned by council of Rome,
360; death, 361.

Auxentius, son of Addas, a presbyter,
391-


Azadanes, a Persian martyr, 267.
Azadcs, a Persian martyr, 266.
Azizus, a monk of Syria, 370.

Babylas, martyr of Antioch, 341.
Baptism, and the Catholic Church,
207; Eunomian doctrine of, 207,

Barbasymes, Persian bishop and mar-
tyr, 267.

Bardasanes, 295.

Barges, Syrian monk, 370.

Barses, Syrian monk and honorary
bishop, 371,

Basil the Great, limited use by Sozo-
men, 223; praise of Ephraem
Syrus, 295.

Basil, bishop of Ancyra, repudiated
by Western bishops, 290, 294;
again acquires bishopric, 301 ;
refutes Photinus at council of
Sirmium, 303; opposes Eudoxus,
308; advises council at Nicsea,
311; deposed by Acacians, 320;
charges against him, 320; mar-
tyrdom, 334.

Basil, bishop of Csesarea, 355; mirac-
ulous powers, 356; friendship for
Gregory, 356; opposes Arianism,
356; doctrine of, concerning
Holy Ghost, 359.

Basiliscus, martyr, appears to Chrys-
ostom, 202, 418.

Battheus, Syrian monk, 370, 371.

Benjamin, ascetic philosopher, 366.

Benus, an Egyptian ascetic, 365.

Berytus, 196; law school at, 234 n.

Bethelia, 191 ; population mixed, 192;
and large, with stately churches,
233; in biography, 198, 370.

Bibliography of Sozomen, 225-231.

Bochres, a Persian bishop and mar-
tyr, 267.

Breviary (or epitome) of ecclesiastical
affairs by Sozomen, lost, 200, 234.

Busiris, a Galatian martyr, 334.

Buthcricus, a general, 394.

Byzantium, 251.

Cresarea, reduced by Julian from rank
of a city, 329.

Ctesarius, and tomb of forty martyrs,
420.

Calemerus, finds relics of prophet
Zechariah, 427.

Callinicus, bishop of Pellusium, 275.

Callicinus, a Melitian bishop and ac-
cuser of Athanasius, 275.

Carosa, daughter of Valens, 352.

Carporles, presbyter, an Arian of Alex-
andria, 251.

Carterius, philosopher, instructor of
Chrysostom, 399.

Cassianus, a deacon, 416.

Catholic Church the orthodox church,
205; unity of, 258; unites with
Novatians in Constantinople,
316; persecution under \"alens,

-1 r 'T

Cecropius, bishop of Nicomedia, killed

in earthquake, 310.
Celibacy, favored by Constantine,


446


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


245; not enforced by council of
Nicaea, 256.

Celts, christianization of, 262.

Cenobite, community at Tabenna,
292.

Chalcedon, church in, 199.

Chrestus, becomes bishop of Nicaea,
256; expelled, 268.

Christ, sufferings typified by Isaac,
coming predicted by Jacob, mi-
raculous conception, so-called by
Josephus, 239; appears to Con-
stantine, 241 ; name of, casts out
demons, 262.

Christianity, spread of, under Con-
stantine, 261, 262.

Chrysostom, 196, 399; method of in-
terpreting Scripture, 206; per-
sonal character, 399; dissuades
Theodore of Mopsuestia from
marriage, 399; elected bishop of
Constantinople, 400; opposed by
Theophilus in vain, 4C)0; purifies
the clergy, 400 ; strives to re-unite
the churches of the West and the
East, 400 ; foils plans of Gainas,
401; prudence in governing the
Church, 402; miracle during his
administration, 403; deposes thir-
teen bishops in Asia, 403; or-
dains lleraclides liishop of Ephe-
sus, 403; expels Gerontius, bishop
of Nicomedia, 403; ordains Pan-
sophius instead, 403; incurs en-
mity of the clergy, 404; rel)ukes
Olympias for unwise almsgiving,
405; disputes with monk Isaac,
405; expels Severian from Con-
stantinople, 405; is reconciled by
the empress, 405 ; cautiously re-
ceives the Egyptian monks, 407;
goes to receive Epiphanius, but
is repulsed, 408; refuses to expel
the "Long Brothers," 409; ex-
cites the enmity of the empress,
409; cited to ap])ear at council
of Rutiniatj'ie, 410; declines to
do so, and is deposed, 410; with-
draws, and a sedition arises
against the council, 410; which
causes his recall, 41 1; when he
delivers an oration, 41 1 ; is more
than ever liked by the ])cople,
412; justified by a council of
sixty V)ishops, 41 1 ; again offend-
ing the empress, is again deposed,
412; is expelled, holds meetings
outside the city, 412; attacks on
his life, 413; is guarded by the
people, 413; exiled to Armenia,
413; cause espoused by Innocent,
bishop of Rome, 416; receives
letter from Innocent, 417; repu-
tation during his exile, 417; is
banished to a remoter place, dies
on the way, 418.

Church and State, 20S; in persecu-
tion, 210; united, 244.

Churches restored, 245.

Cilix, presbyter of Tarsus, 199.

Clemens, Alexandrinus, scholarship,
194, 240.

Clergy, ascetic character of, in Sozo-


men's time, 194; exempted from
taxation, 246; appeal to bishops
from civil courts allow-ed, 246;
support of, 329.

Codex Gregorianus, 196; a source of
Sozomen's history, 223.

Codex Hermogenianus, 196; a source
of Sozomen's history, 223.

Codex Theodosianus, proclaimed a.d.
439> '96; a source of Sozomen's
history, 223.

Commissioner of penance, origin of
office, 386; sui)pression, 386.

Conciliar movement, in West, 217,
312-315; in East, 217, 315-317.

Confession of faith, of l)ishops of the
East, 289; three formularies of
Council of Sirmium, 303; \'alen-
tian formulary, 315 ; of Ariminum,
322; of Eustathius, etc., 352.

Constans, son of Constantine the
Great, obtains empire of the
West, 284; writes to Constantius
in re Athanasius and Paul, 289;
receives three bishops and dis-
misses them, 289; fails to have
Athanasius and Paul reinstated,
289; summons Synod of Sardica,
289; threatens brother with war
unless Athanasius restored, 298;
killed in Gaul, 301.

Constans, son of Constantine the
Usurper, 425; slain, 427.

Constantia, sister of Constantine, ad-
vocates restoration of Arius and
Euzoius, 277.

Constantine the Great, sees vision of
cross and of Christ, 241 ; incjuires
of priests, who expound the
Scriptures, takes cross as his
standard, which protects the
bearer, 242; charged with mur-
dering son Crispus, 242; but
charge untrue, 243 ; churches
flourish under him, 243; conquers
Dardanians, 243 ; overcomes Li-
cinius, V)ecomes sole emperor,
makes Christianity state religion,
revokes edicts against Christians,
pagan worship prohibited, 244;
])roperty restored to Christians,
244; conquers Goths and .Sarma-
tians, enjoins observance of Eord's
Day, abolishes crucifixion, 245;
abolishes law against celibacy,
245; exempts clergy from taxa-
tion, allows appeal to bishops
from civil courts, 246; grants
request of Eutychianus, 251; re-
bukes Arius and Alexander, 252;
is grieved at I'asciial controversy,
252; sends Hosius to reconcile
differences, 253; convenes coun-
cil at NicKa, 253; burns memo-
rials and exhorts to peace, 253;
replies to Eusebius' eulogy, 254;
attempts to reconcile the Nova-
tians, 256; entertains the coun-
cil, exhorts to harmony, and
writes to the churches, 257; or-
ders church built near Calvary,
258; has bit made out of true
nails, 259; erects temples, 259;


beautifies Byzantium and changes
its name, 260; builds church at
Hesli.v, or Michxlium, 260; or-
ders church erected under oak
of Mamre, 2O1 ; orders pagan
shrines and idols destroyed and
places purified, 261 ; receives
embassy of Iberians, 264 ; re-
monstrates with Sapor for perse-
secuting Christians, 268; hears
traducers of .Athanasius, 272; but
dismisses them, 273; convenes
council of C;vsarea, 275; orders
consecration of the Great Mar-
tyrium at Jerusalem, 276; is per-
suaded by Constantia to restore
Arius and Euzoius, 277; writes
letter to Synod of Tyre, 278; ex-
iles .Athanasius to Treves, 279;
refuses to recall him, 280; exiles
John, the Mclitian bishop, 280;
enacts law against heresies, 280;
baptism, death, and character,
282; charges Constantius to call
council regarding homoiousios,
298; body removed by Macedo-
nius, 316.

Constantine, son of Constantine the
Great, death of, at Acjuileia, 284.

Constantine, proclaimed emperor by
soldiers, 425; sends son Constans
into Spain, 427; proclaims him
emperor, 427; killed, 427.

Constantine, a city of Phcenicia, 262.

Constantinople, churches in, 199.

Constantius, father of Constantine the
Great, 205; protects Christians,
243; tests the faithful, 243.

Constantius, son and successor of
Constantine, recalls Athanasius,
283; letter to church of Alexan-
dria, 283; obtains empire of the
East, 284; goes to Antioch of
Syria, 285; adopts the term " ho-
moiousios," 297; convenes coun-
cil of .Ariminum, 298 ; restores
.Athanasius, 298; commends him
to bishops of Egy])t, 299; over-
comes \'etranius, 302; and Max-
entius, 304; goes to Rome, at-
temjils to force homoiousios on
church, 304; banishes Tiberius,
307 ; condemns Eudoxius and
the Aetians, 309; convenes coun-
cil at Nicrea, 311; goes to Ari-
minum, council meets there, 312;
permits another at Seleucia, 312;
slights deputies from council of
Ariminum, 314; appoints Julian,
Ccesar, 316; death, 325.

Constantius, a general of Ilonorius,
426, 427.

Consulistantiality of Son, broached,
251; defended by Alexander of
Alexandria against Arius, 251;
becomes the faith of the church,
255; dispute over meaning of
word, 270; evaded by partisans
of Eusebius of Nicomedia, 285;
affirmed by the West, 291; ho-
moousios and homoiousios, 297;
debated at Sirmium, 303; and at
Seleucia, 317; and at Ariminum,


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S HISTORY.


447


319; attacked anew by Acacians,
323; Macediinian acccjjtation of
the term, 336; Niceiie statement
affirmed l>y council of AntU)ch,
348; accepted by Macedonian
bishops, 352; afterwards rejected
by them, 377.

Coprcs, an Kj^yptian monii, 365.

Corporeality of God, (juestion raised
in t^yi>t, 406.

Council of Alexandria, 209; reaffirms
Nicene doctrines, 335. Antioch,
207; deposes Kustathius, 270 ;
ordains Euphronius bishop, 271;
second council, 285; deposes
Athanasius, ordains Gregory, 285.
Antioch in Syria, 348; reaffirms
Nicene faith, 348; letter to Jo-
vian, 348. Ariminum, convened,
298; cause, 298; second council,
convened, 312; rejects Aetian
doctrines, 313; sends report to
Constantius, 313; confirming Ni-
cene doctrines, 314. Ciesarea, to
try Athanasius, who does not ap-
pear, 275. Constantinople, 209;
convened by Theodosius, 380;
chooses Nectarius bishop of Con-
stantinople, 38 1 ; affirms Nicene
faith, 381 ; establishes precedence
of Rome, and rank of see of
Constantinople, 381. Jerusalem,
299; letter in behalf of Athana-
sius, 299. Lampsacus, 350; holds
Arian doctrines, 350. Milan, de-
poses and banishes Athanasius,
305. Niciea, convened, 253;
assembled, 254; condemns Arian-
ism, 255; leaves celibacy unen-
forced, 256; enacts canons, 256.
Rome, 360 ; reaffirms Nicene
doctrines, condemns Auxentius
of Milan, 360; circular letter of,
360. RufinianLe, 409; the eighty
monks reconciled with Theophi-
lus, 410 ; cite Chrysostom and
clergy of Constantinople to ap-
pear, 410; depose Chrysostom,
410; mobbed by the people, 410.
Sardica, 209; East separates from
West, 289; numbers attending,
290. Seleucia, 316; two formu-
laries offered, 316 ; reaffirms
formulary of council of Antioch,
318; deposes various bishops,
318. Sirmium,. convened, 302;
deposes Photinus, 303 ; three
formularies of faith, 303. Tyana,
353; reaffirms Nicene doctrines,
353. Tyre, assembles without
being convened by the emperor,
275 ; deposes Athanasius, and
declares reasons to Constantine,
276; restores and re-establishes
the Melitian bishop, John,
280.

Councils, imperial convocation de-
fended, 208.

Crispion (also " Chrispion "), arch-
deacon, a monk of Bethelia, in
Palestine, 191, 370; Ephanius'
archdeacon, 233; brother of Fus-
con and Salamanus, 233, 408.


Crispus, son of Constantine, murder

of, 242.
Cronius, an ascetic, 291; called Cro-

nion, 368.
Cross, ai)pearance of, to Constantine,

241; near Jerusalem, 302.
Crucifixion, as punishment, abolished,

245-
Cyriaciis, bishop of Adama, 382.

Cyriacus, a deacon, 416.

Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, 294; suc-
ceeds Maximus, 302, 315; de-
posed by Acasians, 321 ; re-
nounces Macedonian doctrines
and attends council of Constan-
tinople, 380; death, 385.

Cyrinus, bishop of Chalcedon, abuses
C'hrysostom at council of Chalce-
don, 409; death, 409.

Cyrus, of Constantinople, 194.

Damasus, bishop of Rome, 359;
condemns Apolinarianism, 362;
death, 398.

Daniel, a Syrian monk, 293.

Dansus, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Daphne, at Antioch, 234 ; customs
of, 341 ; temple and statue of
Apollo destroyed, 342.

Democritus of Coos, 274.

Demophilus, Arian bishop of Con-
stantinople, 354; leader of the
Arians, 378; leaves the city, 379;
holds service with Lucius outside
Constantinople, 379; death, 385.

Dianius, bishop of Cappadocian Caes-
area, attends second council of
Antioch, 285.

Didymus, of Alexandria, 294; char-
acter, 295; foresees Julian's death,
347; renown, 358, 368.

Didymus, a relative of the Emperor
Honorius, 425.

Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, 380, 381 ;
instructor of Chrysostom, 399;
avoided allegory in interpreta-
tion, 206, 399.

Diogenes, deacon, 320.

Dionysius, bishop of Alba, 305.

Dionysius, a monk of I-lhinocorura,

369-

Dionysius, temple of, at Alexandria,
destroyed. 385.

Dioscorus, an Egyptian monk, 365,
368; made bishop of Hermopolis,
406; incurs enmity of Theophi-
lus, 406; retires to Scythopolis,
407; appeals to empress, 407,
410; death, 410.

Diospolis, bishopric of, 271.

Divination, by wooden tripod, 391.

Dominica, wife of Emperor \'alens,

377-

Donatist, practice regarding the ex-
communicated, 208.

Donatus, bishop of Eurcea, 394; slays
a dragon. 395.

Dorotheus, Arian bishop of Constan-
tinople, 385: heads one party of
the Arians, 388.

Dorotheus. bisho]') of Antioch, suc-
ceeds Euzoius, 374.


Dorotheus, an ascetic of Thebes, 366.
Dracontius, bishop of Pergamos, de-
posed by Acacians, 320.

Easter controversy, 216 ; Novatian
and Sabbatian ])osition, 388.

Eastern Christians, 241.

Eastern church, and schism of Sardico,
290, 291 ; mainly Arian, 377.

Ecdicius, slayer of Edovicus, 426.

Edesius, adventures in India, 274.

Edessa, 193, 293; devotion of Chris-
tians of, 357.

Edicts against Christians revoked,
244.

Editions of Sozomen, 225, 226.

Edovicus, a general of the usur]>er
Constantine, 426.

Egyptian monasticisin, 292, 365-369.

Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, 308; de-
posed by Acacians, 320; em-
Ijraces heresy of Macedonius, 322,
336; compelled by Julian to
build Novatian church, 330; ex-
pelled by Julian, 336; recants
before Valens, but repents, 351;
attends council of Constantinople,
380.

Elias, associate of Patrines, 273.

Elias, an Egyptian ascetic, 365.

Elpidius, bishop of Satala, deposed
by Acacians, 321.

Emesa, church of, 297.

Empedocles, death of, 274.

Encratites, 206, 334.

Ephraem Syrus, 216, 293, 370 ; liter-
ary works, 295; personal char-
acter, 296.

Epiphanies of angels, saints, etc., 202.

Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis, con-
troversy with the empress, 191,
408; prophecies of, 213; duped
by Theophilus, acts against
Chrysostom, 408 ; is dissuaded
from this course by Serapion,
408 ; meets " Long Brothers "
and is reconciled to them, 409;
■ death, 409.

Epiphanius, monk of Palestine, 369;
afterward bishop of Salamis, 370;
liberality and miracles, 395.

Epiphanius, the sophist, 362.

Episcopal and presbyterial jurisdic-
tion, 390.

Erennius, becomes bishop of Jerusa-
lem, 324; is succeeded by Her-
aclius, 324.

Eucherius, son of Stilicho, 421 ; death,
422.

Eudocia, Empress, 194; liberal ten-
dencies, 197.

Eudoxia, daughter of Eudocia, liberal
tendencies, 197; married V'alen-
tinian III., 200; death. 417.

Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia, after-
wards of Constantinople, attends
second council of Antioch, 285.

Eudoxius, Flunomian bishop of Anti-
och, 30S; ejected and condemned
by Constantius, 309; and deposed
by council of Seleucia, 318 ;
usurps bishopric of Constanti-
nople, 321; opposes Nicene <loc-


448


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


trine, 322; gains over Valens,

351; (leath, 354.
Eudoxus, bishop of Nicwa, 205.
Eugenius, bishop of Niccta, 304.
Eugenius, attempts to usurp throne

of the West, 392; death, 393.
Eulalius, orthodox bishop of Amasia,

377-

Eulogius, Egyptian presbyter and
monk, 365.

Eulogius, Persian monk and honorary
bishop, 370.

Eunomianism, genesis of, 217, 363;
doctrines, 307, 363; prominence
and condemnation, 309; favor
by Julian, 330 ; origin, 363 ;
attributed to Aetius by Euno-
mius, 364; geographical distri-
bution, 364.

Eunomians, 207; baptism among,
207, 363; not tolerated by Gra-
tian, 377.

Eunomius, 207; Arian bishop of
Cyzicus, 351; his heresy not
new, 363; acknowledges indebt-
edness to Aetius, 364; described
by Gregory Xazianzen, 364; se-
cedes from Arians, 379; banished
by Theodosius, dies, 387, 388.

Euphronius, ordained bishop of An-
tioch, 271 ; succeeded by Place-
tus, 2S5, 298.

Euplus, Melitian bishop, 275.

Eupsychius, martyr of Cassarea, 334.

Eusebia, guardian of the Forty Mar-
tyrs, 420.

Eusebius, bishop of Cresarea, 275;
attends council of Tyana, 353;
difficulties and reconciliation with
Basil, 355; death, 355.

Eusebius Kmesenus, bishop of Emesa,
life. 286, 294.

Eusebius of Nicomedia, sides with
Arias against Alexander, 252;
pretends to repudiate him, 255;
is deposed, 256 ; expels Amphion,
268; endeavors to reinstate Arius,
270; charged by Eustathius with
Arianism, 270; again plots to
restore Arius, threatens .Alexan-
der of Constantinople, 279; death
of .-Arius foils plan, 279; at death
of Constantine favors Arianism,

283.

Eusebius, bishop of Samosata, 348.

Eusebius, bishop of Vercella, 305;
returns from exile to council of
Alexandria, 335; maintains N'i-
cene doctrines, 335.

Eusebius, a eunuch, chamberlain to
Constantius, 283; aids .\etians,
312.

Eusebius, governor of the court, exe-
cuted, 330.

Eusebius, a martyr of Gaza, 332.

Eusebius, one of the " Long Brothers,"
Egyptian monk, 368.

Eusel)ius Pamphilus, the historian, one
source of Sozomen's history, 222;
story of Constantine's vision of
the cross, 24 1; sides with Arius
against Alexander, 252; attends
Nicene council and eulogizes


Constantine, 254; after delay,
sanctions decision reached, 255;
censured concerning the oak of
Mamre, 261 ; recommended for
sec of Antioch, 270 ; death, suc-
ceeded by .\cacius, 284.

Eusebius, a Syrian monk, 370.

Eustathians, favored by Athanasius,
299; numerous in Antioch, 299;
adherents of Nicene doctrines,
323; same as the Catholics, 358.

Eustathius, bishop of Bercea, then of
Antioch, 241 ; attends Nicene
Council, 253; disputes with Eu-
sebius Pamphilus concerning
consubstantiality, 270; deposed
by council of Antioch, 270; char-
acter, 271.

Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste, ascetic,
293; opposes Eudoxius, 308;
deposed by Acacians, 320; ac-
cepts heresy of Macedonius, 322,
336; goes to Rome, adopts Ni-
cene doctrine, 352; exiled by
Valens, 355.

Eutropia, mother-in-law of Constan-
tine, 261.

Eutropius, a eunuch, 392; becomes
consul, 403; refuses refuge of
churches to fugitives, falls victim
to his own order, 404.

Eutropius, a reader of Alexandria,
414; suffers death, 414.

Eutychean heresy, 201, 387.

Eutychianus, a Novatian of Bithynia,
])erforms a miracle, 251.

Eutvchus, a Eunomian, doctrine of,

'387-

Euzoius, deacon of Alexandria, be-
comes an Arian, 25 1; having
been deposed, is reinstated in
company with Arius, 277; stirs
up dissension, 335; as bishop of
Antioch, opposes Athanasius,
349; seizes Peter of Alexandria,
357; death, 374; succeeded by
Dorotheus, 374.

Evagrius, archdeacon of Constanti-
nople, 369; becomes an ascetic,

369-

Evagrius, bishop of Antioch, 385;
death, 401.

Evagrius, orthodox bishop of Con-
stantinople, 354; exiled by Va-
lens, 355.

Evagrius, the historian, 191.

Exucontians, 324.

Fatherhood of God, Arian discussion

concerning, 388.
Fathers' creed Hnal, 205.
Felix, bishop of Rome, 204; adheres

to Nicene faith, 307.
Flacilla, wife of Theodosius, holds

Nicene faith, 379.
Flavian, pagan and prrctorian prefect,

392-
Flavian, presbyter, afterwards bishop
of Antioch, 362, 382, 398; ap-
peases wrath of Theodosius, 393 :
dispute with bisho]) of Rome,
400; succeciied by Porphyry,
415.


Flavita, barbarian general in Roman
army, defeats Gainas, becomes
consul, 402.

Forty Martyrs, discovery of remains,
196; prior to A. L). 439, 201 ; story
of discovery, 420; description of
the tomb, 421.

Frumentius. missionary to India,
youthful adventures of, and sub-
sequent ordination as bishop of
India, 274.

Gaddanus, a Syrian monk, 370.

Gaddiabes, a Persian bishop and mar-
tyr, 267.

Gainas, an Arian, 197, 205.

Gainas, a Goth, attempts to seize the
throne, 401 ; lays aside preten-
sions and is made general, 401 ;
espouses Arian cause, is foiled
by ChrysQstom, 401 ; attemjUs to
cross to Asia and perishes, 402.

Galileans, a name of the Christians,

329> 338-

Galla Placidia, sister of Honorius,
427.

Gallus, 295; made Coesar, 302; re-
sides at Ephesus, 327; death,

327-

Gallienus, 262.

Gaudentius, 290.

Gauls, christianization of, 262.

Gaza, dissension between G. and
Majuma, 195, 198; martyrology,
198, 332; Sozomen's grandfather
esteemed there, 233.

George, bishop of Alexandria, perse-
cutes opponents, 302, 306; at-
tends council of Sirmium, 303;
deposed by council of Seleucia,
318; reinstated by Acacians, per-
secutes pagans and opposing
Christians, 324; meets violent
death, 331.

George, l)ishop of Laodicea in Syria,
285 ; deposed by bishops of West,
290; reinstated, opposes Eudox-
ius of Antioch, 308; ejection of
Apolinarius causes Apolinarian
heresy, 362.

George of Arethusa, nominated for
bishopric of Antioch, 271.

Germanus, presbyter, 416.

Gerontius, a physician, becomes
bishop of Nicomedia, 403; de-
posed by Chrysostom, 403.

Gerontius, a traitorous general of
Honorius, 426.

Gladiatorial shows prohibited, 245.

Goths, christianization of the, 262,
373; become Arians, 373; follow
the Psathyrians, 388.

Gratian, emperor, 209; toleration
edict of, 210, 377; associates
Theodosius with self in empire,

377-

Gratian, proclaimed emperor by sol-
diers, soon afterwards slain, 425.

Gregory, bishop of Alexandria, 285;
attends second council of An-
tioch, 2S5; repudiated by bishops
of the West, 290.

Gregory, bishop of Nyssa, 382.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOxMEN'S HISTORY.


449


■Gregory Nazianzen, 193, 199; a source
for Sozomen, 223; hatctl l)y Ju-
lian, 340; attends council of
Tyana, 353; becomes bishop of
Nazianzus, 356; and of Constan-
tinople, 356; .doctrine of, con-
cerning the Holy Ghost, 359;
describes Apolinarianism and
Eunomianisni, 364; leader of
orthodox, 378; translated to
Constantinople, abdicates, 380.


Ilabakkuk, relics of, discovered, 397.

Halas, a Syrian monk, 370, 371.

Ilarmonius, 295, 296.

Hegesippus, 240.

Helena, mother of Constantine, 204;
goes to Jerusalem, seeks true
cross, 258; erects temples at
Bethlehem and on Mount of
Olives, visits churches of the
East, is proclaimed empress, dies
at age of eighty, 259.

Helenopolis in Bithynia, 259.

Helenopolis in Palestine, 259.

Heliodorus, a Syrian monk, 370.

Helidpolis, persecution of Christians

in, 333-
Helladius, bishop of Ctesarea in Cap-
padocia, 382; ordains Gerontius,

403-

Helladius, deacon of Alexandria, be-
comes an Arian, 251.

Helles, an Egyptian ascetic, 365.

Hemona, building of, 234.

Heortasius, bishop of Sardis, deposed
by Acacians, 320.

Heraclean, general under Honorius,
423; causes famine in Rome, 424.

Heraclides, Egyptian ascetic, 291,

358.

Heraclides, monk of Scetis, ordained
bishop of Ephesus, 403.

Heraclius, succeeds Erennius as
bishop of Jerusalem, 324; is suc-
ceeded by Hilarius, 324.

Hercules, purified, 243.

Hermaeon, a Melitian bishop, 275.

Hermias, a common Christian name,

191-

Hermogenes, prefect of Syria, 320.

Hermopolis, in the Thebais, 343.

Herod the Great, 239.

Hestiae, called Michaelium, 196, 198;
church built by Constantine, 260.

Hesychas, Palestinian monk, 293;
" Hesycas," 369.

Hilarion, life of, 192, 293, 333; exor-
cises Alaphion, 192, 233; ac-
tivity in Palestine, A.D. 345, 192,
293; death, 371; burial, 293.

Hilarius, bishop of Jerusalem after
Heraclius, 324.

Hilary of Pictavium, 193, 295; exiled,

305-
Himerius, sophist of Athens, 356.
Historiography of Sozomen, 228.
Holy Ghost, doctrine of, two parties,

359- .
Homoousians, 209, 297, 298.
Homoousios and homoiousios, 297,

298.


llonoria, daughter of the general
Constanlius, 427.

Honorius, 205; date of death of, A.o.
423, 217; succeeds Tiieodosius,
398; offers to acknowledge Atta-
lus as co-emperor, 423; rebellions
against him, 425; which he over-
comes, 427.

Hormisdas, a Persian bishop and
martyr, 267.

Hosius, bishop of Cordova, 246; sent
to settle Paschal controversy,
253; expands Nicene creed, 290.

Huns, 398, 415; retreat from Thrace,
422.

Hypatian, bishop of Hcraclia, 350.

Hypostasis, 255, 270, 289, 320, 335,
381.

Iberians, of Asia, converted by a slave,
assisted l:>y miracles, 263; send
ambassadors to Constantine, 264.

Impeccability, 386.

India, Christianization of, 274.

Indifferent canon, 389.

Innocent, bishop of Rome, 415;
writes Chrysostom, 416.

Irene, daughter of Spyridon, wonder-
ful story of, 246.

Irenius, bishop of Gaza, 348.

Isaac, a Melitian bishop, 275.

Isaac, a monk, predicts death of
Valens, 376; disputes with Chrys-
ostom, 405.

Isaac, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Isaac, a type of sufferings of Christ,

239-

Isaiah, 343.

Ischurias, a Melitian presbyter, 275.

Ischyrion, bishop of Mareotis, ap-
pointed by Eastern bishops, 290.

Ishmael, father of the Saracens, 375.

Isidore, an Egyptian monk, 365.

Isidore, a presliyter of Alexandria,
400; sent on embassy to Rome,
400; incurs enmity of Theophi-
lus, 406.

Isidore of Pelusium, 191.

Jacob, predicted coming of Christ, 239.

Jews, the, rejection of Christ, 240 ;
conspire with Magi against Per-
sian Christians, 264, 266; laws
regarding slave-holding, 297;
granted permission to rebuild
the Temple, 343; repulsed by
fire issuing from the earth, 398.

Johannists, or Johnites, followers of
John Chrysostom of Constanti-
nople, 201,413; persecuted, 413,
414; excommunicated, 415.

John Baptist, head found, conveyed
to Constantinople, and church
built over it, 199,391; miracles
there, 393.

John, bishop of Constantinople, 196,
212; predictions of, 213, 409.

John, bishop of Jerusalem, 398.

John Chrysostom, see Chrysostom.

John, Egyi)tian ascetic, 365.

John, a Melitian bishop, 271, 275;
exiled by Constantine, 280.


John, a monk of Thebais, 392; pre-
dicts death of Theodosius and of
Eugcnius, 392.

John, a Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

John, presbyter and monk, 366.

Joseph, husband of Mary, 343.

Joseplius, the historian, witness of, to
Christ, 239.

Jovian, 207, 209; proclaimed em-
peror, 347 ; restores privileges to
Clnistians, 348; restores Athana-
sius, 349; death, 349.

Jovius, prefect of Italy, 423.

Julian, the apostate, eflicts cause flight
of Sozomen's family and of Ala-
I)hion's, 192 ; portents during
reign, 205 ; infatuation, 206 :
murder of, defended, 209, 346;
dread of him, 210; named Csesar,
317 ; is proclaimed Augustus,
and apostatises, 325, 326; family
and education, 326; studies phi-
losophy at Constantinople, 327 ;
relations with Constantius, 327;
reopens pagan temples, 328 ;
refuses help to Nisibis, 328 ; sub-
jects Majuma to Gaza, 328; with-
draws immunities from clergy,
329; hatred of the church, 330 ;
recalls Aetius, 330; compels re-
building of Novatian church, 330;
banishes Athanasius and Eleusius,
336; expels the clergy, 336; fail-
ure to reinstate paganism, 337;
further efforts, 338; testimony
to Christian benevolence, 338;
letter to Arsacius, 338; artful
measures against Christians, 339;
forbids public education and
Greek classics to Christians, 340;
writes his " Aversion to Beards,"
341 ; orders body of Babylas re-
moved, 341; persecution result-
ing, 342 ; destroys a statue of
Christ, 342; permits Jews to re-
build the Temple, 343; makes
war on Persia, 345; insults Ar-
sacius, King of Armenia, 345;
death, 346; cause of his death,
346; his impiety, 347.

Julian, the Chaldaean, performs a
miracle, 254.

Julian, governor of Egypt, 331 ; uncle
of above, 331 ; horrible death,

332.

Julian, Syrian monk, 293.

Julius, bishop of Rome, absent from
Nicene council, 253 ; rebukes
bishops of East, secures rein-
statement of Athanasius and
Paul, 287; summons Athanasius
to Rome, 288; replies to letter of
bishops of council of Antioch,
288; appeals to Constans, 2S9;
death, 304.

Julius, a deacon of Alexandria, and
an Arian, 251.

Justina, revival of Arianism, 21 1;
attempts to force its adoption by
threats, 384; flees with Valen-
tinian II. to Thessalonica, 384;
death, 385.


450


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Lagodius, a relative of the Emperor

Honorius, 425.
Lazarus, a Syrian monk and bishop,

370, 37'-

Leontius, bishop of Ancyra, 371; de-
prived N'ovatians of churches,
399; attends council which de-
poseil Chrysostoni, 412.

Leontius, bishop of Antioch, 298;
succeeded by Eudoxius, 308.

Leontius, presbyter to Constantius,
308.

Libanius, the Syrian, 209, 356; teacher
of Chrysostom, 399.

Liberius, bishop of Rome, 204, 207;
succeeds Julius, 304; exiled by
Constantius, 307; recalled, 309;
receives Macedonian bishops,
352; death, 359.

Licinius, 241; persecutes Christians,
244; deceived by oracle, loses
battle, and dies in Thessalonica,
244.

Literature upon Sozomen, 228-231.

Logos, the, 239.

" Long Brothers," the, 368; incur
enmity of Theophilus, 406; re-
tire with other monks to Scytho-
polis, 407.

Lord's day, observed by Constantine,

.245- ^

Lucianius, martyr of Nicomedia, 285.

Lucifer, founder of Luciferian heresy,
295 ; bishop of Cagliari, 335.

Lucius, bishop of Adrianople, de-
posed, lives in Rome, 287; re-
instated, 300; again deposed;
dies in prison, 301.

Lucius, presljyter of Alexandria, 349;
made bishop by Arians, 357;
attempts persecution of the as-
cetics, 35S; reproached by Moses,
374; expelled, flees to Constan-
tinople, 379.

Maares, Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, 241,
246; attends Nicene council, 253;
discovers true cross, 259; chided
by Constantine because of oak
of Mamre, 261 ; succeeded by
Maximus, 271.

Macarius, deacon of Alexandria, an
Arian, 251.

Macarius, presbyter of Alexandria,
291, 358, 366.

Macarius, presbyter of Celliae, 207,
366.

Macarius Politicus, ascetic and pres-
byter, 291.

Macedonius, 198; church built by
M., 199; candidate for bishopric,
284 ; gains possession, 288 ;
ejected on return of Paul, 30x5;
again sei/.es bishopric, persecutes
Paulinists, 210, 301, 315; ex-
pelled by Acacians, 322; death,
322; heresy of, regarding the
Holy Chost, 322.

Maceilonius, a Phrygian martyr. 334.

Macedonian heresy, 322; peculiarity,
336.


Macedonians, hold councils, 336;
persecuted by Valens, 352; send
embassy to Rome, 352; invited
to council of Constantinople, but
withdraw, 3S0; decline of, 398.

Magi, of Persia, malign the Cliristians,
264; stir up persecution, 265,
266.

Magnentius, usurps power of Con-
stans, 301 ; defeated by Constan-
tius, commits suicide, 304.

Magnus, treasurer under Valens, 357.

Majuma, seaport of Gaza, 195; dis-
sention between Majuma and
Gaza, 195, 198; sudden conver-
sion of inhabitants, name changed
to Constantia, 262; degraded by
Julian, 328.

Malachion, a monk of Bethelia in
Palestine, 191, 233; death, 193;
miraculous disappearance and
reappearance, 370.

Mammas, the martyr, 326.

Mamre, oak of. church built by Con-
stantine under, 261.

Mania (Mavia), Phylarch of the Sar-
acens, 374 ; succors Constan-
tinople, 377.

Manichxans, not tolerated by Gratian,

377-

Manumission of slaves facilitated, 246.

Manuscripts of Sozomen, 225.

Marathonius, convent of, in Constan-
tinoi^le, 199, 315; made bishop
of Nicomedia, 315; adopts heresy
of Macedonius, 322.

Marcellinus, mention of story of
Stephen, 224.

Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra, his doc-
trines, 281; deposed by Synod
of Constantinople, 281 ; rein-
stated by Synod of Sardis, 282,
300; again deposed, 301.

Marcellus, bishop of Apamea, Syria,
386; death, 386.

Marcian, Macedonian bishop of
Lampsacus, 380.

Marcian, Novatian presbyter of Con-
stantinople, 352; becomes bishop,
384; regrets ordination of Sab-
liatius, 388; death, 398.

Marcian, singer and martyr of Con-
st.intinc)i)le, 301.

Marcionites, 280.

Mardonius, a eunuch, 391.

Mareas, Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Marinus, succeeds Hemophilus, super-
seded by Marinus, 385; heads
the Psathyrians, 388.

Maris, bishop of Chalcedon, repudi-
ates Arianism, 255: joins the
Acacians, 319; bohhiess, 329.

Mark, bishop of Aretliusa, 289, 308,
31 1 ; att<>nds council of .Sirmium,
302; compiles formulary, 317;
martyrdom, 333.

Mark, bishop of Rome, succeeds Sil-
vester, succeeded by Julius, 271.

Mark, a deposed presbyter, 275.

Mark, a monk, 207, 366.

Mark, proclaimed emperor by soldiers,
soon afterwards slain, 425.


Marosas, monk of Persia, 371.

Martin, bishop of Tarracina;, 294.

Martyrius, bishop of Marcianopolis,
382.

Martyrius, a physician, refuses diac-
onate, 382.

Martyrius, sub-deacon and martyr,
301.

Maruthas, causes death of Cyrinus,
409.

Mary, called mother of God, 343.

Matrona, guardian of head of John
Baptist, 391.

Maximus, Alexandrian philosopher,
381; episcopal ordination of,
declared invalid, 381.

Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem, 213,
246; succeeds Macarius, 271.

Maximus, bishop of Seleucia, 399;
schoolfellow of Chrysostom, 399.

Maximus, bishop of Treves, deposed
by Eastern bishops after schism
of Sardica, 290.

Maximus, Ephesian philosopher, 327.

Maximus, usurper set up by Geron-
tius, 426.

Maximus, usurps Valentinian's throne,
384; death, 386.

Melas, bishop of Rhinocorura, 369.

Meletius, appointed by Acacians
bishop of Sebaste, 322; trans-
lated to Antioch, 323; upholds
Nicene doctrine, and is expelled,
323; returns to Antioch, 335; at-
tends council of Antioch, 348;
banished by Valens, 351 ; returns
to Antioch, causing dissension,
378; attends council of Constanti-
nople, 380 ; burial, 382.

Melitians, plead for Arius with Athan-
asius, 270; unite with the Arians,
271 ; views of, 272 ; traduce
Athanasius before Constantine,
but fail, 272; second attempt,
which also fails, 273.

Melitius, bishop of Lycus, his heresy,
251 ; examined by council at
Nic3ea, power of ordination with-
drawn, 256; nominates John as
his successor, 271.

Menivolus, secretary to Justina,

384.
Meropius, journey to India, 274.
Method of Sozomen in composition,

213-217; chronological method,

215, 2l6.
Micah, relics of, discovered, 397.
Micha."lium, see Hestiae.
M issions, 2 1 1 .

Mithrium, scene of, riot, 331.
Mocius, Persian bishop and martyr,

267, 410.
Modestus, prefect of Antioch in Syria,

357-.
Monasticism, 212 ; immoralities of,
omitted, 213; praised, 216; phi-
losophy, 233, 247; monastic life,
248, 369; origin of, attributed
to John Baptist and Elias, the
prophet, 248; among Hebrews,
248, 293 ; among Egyptians,
292; and Syrians, 293, 370 ; in
Palestine, 3G9.


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S HISTORY.


451


Monks, Syrian and Persian, 21 J;

Egyptian, 248.
Montanism, 206.
Montanus, 270.
Moses, presbyter and monk of Scetis,

367 ; reproaches Lucius, 374;

refuses ordination by latter, 374.
Mysteries, 245, 248. '

Narcissus, bishop of Irenopolis, 289;
deposed by Western bishops,
290; attacks Athanasius, 304.

Nectaria, deaconess, 321.

Nectarius, bishop of Constantinople,
364 ; election of, 204, 380 ;
abolished office of commissioner
of penance, 386; death, 399.

Neonas, bishop of Seleucia, deposed
by Acacians, 321.

Nestabius, a martyr of Gaza, 332.

Nestor the Confessor, death of, 332.

Nestorianism, 201, 223.

Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople,
223.

Nicsea, in Bithynia, 205 ; council con-
vened, 253.

Nicarete, a lady of Bkhynia, 199;
noble character of, 414.

Nicene creed, 207 ; adhered to by
the West, 291.

Nicenism, geographical distribution
of, 217, 291, 359; adherents take
courage, 375.

Nicomedia, earthquake of, 205, 310.

Nicopolis, 343.

Nilammon, a monk of Gera, refuses
bishopric, 41 1; death, 41 1.

Nitria, monastic life at, 369.

Nonnichia, wife of Gerontius, 426.

Novatians, church of, in Constantino-
ple, 198; destroyed, 31 5; opposed
by Sozomen, 206; refused restor-
ation to excommunicated, 208,
256; separated from the church,
280; cause of their immunity from
suppression, 281; church of, in
Cyzicus demolished, 316; perse-
cution by Macedonius, 316; ob-
servance of the Passover, 361;
schismatic action, 361 ; Easter
and Sabbatian disputes, 388;
prosperity under Arcadius and
Honorius, 39S.

Novatius, doctrine of, 256, 361.

Olympias, a widow, 404; ordained
deaconess by Nectarius, 405 ;
rebuked by Chrysostom for un-
wise giving, 405; being perse-
cuted, refuses to hold communion
with Arsacius, and goes to Cyzi-
cus, 415.

Origen, controversy, 206, 406-408 ;
works of, 368; assailed by The -
ophilus and other bishops, 408.

Origen, a monk of Scetis, 368.

Origenists, detinition of, 407.

Otreinus, bishop of Melitine, 382.

Otreus, bisliop of Melitene, 353.

Pachomius, a Melitian bishop, 275.
Pachomius, a monk, sees an angel,
202.


Pachon, an ascetic of Scetis, 367.

Pagan worship interdicted, 244.

Palestine, the church in, 211.

Palladius, the historian, a source used
by Sozomen, 223.

Pambo, Egyptian ascetic, 291, 358.

Pan, statue of, destroyed, 262.

Papas, Persian bisliop and martyr,
267.

Paphnulius, the confessor, 246, 291;
argues against enforced celibacy,
256.

Paschal, usages of Montanists, 206;
controversy, 252; Hosius sent to
settle it, 253; controversy decided
at Nicsea, 286; how observed by
Novatians, 361 ; Novatian and
Sabbatian position, 389; usage
of Pepuzites, 389.

Patrines, a Melitian presbyter, 273.

Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,
sides with Arius against Alexan-
der, 252, but accepts decision of
Nicene council, 255; charged
by Eustathius with Arianism,
270; attends second council of
Antioch, 280 ; deposed, 318.

Paul, bishop of Constantinople, 199;
succeeds Alexander, 284; ex-
pelled, 284, 287; goes to Rome,
287 ; reinstated, 288 ; again
ejected, 2S8; affirms Nicene doc-
trine, 291 ; again returns, 300;
once more ejected and banished,
dies in exile, 301; burial,
382.

Paul of Ferme, a monk, 367.

Paul of Jugatum, a Persian monk, 371.

Paul the Simple, disciple of Antony
the Great, becomes an ascetic,
250.

Paulianians, a heretical sect, 280.

Paulinists, 358.

Paulinus, bishop of Antioch, divides
see with Meletius, 378 ; death

385-

Paulinus, bishop of Treves, defends
Athanasius, 305.

Paulinus, bishop of Tyre, sides with
Arius against Alexander, 252;
charged by Eustathius with Ari-
anism, 270.

Paul us, Persian bishop and martyr,
267.

Pelagius, bishop of Laodicea, 353,
382.

Penance, 338, 399; peculiar to the
West, 386.

Persia, church of, 211 ; how estab-
lished, 264; persecution under
Sapor, 265 ; sixteen thousand
names of martyrs known, 267.

Peter, Apocalypse of, 196.

Peter, ajipointed bishop of Alexan-
dria by Athanasius, expels Arius,
suffers martyrdom, 251, 257; de-
posed by Valens, 357; condemns
Apolinarianism, 362 ; returns,

. .•'^75-
Philip, prefect of Constantinople,

288.

Philippus of Side, a source of Soz-

omen's history, 223.


Philo Judxus, description of monks,
248.

Philostorgius, 209; a source of Soz-
omen's history, 222.

Photinus, bishop of Sirmium, heresy
of, 302; is deposed, 303; follow-
ers not tolerated by Gratian, 377.

Photius, gives Sozomen's name, 233.

Phritigernes, a Gothic leatler, 373.

Phrygians, a heretical sect, 280.

Phuscon, a monk of Bethelia in Pal-
estine, 191, 233, 370.

Piammon, presbyter and monk, sees
an angel, 202, 366.

Pior, an Egyptian monk, 367.

Piturion, 291.

Placetus, bishop of Antioch, succeeded
Euphronius, 285, 298.

Plagiarism of Sozomen, from Socrates,
221.

Plato, 274.

Plinthus, reconciles Arian factions,
.388.

Plusian, a bishop, 275.

Polemics, deleterious, 207.

Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, 390.

Polychronius, a presbyter, aids Pul-
cheria in discovery of tomb of
Forty Martyrs, 420.

Pontus, 356.

Porphyry, succeeds Flavian as bishop
of Antioch, 415; persecutes Jo-
hannists, 415.

Prapidius, a rural bishop, 371.

Primacy of Rome, 209.

Prisciallianists, 206.

Private judgment, 206.

Proserssius, a sophist of Athens, 356.

Probatius, eunuch under Jovian, 349.

Probianus, a physician, miraculously
cured, and becomes a Christian,
260.

Proclus, bishop of Constantinople,
201, 224.

Procopius, revolts against Valens, de-
feated, 351.

Protogenes, bishop of Sardica, deposed
by Eastern bishops, 290 ; expands
Nicene creed, 290.

Protogenes, a Syrian monk, 370 ; suc-
ceeded Vitus as bishop of Carrre,

370-

Psathyrians, an Arian sect, 388.

Pulcheria, sister of Theodosus the
Vounger, 196, 204; marries Mar-
cian, 200; previous vow of vir-
ginity, 201 ; opposed Eutychian-
isni, 201; is protector of the
emperor, 205, 419; opposed free
thought, 206, 223 ; inclined to
asceticism, 212; excellent char-
acter, 224, 419, 421; discovers
tomb of the Forty Martyrs, 421.

Purification, of Hercules and Greeks,
after crime, 243.

Pusices, a Persian martyr, 266.

Putubastus, 291; " Putubatus," 368.

Quadragesima, 412.
Quartodecimarians, 206, 389.
Quintianus, ordained bishop of Gaza,

287 ; repudiated by Western

bishops, 290.


452


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


Relic worship, 208.

Rhinocorura, monastic life at, 369.

Rhodanus [or Rhodanius], bishop of

Toulouse, 305.
Romanus, bishop of Antioch, 241.
Rome, sack of, under Alaric, 424;

incidents during the sack, 425.
Rufmus, the historian, one of Soz-

omen's sources, 222.

Sabbatians, origin and doctrines, 388;
difficulties of their theory, 389.

Sabbatius, Arian presbyter, originates
Sabbatian heresy, 388.

Sabellian heresy, 335.

Sabellius, 270.

Sabinus, the historian, a source of
Sozomen's history, 223.

Sacraments, as mysteries, 207.

St. Euphemia, church of, in Chalce-
don, 199.

St. Michael, Archangel, church of, at
Hestias, 196, 198.

St. Stephen, church of, at Constanti-
nople, 199; erected by No vatians,
414.

St. Thyrsus, 196; church of, 199,
420.

Calamines [also Salamanus], a monk
of Bethelia, in Palestine, 191 ;
370; brother to Fuscon and
Crispian, 233, 408.

Sallust, the historian, 206.

Sallust, praetorian prefect, 342.

Sapor, king of Persia, persecutes the
Christians, 264; subsequently ap-
plies order only to the leaders,
266 ; sends embassy to Con-
stantine, 268.

Saracens, 374; derived from Ishmael,
375; customs, 375 ; converted to
Christianity, 375.

Sarmates, presbyter of Alexandria,
becomes an Arian, 251.

Sarmatians, revolt against Valentinian,
but submit, 372.

Schism of Sardica, 289 ; Eastern
bishops depose Julius, 289, and
Hosius, also Maximus of Treves,
and Protogenes, and Gaudentius
of Sardica, 290; Western bishops
depose Theodore, Narcissus, etc.,
290; adhere to Nicene faith, 291.

Sciri, slaves in Asia Minor, 197, 201,
422.

Scitis, a town of Egypt, 250.

Scriptures, the, interpreted by the
&fu>pia, 205.

Scythians, attacked by Valens, 375;
assail Constantinople, 377.

Scythopolis, refuge of Egyptian
monks, 198, 407.

Secundus, bishop of Ptolemais, ac-
cepts decree of Nicene council,

Secundus, praetorian prefect, 348.

Selinus, a bishop of the Goths, be-
comes a Psathyrian, 388.

Sepulchre discovered, 258.

Serapion, bishop of Thumis, 213, 294;
defends Athanasius, 305.

Serapion, an Egyptian monk, 365;
archdeacon of Chrysostom, 404;


unruly in temper, causes trouble
to Chrysostom, 404, 405; made
bishop of Heraclea, 412.

Serapion, a temple of Alexandria, 385 ;
converted into a church,' 386.

Severianus, 213; bishop of Gabali,
405; offends Chrysostom, 405;
acts with the latter's opponents,
409; arouses resentment of Con-
stantinopolitans, 410; flees, 41 1.

Siliyl, ]5redicted Christ's coming, 239.

Sigesarius, bishop of the Goths, 424.

Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, deposed
by Acacians, 321; opposes Ni-
cene doctrines, 348; but after-
ward accepts tliem, 352.

Silvester, bishop of Rome, 241 ; suc-
ceeded by Mark, 271.

Simeon, Syrian monk, 293.

Siricius, succeeds Damasus as bishop
of Rome, 398; death, 415.

Sisinius, deputy of Agelius, 382; after-
ward bishop of Novatians at Con-
stantinople, 382, 398; personal
character, 398; dream of, con-
cerning Eutropius the reader,
414.

Socrates, the historian, 207; relation
of his work to that of Sozomen,
221.

Scion, bishop of Rhinocorura, 369.

Sopater, 242.

Sophia, church of, founded by Con-
stantine, 198, 322; dedicated by
Constantius, 198.

Sophronius, bishop of Pompeiopolis,
deposed by Acacius, 321; ac-
cepts Macedonian doctrines, 336;
opposes Nicene doctrines, 348.

Sotadus, 255.

Sozomen, .Salaminius flermas, life,
191-199; origin atid order of
the name, 191, 233; born near
Bethelia, 191, 233, 337J not a
Jew, 192; grandfather a Christian,

192, 233; converted by Hilarion,

233. 337; ^- born. 370-380; ed-
ucated at Gaza, 234; by monks,

193, 233; hence his high esti-
mate of monastic life, 193, 233;
not a monk, 193; knew Greek
and Syriac, and used Syrian rec-
ords of Persian church, 193;
probably also knew Latin, 194;
general scholarship narrow, 194-
195; religious affiliations Nicene,
but not critical, 195 ; studied
law at Berytus, 234, 235 ; became
a civil and ecclesiastical lawyer,
196, 233; at Constantinople, c.
A.O. 406, 196; careful in state-
ment of ecclesiastical legislation,
196; illiberal in policy toward
the Persians, Arians, and Pagans,
197 ; pietistic, 197 ; defended
Chrysostom,' 197; knowledge of
Palestine, 197 ; of Arabia, Cy-
prus, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Edessa, 197; and of Constanti-
nople, 199; S. AS AUTHOR, 199-
225; his epitome lost, 200, 234;
his history, written between
A.u. 443 and 448, 201, 202; its


objects, 201-213; (i) to present
facts, 201; (2) to prove (a)
divine origin of Christianity, 202;

(3) C*^) Providence promoting
Christianity, 203; his efforts to
this end absurd, 203; and biased,
204; (4) to prove Catholic or-
thodoxy, 205; hence apologizes
forConstantine, 209; (5) to trace
extension of Christianity, 21 1;

(6) to dignify monasticism, 212;

(7) to g^vc secular history; (8)
to develop historically legislation
favorable to church, 213 ; his
method, 213-217; (i) acknowl-
edges limitations, (2) research
{a) personal knowledge, {b^ per-
sonal inquiry, (f) knowledge at
second hand, 213; {d) correction
of falsehoods, (^) use of itxivQi.-
vo/xai, (/) and aKpi^6w, (^) and
documents, 214; (3) textual, and

(4) analytical criticism lacking,

(5) interprets events by (a) criti-
cism of facts, 214, (/>) using his-
tory ethically, (r) suggesting
motives, (d) apologizing for favor-
ites, (e) yielding to personal
feeling, (/) pragmatic deduction,
(^)centralizing prominent figures,
(/i) dwelling on human nature,
(«') explaining away faults of the
orthodox, and (J) speculating,
215; (6) chronological method,
(rt) imperial reigns his epochs,
and (b) uses consulates as refer-
ence dates, 215; (7) geograf)hi-
ca! contributions, 215; names
mostly Hebrew or Syrian, 215;

(8) statistics unmethodical, (9)
biography abundant, and fair,
(10) ecclesiastical culture indi-
rectly treated; (ii) no syste-
matic treatment of dogmatics and
ethics, 216; (12) his knowledge
of Christian literature incomplete,

(13) treatment unphilosophical,

(14) general style good and sum-
maries excellent, 217. The pe-
riod COVERED, presumptively
A.D. 323-439. 217; but really
only to A.D. 437, viz. Constantine
toTheodosius II., 218; grouping
of books by twos, 218. For
whom he wrote; not merely for
monks, nor for the learned, but
for Christians generally, 218.
His sources, I., those mentioned
by S., 218-220; II., those un-
mentioned, 221-223; main au-
thorities not indicated, 221 ; (i)
relations to Socrates' history :
three views, (a) Sozomen pla-
giarized (untenable), 221 ; (prob-
able), 234; (d) both used same
authorities independently (un-
tenable), (c) Sozomen followed
Socrates' lead to authorities
(probable), 221, 222; (2) Ru-
finus, (3) Eusebius' Life of Con-
stantine, (4) Athanasius, (5)
Philostorgius, 222; (6) Sabinus,
(7) PhilippusofSide, (8) codices


GENERAL INDEX TO SOZOMEN'S HISTORY.


453


Gregorianus, Hermogianus, and
Theodosianus, (9) Basil, (10)
Gregory Nazianzen, (11) Sul-
picius Severus, (12) I'alladius,
223 ; stated by himself, 240.
The ninth book, change in
method, deals with the West,
223 ; unlinished, {a) intention
not carried out, {l>) Nestorianism
not delineated, (c) events antici-
pated, narration uncompleted,
223 ; (d) ecclesiastical matters
barely touched, (e) Stephen's
story promised, but not given,
{/,g) close abrupt, 224; con-
clusion not lost, abrupt close due
to author's death, 224. By whom
used, (a) Epiphanius Scholasti-
cus, (A) Liberatus, (c) Theo-
phanes, (d) Theodorus Lector,
Nicephorus Callistus, 224, 225;
errors numerous, 225.

Spyridon, bishop of Trimythum, story
of, 246; rebukes Triphyllius,
247.

Stephen, ascetic of Mareotis, 367.

Stephen, bishop of Antioch, deposed,
298.

Stephen the Martyr, relics discovered,
224.

Stilicho, general under Honorius,
plots against the empire, 421 ;
slain by soldiers, 421.

Sulpicius Severus, a source of Sozo-
men's history, 223.

Symeon, archbishop of Seleucia and
Ctesiphon, arrested by Sapor,
264; is beheaded, 265.

Synod, see Council.

Tabenna, island of Egypt, home of
the Tabennesian monks, 292.

Tabennesian monks, origin and mode
of life, 291.

Tarbula, sister of Symeon, martyr-
dom of, 266.

Tatian, a Phrygian martyr, 334.

Terentius, bishop of Tomi, 382.

Textual criticism of Sozomen, 227.

Themistius, philosopher, 211, 372.

Theoctistus, gives name to the Psathy-
rians, 3S8.

Theodore, bishop of Heraclea, 284;
attends second council of Anti-
och, 285; goes to Rome, 289;
repudiated by bishops of the
West, 290; attacks Athanasius,

304-
Theodore, bishop of Mopsuestia,
399; schoolfellow of Chrysostom,

399-
Theodore the Confessor, of Antioch,

342-
Theodore, disciple of Ammon, in

Egypt, 250.
Theodore, military officer, executed

at order of Valens, 372.
Theodoritus, presbyter of Antioch,

331-

Theodosiolus, a relative of the Em-
peror Honorius, 425.

Theodosius the Great, 324, 332;
built temple over head of John


Baptist, 199, 391; character ac-
cording to Sozomen, 200; literary
eulogium on, 200; self-controlled
and peaceful, 200; sees ai)pari-
tion of Martyr Basiliscus, 202;
suppresses heresy and paganism,
209; address to, 236-238; asso-
ciated with Gratian, 377; bap-
tized, 378; gives title "Catholic
Church" to the orthodox, 378;
orders Uemophilus to renounce
Arianism, 379; attempts unifica-
tion of church, 382 ; opposes
Maximus and avenges Gratian,
384 ; orders pagan temples of
Alexandria demolished, 285 ; ex-
cludes women under sixty years
of age from ministry, 387; ban-
ishes Eunomius, 387; consults
John of Thebais, 392; exacts
tribute of Antioch in Syria, 392;
declares Honorius emperor, de-
feats Eugenius, 393; reproached
by Ambrose — the cause, 394;
death, 397.
Theodosius the Younger, 205 ; suc-
ceeds Arcadius, 419.
Theodotus, Arian bishop of Laodicea,
362 ; ejects, but reinstates, Apoli-
narius, father and son, 362.
Theodulus, a Phrygian martyr, 334.
Theognis, bishop of province of Bi-

thynia, favors Arianism, 293.
Theognis, bishop of Nicasa, repudiates
Arian doctrines, 255; deposed,
255; regains bishopric, 268.
Theonas, an Egyptian ascetic, 365.
Theophanes, mentions Stephen, 224.
Theophiius, bishop of Alexandria,
212, 385, 398; opposes ordina-
tion of Chrysostom at Constanti-
nople, 400; instance of sharp
dealing, 400 ; unites with Chrys-
ostom to unite churches of East
and West, 400; maintains incor-
poreality of God, 406; but by
sophistry deceives the people,
406; becomes hostile to " Long
Brothers" and to Isidore, 406;
complains of them and the eighty
monks to Chrysostom, 407; re-
turns no answer to latter's letter,
407 ; by double dealing enlists
Epiphanius on his side, attempts
to oust Chrysostom, 407 ; writes
against books of Origen, 408 ;
goes to Chalcedon in crusade
against Chrysostom, 409 ; secures
dethronement of Chrysostom at
Ruffinianae, 409 ; after a cold
reception at Constantinople, 409 ;
causes strife at Constantinople,
41 1 ; flees, and visits Gera, where
he attempts to ordain a bishop,
411.
Theophiius, bishop of Eleutheropolis
and of Castabala, 321 ; accepts
Nicene doctrines, '352.
Theophiius of Ohn, 211.
Theophronius, author of Eunomian-

ism, 363, 387.
Theotimus, bishop of Tomi, performs
a miracle, 395 ; opposes Epipha-


nius in attack on Chrysostom,
408.

Theotokos, Nestorian view of, op-
posed by Sozomen, 206.

Thyrsus the Martyr, aids Pulcheria to
discover tomb of the Eorty Mar-
tyrs, 420.

Tigrius, presbyter of Constantinople,
persecuted by opponents of
Chrysostom, 415.

Timothy, presbyter of Alexandria,
275; bishop, 366; biographer
of monastics, 366; death, 385.

Titus, bisho]) of Bostra, 294, 337.

Tomi, capital of Scythia, 359.

Translations of Sozomen, 227, 228.

Trinity, 335, 378, 398.

True cross, found on Calvary, cures
sick, restores dead to life, 259.

Tryphillius, bishop of Berytus, 196;
rebuked by Spyridon, 247.

Uldis, overthrow of, 197, 201, 422.

Ulfilas (or Ulphilas), bishop of the
Goths, 319; becomes an Arian
for state reasons, 373.

Ulphilas, a general of Honorius, 426.

Uranius, bishop of Tyre, deposed, 318.

Ursacius, bishop of Sigidunus, deposed
by Western bishops, 290 ; Arian
tendencies of, 291 ; acknowl-
edges falsity of charges against
Athanabius, 300 ; attempts to
force Aetianism on council of
Ariminum, 312; but fails, 313.

Ursacius, schismatic bishop of Rome,

359-
Uzthazanes, a eunuch, suffers martyr-
dom, 265.

Valens, Emperor, portents during
reign, 205, 209; compared with
Valentinian, 217, 349 ; proclaimed
Emperor by brother, 350; Arian
in doctrine, 350; adopts Eudox-
ian views, 35 1; defeats Proco-
pius, 351 ; persecutes Nicene
adherents and Novatians, 351,
352; and Macedonians, 352;
prohibits council at Tarsus, 353;
orders orthodox bishops ejected,
353; permits return of Athana-
sius, 354; massacres deputation
of orthodox Christians, 355; pur-
poses further injury of the ortho-
dox, 355; persecutes the orthodox
of Syrian Antioch, 356; banishes
and recalls Vctranio, 359; in-
censed at use of divination to
learn his successor's name, 371 ;
hears oration of Themistius, 372;
becomes more humane, 373 ;
angered by Constantinopolitans,
makes war on the Scythians, 375;
death predicted by monk Isaac,
376; death, 376.

Valens, bishop of Mursia, deposed by
bishops of the West, 290 ; Arian
tendencies, 291; acknowledges
falsity of accusations against
Athanasius, 300 ; favors Aetian
heresy, 312; but fails to force it
on council of Ariminum, 313;


454


ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


gains Constantius, 314; perse-
cutes Nicene adherents, 315;
calls his formulary the Nicene,

3'5-
Valentian, two Syrian monks, 371.

Valentinian I., emperor, 217, 349;
proclaimed emperor, 349; ban-
ishment under Julian, 350; pro-
claims Gratian emperor, 352;
supports Nicene doctrines, 359;
dies in a lit of rage, 372.

Valentinian II., proclaimed Emperor
of the West, 372; flees from Italy
on approach of Maximus, 384;
death, 392.

Valentinian III., succeeds Honorius,

427-
Valentinians, 206; a separate sect, 280.
Valesius, prefatory remarks, 233, 234.
Venus, temple of, at Aphaca destroyed,

262.
Verinian, a relative of the Emperor

Honorius, 425.


Vetranio, bishop of the Scythians,
359; banished and recalled by
Valens, 359.

Vetranius, conspires against Constan-
tius, 301 ; is betrayed and retires,
302.

Vicentius, presbyter of Rome, attends
Nicene council, 253.

Victor, bishop of Rome, paschal con-
troversy with Polycarp of Smyrna,

390.
Vincent, a presbyter, guardian of
relics of John Baptist, 391 ; re-
nounces Macedonian tenets,

391-

Virgin Mary, perpetual virginity of,
239.

Vitalius, presbyter of .\ntioch, 362;
became Apolinarian bishop of
Antioch, 362.

Vito, presbyter of Rome, attends Ni-
cene council, 253.

Vitus, bishop of Carras, 370.


Western Christians, 241.

Western church, and schism of Sar-

dica, 290, 291 ; adheres to Nicene

doctrines, 360.
Word, see Logos.


Zachariah (Zechariah), the prophet,
finding of body of, 198, 224, 427;
prophecy of " the bit of the
horse," 259.

Zacharias (or Zechariah), president
of a monastery at Gerari, 370,
427.

Zeno, bishop of Majuma, 195; murder
of, 209, 332.

Zeno, bishop of Tyre, 353.

Zeno, cousin of above, 332.

Zeno, monk of Majuma, afterwards
bishop of Botolium, 396.

Zeno, a monk of Nisibis, 370.

Zocomus, a monk of Majuma, after-
wards bishop of IJotolium, 396.


SOZOMEN'S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

Gen. xviii 239

Gen. xlix. 10 239

Ex. iii. 2 239

Isa. vii. 14 239

Zech. xiv. 20 (LXX.) 259

Matt. ix. 6 247

Matt. X. 23 379

Matt. xxiv. 36 387


Luke xxiv. 13
John iii. 13 .
Acts xix. 35
I Cor. xi. 12
I Cor. XV. 47
I Tim. V. 9 .
Tit. i. 15 .
I John V. 16


343
364
262

324
364

387
247
256


BR 60 .S42 1890
V.2 SMC


A Se lect 1 ibrary of

Nicene and post-Nicene
AKA-9416 (mcsk)
